 Selectmen say they received the approval of the Town Accountant for t hi under the special enabling legislation passed by the General Curt last March . School Building Committee for swamp work was approved .
 Miss Hit a Plummer, seated, shown with members of her staff . She is shown with a staff member .
 Chief Derro L penmt passage, said that D’Ercole concealed the batteries . This decision is intended to restolen batteries in the rear of his . lieve the serious and rather dangercar . Chief Derros said that in placing that Brantwood Road, a
 Judge Henchey warned that the School Committee and the if either youth deviated from the L’hief of Police, terms of his probation he would Dr. Dr. Martin . Without equivocaThe announcement was made by .
 Navajo Life Is Subject of Talk To Unitarian Women’s Alliance Forty At Hearing On School Buses . Winchester Visiting Nursing ssociation, under Mrs. Mrs. Williams, has new director .
 As of October 1, Miss Rita Plummer of Stoncham will be the new executive director of the organization . Plummer is Miss Plummer from Stonham .
 Miss Plummer comes to the Winchester agency with considerable experience in the field of public health nursing .
 The first general meeting of the Women’s Alliance of the Winchester Unitarian Society will be held on Tuesday morning, October 10th, at the Unitarian Church in Winchester .
 Following the coffee, there will be a business meeting in the Symmes room .
 Dudley Moore Director of the Callup, New Mexico Program as well as the African Program, of the Unitarian Service Committee, Inc. will speak . Dudley Moore will speak at the event . The event will be held in New Mexico at 6 p.m.
 Moore will discuss the work of the Unitarian Service Committee, especially with regard to the Navajo Indians . Moore will talk about the work .
 The U.S.C. is, for the eighth year, acting as an operating agency for the Callup Indian Community Center .
 Navajos are part of a program of adult education, hospitality, alcohol rehabilitation, community integration, and a special citizenship education project . The program includes adult education and hospitality .
 95 parents of dents of the Pond Estates and the High Street district, appeared Monday evening at the music room in the high school to attend the hearing . The hearing was held in connection with a petition from Pond Estate parents for school bus transportation .
 Mr Falzione, a leader in the movement for buses, was called to open the hearing . Brink was chairman of the School C ommittee .
 High Street is a heavily traveled way and that there are no sidewalks on it for the use of children going to and from school .
 Committee had given the matter of children from falling into the wa5ua 8ervjce very carefu i considerable Children on their way to the ti<m an( , whcn milWnff up its budLynch Junior High School, he con^ had decjf
 Vienna is described as a nice city, with charming people who drive like mad . Vienna is also known as a great city for its charming people . Vienna has been described as 'a nice city' by many .
 Andy’s delegation bus nice quarters in a hotel down town in the ojty and work out of a palace connected with the Hapsson o got a glimpse of the Soviet's Molotov . The delegation bused into a hotel and worked out of an apartment connected with
 The Winchester boy has naturally taken many pictures as souvenirs of his trip, but recently discovered that a defective camera shutter resulted in ruining 40 of his pictures . The Winchester, Winchester boy, was traveling with a family in Italy .
 His last letter, written September 26, reported the first rain he had seen in Vienna with thunderstorms coming up the Danube Valley . The last letter he sent to the Austrian capital was September 26 .
 The oldest place in Vienna, dating from 1500, is the Griechenhuus, or Greek’s Inn . The phone number will remain the same .
 Friends of the Winchester Hospital will be represented at an Evening on Friday and Saturday, October 12 and I 1. N until and October 1 at Winchester Hospital .
 Winchester and Reading High School girls will serve as dower girls and ushers on these evenings . A bevy of beauteous young ladies and handsome young men from H>th Winchester High School will serve .
 Costumes of dazzling splendor will identify the flower girls for each evening . Flower girls will be identified by their costumes .
 Leslie Dube, Debbie Nichols, Judy Carr, Sylvia Pirotta, Sue Waldron, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Betty Bowes and Lynn Anderson are among the winners of the contest .
 Winchester High School girls will offer corsages each ticket with a number which might be the winning one in the door prize drawing . Each ticket is ticketed with a winning number which will be drawn each evening in the drawing .
 Janet Millican, Kate Robinson, Debbie Harrison, Gwen Eugley, Anne LaPointe, Janet Niles and Dorothy Williams are among the writers on the panel .
 From Reading to grace Winchester’s Town Hall will conic Jill Lougee and Diane Engell . From Reading, they will grace Winchester's Town Hall .
 Officer John Fron gillo of the Winchester Police Department is named the “Man of the Week” of the week . Fronillo is a member of the police department .
 Officer Frongillo was stationed at the Center Sunday afternoon and decided he had had enough of a situation that has long thoroughly annoyed responsible Winchester citizens . The beautiful common has long been deluged with litter and refuse .
 Six Winchester youths are under investigation by the' police department in connection with the yin d ali. stic destruction on August 1 of an eight-by-six-foot cinder block pump house at Leonard Beach Field .
 The boys’ identity was discovered as a result of special investigations by Officers Cogan and Roy . The boys were found in the early hours of the morning .
 Six hoys admit damaging the pump house in Winchester . Investigation uncovered they were members of a no longer secret organization . The group comprises a total of 23 Winchester youths .
 Police discovered a membership list at the Leonard Pool Bathhouse which the youths were using as a club house during the night hours . The names of all of these youths are known to police, who discovered the membership list .
 A 1 ] -year-old Stoncham youth and a W inchester juvenile wen arraigned in Woburn District Court Thursday, Sept. 13 . The police investigation resulted — Two Youths Found Guilty In Auto Battery Larceny A 1 . year-old youth and
 The Stoncham youth was found guilty of receiving the stolen property . The Whester youth was also convicted of the larceny itself . The youth was convicted of receiving stolen property and receiving it .
 Both were sentenced by Justice William Henchey to one year’s probation from a complaint of the Park Department two weeks ago that the lock on the bathhouse was tampered with .
 It was discovered, Chief Derro said, that the youths had used the club house for card games, in direct violation of park department rules . Park rules prohibit the playing of cards on park property .
 As a result of the boys using it, the bathhouse will have to be repainted and repaired at an estimated cost of $60 .
 Chief Derro said that from this point on the parks will be under stricter supervision . Anyone apprehended playing cards on park property will face court action .
 Winchester United Fund leaders reported 13. per cent of residential solicitors and 10 per cent small business solicitors had been enrolled for this fall’s Greater Boston United Fund campaign .
 The reports were presented at the Lfnited Fund Metropolitan Department’s first volunteer enrollment luncheon, held at American Red Cross Headquarters .
 The goal for this date was 25 per cent for residential and 50 per cent  for small business solicitor enrollment . The goal was to increase enrollment for small businesses and residential customers .
 Winchester Police Chief Joseph Derro identified the Stonehani youth as William D’Ercole, whose parents, former Winchester residents, now live in Rhode Island . Winchester police chief Joseph J Derro said D'Ercoole's parents now live on Rhode Island.
 The name of the juvenile was withheld by the police . Under the laws of the Commonwealth, the police withheld the name .
 Officers Boyle and Baird conducted the successful investigation, assisted later on in the case by Juvenile Officer Cogan . The investigation was successful .
 The theft took place at the Fitzgerald Auto Supply Co. on Glenwood Avenue school yard from Brantwood Road on Thursday, August 10, as reportto Sylvester Avenue will be removovated .
 Mr Saltmarsh said the Board — had acted on the advice of both the Town Counsel and Town Accountant . The decision was still subject to the approval of the State Director of Accounts, Herman Dine, as required by the enabling act .
 The Selectmen are still holding out approximately $17,482 pending further investigation of the validity or accuracy of the bills . The Selectman is holding out about $18,000 for further investigation into the validity and accuracy of bills .
 These investigations have required the services of the Town Accountant, the Water and Sewer Board, the Town Engineer and the Town Counsel . The Town Council is investigating the town's sewage problems .
 The Selectmen are still not satisfied that the charge for this is justified in terms of the contract . The selectmen are not satisfied with the charge .
 He said Mr Karp had told him that bis firm had been unable to complete the work as scheduled but that the work would be completed this week . He said the firm had not been able to do the job as scheduled .
 $850, for stone fill put under the water mains. $850 for fill put in under the mains . Mr Saltmarsh said grading for the court had already been done .
 There is some question as to whether the amount of fill put in was more than required . There is also some question about whether it was enough to fill .
 The Selectmen are holding up payment of this item pending further word from the Water and Sewer Board . Selectmen hold up payment until further word is given .
 Selectmen retainage against the contract held out for one year after work is completed . The Selectmen retained the contract for the next year .
 Selectmen are hopeful that they will be able to announce more specific and final decisions on the payment of these items next week . The Selectmen hope to make a final decision on payment of the items .
 There was no definite word this week as to whether and the j arbitration would be sought on I any of them .
 Winchester Home Fronters are again preparing for Tag Day on Saturday October 14 . Winchester people are encouraged to contribute funds for the Christmas packages that are still sent to our men and women in the service .
 We have many more in the service this year because of the new draft call . The draft call is the first time the draft call has been called into the military .
 David M Rush, chairman held her committee meeting Monday, October 2, at her lovely home at 2 Mayflower Road .
 Headquarters will be at the police station again this year this year which is very much appreciated . Headquarters will remain at the station this year .
 Collectors will be on the street and at the football games from 9:00m. until 5:00 p.m. Collectors can collect the items from the street or at football games .
 State Representative I larrison Chadwick of 2 I Everett Avenue appealed for party unity among Massachusetts Republicans this week .
 F.B.I. counterspy, Herbert Philbrick, will appear in Winchester on October 19th . Philbick sacrificed a happy home life and a career as an advertising career man to fight the Communists .
 Lynch Junior High School moved into new quarters in Lynch Jr. High School on Brantwood Road . School Administration offices moved in to new quarters Tuesday .
 The move was described as temporary, for the Department may occupy the Hast wing first floor offices only until they are needed for classroom space .
 Staff of 15 do the planning, supervising, buying, and accounting for the Winchester school system . Winchester School Department is the largest department in Town government .
 The new accommodations are a distinct departure from the “old woman in the shoe” atmosphere of the Main Street building over the past four years . Main Street has been home to a variety of businesses since 2009 .
 Superintendent Gilson and assistant superintendent have smart-looking adjacent offices looking out toward Horn Pond Brook Road . The most direct approach to the East Wing is to the east Wing .
 Lillie Mac Feeley will have the office to the left of the area exterior entrance . The office will be located in front of the exterior entrance of the main building .
 The director of Guidance Norton Dempsey is at the top of the school's Guidance Department . The school's superintendents, their secretaries and their secretaries are also in the corridor .
 At the end of the hall, to the left, the departmental supervisors will share a large loom . The departmental supervisor will also share a loom.
 To the right as you enter the lower East entrance will be the general business offices and work room . To the left as you entered, the general work room is the main business offices .
 The combined “Committee Room and Curriculum Laboratory and Library” will be christened by a school committee meeting next Monday night .
 In addition to its function as a meeting room, as a curriculum work room and planning room, it is a real symbol of modern school administration . It is also used as curriculum work rooms and planning rooms .
 In the last fifteen years the school department has had a number of homes . In the past 15 years it has been in the hands of many different owners .
 Curtiss won the post by a bare majority, or 41, as opposed to 29 for Rep. Curtiss . Curtiss was elected by 41 votes, compared to 29 votes for Curtiss, who won by 29 .
 Massachusetts Republicans need to act as a real opposition party should act . The time has come for Massachusetts Republicans to act . Massachusetts Republicans should act as an opposition party .
 The time has come for our party to change its direction, to stop going along out of a feeling of futility, to stand up and be counted and make a record it can really run on . The time is now for the Labour Party to change direction, says Labour leader .
 Mr Chadwick suggested that Republicans ought to act as if they were sitting in these seats, not hiding behind them .
 Winchester Savings Rank assures dependable insured dividends . Winchester savings rank assures dependible insured dividends for your savings account . Winchester's savings account is at the top of the list of savings accounts .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery . Visit www.dailymailonline.com/Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots .
 A Visit From Ned The Star had one of its pleasant visits yesterday from an old friend, Ned Crawford, of Williamsvillc, Vt., where he acts as chauffeur and general handy man for Sumner McCall, son of the late war time Governor of Massachusetts .
 He has served the McCall family for 57 years, going to work for the then Congressman McCall, later Governor, when he completed grammar school . He has been with the family of the late Gov. McCall since his birth .
 In those days he drove the Congressman and his family in their horse-drawn carriage .
 MABEL L VINTON late of Wine he* Ur in Haul County, deceased . To ull persons interested in the estate of Mabel L. VINTON, deceased.
 Witness, John C Lejocat, Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this third day of October 1UG1.
 A great sports follower, he particularly enjoyed taking his son, Hal, to Harvard varsity nine . The Congressman's son plays second base for Harvard .
 Later in the early nineteen hundreds he drove the family’s Stoddard-Dayton automobile . He also drove his family's car .
 “Ned” has been with Sumner McCall on his place in Williamsville, Vt. For many years now "Ned" has been on his way in Vermont . Sumner says he's been with him for years .
 It is always nice to have this fine old timer drop in at the Star Office and it is the editor's hope that he will come in often .
 The owner of a single family residence building and a store numbered# 60 Harvard Street, located in a general residence district established by the Zoning By-Laws, hereby makes application for permission to alter the house for two-family use .
 That a public hearing be held thereon in the office of the Building Commissioner, 9 Mt. Mt. 9 . The hearing will be held in the building commissioner's office .
 Winchester Jaycees are off and rolling again . Board of Appeal Gilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane Mtft-tt To All Jaycee Members . Winchester Jayccees have been on the road for a year .
 Charter Night dance to be held December 9th at the Town Hall . Charter Night will be held at Town Hall at the end of the year .
 Ted Ben&rd is going to make the walls rock with Dixieland Jazz once again . Ted Ben &rd will be playing jazz at the end of the year . Ted will be joined by his bandmates .
 Meeting place will be at the Red Cross Chapter house between the Town Hall and the Library . Meeting place to be held will be between the town hall and the library .
 Charter Night dance will include free cocktails and a late buffet . Charter Night Dance will be one of the major topics for discussion at the event .
 This year’s project agenda tentatively includes Town Christmas decorations, High School foreign pen-pal correspondence, and a sports olympia .
 School Committee should feel that senior and junior high school pupils can do the same. Please come down. i the School Committee to feel that Senior and Junior High School pupils can . i the school committee .
 State will authorize the continuous operation of the traffic lights at Cambridge und Wildwood Streets, says State . She said there is every reason to believe that with the new layout made by the town, the State will approve it .
 Brink stated that there is a footpath running along High Street and there are traffic lights at Cambridge, Church and High Streets . Brink said that there are footpaths running along the High Street .
 The School Committee does not feel that walking past winter pond is any particular hazard . It says elementary school pupils have been walking past it with safety for years .
 There is a traffic officer, she said at the junction of Pond Street and Woods ide Road .
 A pupil traffic count taken at several of the busy intersections showed a great falloff in numbers during the afternoon . Many mothers pick up their children at school and bring them home while fewer take them to school in the morning .
 A mother questioned the traffic count as not providing a true picture . She said that many children, not eligible, are using the busses illegally .
 Brink said providing buses for Pond Instate and neighboring children would add $6(515 to the School Department budget and approximately 20c to the tax rate . Brink: Providing buses for the Pond Instates and neighboring kids would add  $6.5(515)
 The School Committee’s chief concern is education, and if it can effect savings in the other aspects of its budget, this money can be used for education . School Committee: If it can save money in other ways, the money will be used to fund education .
 Children in Pond Estates have no opportunity to go by bus if they so desire, parents say . Parents say the children have to walk a long distance .
 Brink said she did not believe that walking to school is any great hardship for children . Brink: "I don't think it's a hardship for kids"
 There was a mixed reaction to this statement and one mother felt it was hard for the youngsters to walk in rainy weather . One mother felt the children would not be able to walk if it was wet .
 A father asked if limiting the buses was the result of the econ omy involved, and Mrs. Smith said it was not the result .
 Gilson, superintendent of schools, said that financial con sideration was not the only con . Gilson said that the financial con-sideration is not the other con sidersation .
 The old system placed the School Commit tee in the untenable position of believing elementary school young sters can walk four miles to and from school and that junior high pupils can not .
 The alternative to requiring the longer walking distance for the old er pupils is to reduce all the mile age . The alternative would result in a serious financial situation because of the large numbers of youngsters who would have to be taken by bus to school .
 Gilson said it is possible to hold up any one traffic hazard, since they exist all over town . Gilson added that it is not possible to stop traffic accidents from occurring .
 The east side children have to cross Highland Avenue and the topography is as hilly on the east side as it is on the west . The east-side of Highland Avenue is as much as the west-west .
 Committee feels that reducing the distance to be walked by older children is effect discriminating against the younger ones . Committee feels older children are being discriminated against . Committee also feels that older children should be allowed to walk longer .
 Reducing the walk ing distances will eventually lead to a town-wide transportation problem cost ing thousands of dollars . Reducing walk distances will, in his opinion, lead eventually to a Town-wide transport problem .
 A mother from the Forest Street area asked how many of those pre sent shoveled the sidewalks in front of their houses, and was told that the west side hill residents had no sidewalks . A mother of the Forest St. area was told how many people shoveled their sidewalks .
 Plant — Koko Boodakian & Sons, Inc. One of the MOST COMPLETE RUG SERVICING PLANTS in the industry . 20% discount for cash and carry .
 Set 9:30 A M. M. to 5:00 P.M. j they had to use public buses at a cost of $480 a year . Set 9,30 A. M to 5,00 p.m. j had to travel to the airport at a
 She wondered | if pressure had anything to do with j the change in hus distances .
 A mother said the school bus stops near the Pond Estates and asked why the children of that neighborhood who want j to ride to school can not get on the i bus then* and pay their way . A High Street mother said .
 Both buses will be able to carry 50, which is the maximum load desirable . However, these loads will be adjusted so that both buses will carry 50 .
 Having the kids pay 5c a day sounds good, hut such procedure would result in loss of control and a serious situation . Having such a procedure would be a serious mistake .
 A father suggested youngsters living between one and one half and two miles from school who want to ride to school should be permitted to pay for buses by the year so that the authorities can know in advance how many to provide for .
 Brink replied that one of the reasons for the luck of top physical condition in our children is the fact that they ride everywhere . Brink said that one reason for the good luck is that children ride everywhere.
 She also felt that children entering junior high school are growing up, are able to walk to school and should by walking and other responsibilities learn to become self reliant .
 One mother felt that four miles is too far for little children to walk . Another wondered why younger children could not take a sandwich or other lunch to school and stay there until noon .
 The I School Committee also feels, she j said that it is good for the youngi sters to get out in the air and walk home for lunch .
 A father asked if the extra monI ey involved in putting on more buses was the paramount consideration in the lengthening of the i bus districts . The i bus district districts will be lengthened in the future .
 He said that six buses I would have to added to care for j ‘the efementary schools,’ said .
 A father at the rear of the hall got a laugh when he ruefully said that there had been two changes affecting the bus distances in recent years . Each affected him adversely, in both cases his home being just outside the bus limit .
 Brink reminded the hearing that the School Committee can not be held responsible for statements about school transportation made by real estate salesmen . Brink urged that such statements he investigated he investigated .
 A babel and some laughter greet ed the statement by one mother that her kids ride home from school and then walk down town to the Sport Shop or library . The mother-of-two says her kids go to the sport shop and library .
 Clark of the School Committee felt that the parents are suffering more over the lack of transportation than the kids . Clark felt that parents are more concerned about the children's safety than the children .
 One mother said that Mr Dosjarlais, assistant Superintendent of Schools, had told her there would be hus transportation for her children to the Lynch School and that now there will not be any . Another mother said there would have been no transport to Lynch School .
 She was told that his statement was made before the change in the Committee’s bus policy . She was also told that he made the statement before the Committee changed its policy .
 A father felt that the lack of sidewalks on High Street constitutes a distinct hazard for school children . A mother concurred that something should be done now to prevent a serious accident there .
 Dr. Gilson felt that the School Committee should not go into the transportation business . Another father felt there should be hus service for those willing to pay for it .
 Ault of the School Committee felt the meeting showed no ununimity of opinion in the matter of child welfare involved in the new bus policy . Johns of the Committee stated that the school Committee in framing policy has to take a broad view of what is best for the entire town .
 The committee is trying to retrench wherever possible in the interest of the tax payers, he said . He said with substantially increased school costs the committee is retrenching wherever possible .
 The meeting closed with the request by a mother that the School Committee ask for sidewalks for the Lynch and Vinson Owen Schools . The meeting was closed with a request that the school Committee asked for sidewalks in both schools .
 Informal groups gathered after the meeting to continue the discussion with school committee members and each other . Informal discussion continued after the school committee meeting .
 The hearing was admirable in every way, with ideas courteously exchanged and no tempers apparent . No tempers were apparent during the hearing .
 N A. working under the supervision of Miss Plummer are Miss Eleanor Madden, Mrs. Eleanor Madden and Mrs. Mrs. N A . Miss Madden is also in charge of the team .
 Winchester agency provides an excellent family-centered, generalized Public Health Nursing service for the residents of Winchester, Winchester .
 Crazy Atoms Fiddlestick is a mystifying toy and a fascinating competitive game . It’s a mystery to the public who play it .
 Mr Charles Merenda of Bacon Street underwent a major opera| tion Wednesday morning at the Winchester Hospital . Mr Charles has been in the hospital for over two decades .
 Police report dangerous over-I crowding of motor vehicles after football games . Overcrowding reported after football matches .
 Last week end 17 j young people piled out ot' a station wagon after a game . 17 people piled into the station wagon last week end .
 Registrar Riley will take drastic action to prevent injury to young ; people in the exuberance of victory, j Licenses will be suspended . Registrar Riley to take drastic j action to . prevent injury .
 Cooperation of parents would help -officials to control this seasonal highway hazard . Cooperation of . parents would . help - officials say .
 Roberta Logan recently re| turned from Houston, Texas, where she attended the 10th Annual Con1 vention of the Desk and Derrick J Club* of North America . Logan attended the Con1 conference .
 Reese E James, Administrator of the Winchester Hospital, advanced to the status of Membership in the American College of Hospital Administrators, a professional society .
 The College, now in its 28th year, was founded for the purpose of providing* recognition to men and women who are doing outstanding work in their professional careers .
 Melvin L Sutley of Philadelphia, president of the College, presided at the convocation . The convocation was held in Philadelphia .
 Radcliffc College alumnae c Winchester will meet for coffc Monday morning, October 9 at the home of Mrs. Mrs. C. Winchester .
 The informal gathering will focus its attention on one of the most rapidly developing areas of growth at Radcliffe its dormitories . Radcliffe dorms will be the focus of the informal gathering .
 Dean of Residence and of Student Affairs will bring the alumnae up to date with these developments . The Dean will also bring up the latest developments on campus .
 Winchester Radcliffe neighbors who now number more than 60 will also have an opportunity to meet Mrs. Radcliffe . Winchester neighbors will also be given a chance to meet her new neighbors at the event .
 Robert Treat, President of the Radcliffe Club of Boston and Mrs William S Hanna, Executive Secretary of the . Radcliffe College Alumnae Association .
 John Volpe is to be a guest of honor at “Morning, Noon and Night in Suburbia”, gala fashion show sponsored by the Winchester Auxiliary of M.S.P.C.A. on Thursday afternoon, October 19th, at the Winchester
 Peter Picopolus of 18 Spruce Street announce the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Virginia, to Mr Lewis Joseph DeLuca, son of Mrs. Virginia . Mrs. DeLucas is engaged to Mr. Lewis Joseph .
 He is now employed as a Purchasing Agent’s Assistant in the Executive Office of the former Tenney Group, Associates, in Boston .
 The hard working committee reports tremendous enthusiasm for this lush show planned to benefit those who cannot plan for themselves, i.e., lost, injured and mistreated animals . MRS. John A. Volpe will be at the center of the show at 8 p.m. on Saturday
 Also benefiting will be the Angell Memorial Animal Hospital, the Alvarl Wildlife Sanctuary and the American Fonduk in Fez, Morocco, where brutally treated native donkeys are cared for . The cause of American good relations is promoted more effectively than in any way .
 Personnel Changes At Winchester Hospital have also been announced recently . Reese E James, Administrator, announced several changes in personnel .
 Joseph A Gagnon of Peabody has been appointed Comptroller . Stanley W Krygowski is resigning after three years in this capacity to accept a similar position at Salem Hospital .
 He is presently chief accountant and office manager at the Lynn Hospital . He is currently chief accountant at the hospital .
 His appointment further strengthens this department and frees the dietitians for further development of our patient food service .
 Mr Roberts comes to Winchester Hospital from a position as assistant manager of the Northeastland Hotel, Presque Isle, Me., and previous to that he had extensive experience as assistant food manager at the Harvard Club of Boston .
 Louis C Evangelista, a native of Winchester, has been promoted to the position of Laundry Manager . He replaces Charles Heisler who held this position for the past three years . Evangelista is a resident of Winchester .
 Mr Evangelista will head this important department of the hospital during its crucial period of expansion and remodeling as it prepares for the increased patient load .
 Young Actors Will Attend Boston Play . Some members of the Children’s Theatre School will attend a performance Friday evening October 13th or Saturday matinee October 14th .
 Agnes DeMille has been acclaimed as her finest achievement, “Oklahoma being one of her earlier ones.” The superb choreography of Agnes deMille’s ‘Oklahoma’ is one of the best choreographed films .
 During her visit to the Samoiloft’s last Sunday with the composer of her ballet music in “Kwamina,"" she kindly agreed to try to arrange to arrange the plan for Mrs. Mrs. Edmonds .
 Parents of any former students or currently enrolled wishing to attend should phone Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 The art classes of Winchester, Winchester, are gathering for their first meetings at their various studios with fine teachers and varied emphases . Winchester's Studio Guild's First Meeting will be held at the studios of Winchester .
 Some are for children, some adults, some for women, others for both sexes . Others are for both adults and children . Some for children are for adults .
 Studio Guild lays special emphasis on the friendly, informal atmosphere, the lack of well-defined rules, and especially the encouragement to draw or paint the thing in which you are interested in the way you see it .
 This results in definitely personal pictures, in various media and in realistic semi-abstract, or completely abstract styles as the artist sees the subject .
 The director of this group, William Grady, gives intensely, personal criticism to each member of the group . The group is based in New York City .
 Occasionally he gives a short talk on some subject of general interest . He also gives talks on some subjects of interest .
 He confines himself to his criticisms of each individual picture . But for the most part he confines himself . He listened to and profited by all the other amateur artists .
 Plans for the year were discussed at length with many suggestions and criticisms from the twenty members present at the meeting .
 Discussion of figure painting and portraiture were considered and left to be decided in the future . Discussion was left to decide on the future of the project .
 Members were asked to bring all paintings done during the summer, so that the walls could present a gay and interesting sight . Members of the club were invited to bring paintings done in the summer .
 Members were also asked to bring objects for still life studies . Not handsome bowls and Japanese figurines but old rusty objects from the cellar or rusty bits of wood .
 Herbert Levin of Riverton, N. J., as her only attendant at her marriage to Robert James Anderson of Chicago, 111., son of Mr. and Mrs. Anderson, 111. Herbert Levin .
 Ivan G Anderson of Evanston, 111., will be remembered on Saturday afternoon, September 23, at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church . Anderson's funeral will be held at the church in Evanston .
 Dwight L Cart, read the 3 o’clock marriage service, and a reception followed in Chidley Hall . Dwight Cart was married at 3:30pm .
 Miss Angela d’Elseaux is engaged to Mr James Campbell Wakefield, son of Mr and Mrs. Frank Christian d'Elseaux of Winchester and Marblehead . The couple announce the engagement of their daughter .
 Winchester Boat Club is providing entertainment this Saturday evening, October 7, for members . Warren Dannenberg will present slides on a trip to California by Warren . Winchester boat club members will enjoy the entertainment .
 Homeric Days 13 13 13 it 11 12 13 5 10 Min. Min. A tlantic Homeric Day .
 Oslofjord Mauretania Ocean Monarch Italia . Italia Homeric Empress of Can. ( 'a ron i a N Amsterdam Mauredania)
 Lt. Joseph B Peel of 34 Pickering Street, announce the marriage of their daughter, Lt. John Peel . Lt. Peel's parents announce their daughter's marriage to Lt. Robert Peel of Pickering St.
 The ceremony took place on Friday, Sept., in the chapel of the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Md. The ceremony was held at the chapel .
 The bride is a graduate of the Boston City Hospital School of Nursing . She is a member of the Navy Nurses Corps, seeing service in World War II and Korean Campaign .
 She has returned from a 20 months tour of duty in Spain and has 20 months additional service before retiring . She has been deployed to Spain for 20 months .
 He is currently on duty in the office of the Judge Advocate General at the Pentagon . He will make his home with his bride in one of the suburbs of Washington's Capitol .
 The Eighth District Leadership Workshop of the Massachusetts State Federation of Woman’s Clubs is held in Massachusetts . The eighth district Leadership Workshop will be held in Boston, Massachusetts .
 W’ilmington Congregational Church held on Wednesday, September 27 at the W‘ilmington Congregational Church .
 More than 75 people attended the Wilmington Club . Edmund S Ferguson, President of Wilmington Club, welcomed more than 75 .
 Ralph W Hatch, President of the Fortnightly, and the President of Wakefield Club were in charge of registration . Ralph Hatch was in charge with the Wakefield club .
 First meeting of The Fortnightly will be a luncheon for the benefit of War Veterans on Monday, October 9, with Mrs. Mrs. Johnson .
 Melrose Highlands Woman’s Club Dramatic Group will put on a play ‘This Daring Generation’ for the entertainment for the regular meeting at 2:00m.
 Archibald's mother wore a flag-blue matte jer sey sheath with a hat of deep pinls leaves and a corsage of matching miniature carnations .
 The bridegroom’s mother, M Anderson, wore a beige sheer woo dress with brown feather hat anc corsage of small garnet roses .
 Fred Shulz of Chicago, 111., was ering were Theodore H Anders* of Binghampton, N Y., brother the bridegroom . Two brothers the bride, David K Archibald Cambridge, and Lawrence Archi bald of Winchester, were also present .
 Anderson will make his Chicago home at 6051 South Drexel Avenue, Chicago, 111. 111. Anderson will live in his new home . Anderson: "I will make the most of my life in my Chicago home"
 Mr Anderson is an artist at the Museum of Natural History in Chicago . He is a graduate of the Art Institute of Chicago .
 Miss d’Elseaux and Mr Wakefield are 1958 graduates of Winchester High School . Both Miss d'Elseaux d' Elseaux and Mrs Wakefield were graduates of the school .
 Miss d'Elseaux attended Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital School of Nursing . Miss d’Elseaux received her medical secretarial certificate from Hickox Secretarial School .
 Miss Barbara Serbinski, of 97 Cambridge Street, in Winchester, to marry Mr Daniel F Chisholm, son of Mr and Mrs. William Serbinks .
 Paul Weaver, tin* formal reception held annually with senior counselors and faculty . Paul Weaver is a former counselor at the University of Washington .
 Mirak's 23-ycar honest dealing and quality service . Every sale is hacked . Mirak: Every sale^ hacked hy Mirak .
 Meet the entire Chevy family for l%2 at MirakV rooms in the heart of Arlington Center . The rooms are located in the center of the Arlington Center.
 Arlington Center Mission 3-8000 At an 11-o’clock Nuptial Mass m St. St. Ave., Arlington Center . Ave.
 Miss Sandra E White, (laughter of Mr and Mrs. White) was at St. Ann’s Church, Gulf Breeze, Florida, on Saturday, September 23, .
 Marco J White, Jr., of Gulf Breeze, became the bride of Lieutenant Francis P Hurley, USN . Lt Hurley is the son of Mr and Mrs. White . Lt. White is married to Lieutenant Hurley of the U.S.
 The Reverend Leonard F Hurley of Washington, D. C. performed the ceremony and celebrated the Nuptial Mass that followed . The Reverend Hurley was the brother of the groom .
 The bride’s gown of white silk organza over taffeta had a modified V-neck line overlaid with appliques of Alencon lace .
 A crown of lace and pearls held her veil of illusion . Her bridal bouquet was fashioned of white fuji chrysanthemums .
 Gowns of Dior-blue silk organza were worn by the bride’s attendants with headpieces to match . The bride's attendants wore the same Dior gowns as their own .
 They carried bouquets of white chrysanthemums on Dior-blue velvet leaves . The flowers were carried by Dior's designers .
 The best man was Lieutenant •lulin H McEnemin, USN, and Lieutenant Patrick Duncan . Lieutenant Raymond Hudson, US Navy, ushered . The best-wishers were Lieutenant .
 Lincoln School Mothers’ toffee was held on Tuesday morning, October 3 . The “Coffee Hour” for new mothers was held in the school auditorium .
 Eleanor Davis, school secretary, joined the gathering for a brief visit and welcomed new mothers as they enjoyed their coffee .
 Mrs. Robert Millican poured at the attractively decorated table with a beautiful centerpiece of red and white carnations .
 The executive board wishes to thank everyone who participated in the first social hour of the school year .
 John F Maguire, Jr. of 37 Clark Street, Massachusetts, recently celebrated their 40th wedding anniversary at a dinner party held in their honor at The Meadows in Framingham . John F and John F were married 40 years ago .
 A large group of friends and relatives, including children and grandchildren, were present to assist the Maguires with their anniversary celebration . The Maguire family extended congratulations and best wishes .
 Maguire were recipients of a substantial purse of money and other appropriate gifts . The couple were given a large amount of money .
 Miss Serbinski was graduated in 1959 from Winchester High School . She is an alumus of Leland Powers School of Radio-TV and Theatre in Boston .
 Spent four years with the United States Navy, and is also an alumnus of Leland Powers School in Boston .
 Mr Ondrejka was received into membership by Letter of Transfer from the Bethany Baptist Church, waukee, Wis. He received a letter of transfer from the church .
 Girl Scouts celebrate their 50th Anniversary of Girl Scouting . Girl Scouts are planting a Golden chain tree on the Winchester Common .
 Oct. at 4 o’clock all troops of the Winchester council will be represented at the tree planting to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Girl Scouting in America .
 William Davis, Park Commissioner in charge of the Common along with Mrs. Mrs. Davis, park Commissioner, and Mrs. William Davis are pictured .
 James Stewart, President of the Girl Scouts, will plant the Golden Chain tree . James Stewart will be the first Girl Scout president to plant the tree .
 Harold Butters, Program Chairman of the Winchester Girl Scouts has planned and will conduct the program . Winchester Girl Scout program will be held at the center of the event .
 I Counterspy Herbert Philbrick played a key role in helping to smash the Reds . He was only one of three roles he played in helping the Reds beat the Tigers .
 67 donors out of the 79 who braved the torrents were accepted . 67 donors were accepted by 67 of 79 who donated .
 Mrs. Martha P, Bund Allan T Burns, Idoyd G Butterfield, Herbert V Canfield and Mrs. Canfield are all named .
 Adelaide C Dunn Ralph H Earle Donald R Ellis Daniel F Fairbanks Clifford M Hammel William H Harris Donald V Harrod Robert D Heileman James F Henry Anna A Hormanson Edgar D Hinton .
 Lane Richard B Lawrance Frank H Leslie Roland A Lewis Frank J Logan Charles F Mahoney Gordon D MacKay Mrs. Lane . Lane Richard Lawrance Richard H. Lawrance .
 Claire E Mullen, Clyde Y Mullen and Austin E Naniy Fenton H Norris were all named . William J O’Malley and Francis B Parsons were also named .
 Mrs. Charlotte E Schaefer is a mother-of-two . Charlotte E. Schaefer was married to Richard Schaefer . Mrs. Richard E. Smith was a mother of two .
 Troop Donald C VanRoosen, Jr. Ruth F Thompson, Marguerite H Troop . Donald J Waite, Jr., Donald C. Waite Jr. The Troop was deployed to the U.S.
 Our volunteer staff as usual were right on hand to assist in their varied capacities . Elinor V Walker, Ronald A Ward, Francis M Wiener and Corey Wynn were also present .
 Harold E “Bergquist and her committee was greatly enjoyed by the volunteers and the bloodmobile staff . Harold E. Bergquist's committee was "greatly enjoyed" by volunteers, staff, staff .
 Dunbar L Shanklin Motor Service chairman, Mrs. Dunbar, Mr Theodore P Messer, Mr Sherman Russell Canteen .
 Medford police arrested two men on charges of stealing a car in Boston and reported to Winchester that the articles in the stolen car belonged to Winchester residents . Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club two are jailed for car theft .
 The men were 40-year-old John J Quinn of Shawmut Avenue, Boston and 24-year old Raymond Guimond of Dover Street, Boston . The men died in the shooting .
 A Boston court sentenced the men to Concord Reformatory and Deer Island, one for an indefinite term, the other for a three-month visit .
 Crawford visited both men and learned that they indeed had ransacked the Winchester cars in question . Crawford also learned that the men used the stolen car to get to Winchester . Crawford visited the men to learn that they had stolen the cars .
 One of the men was sentenced to Concord Reformatory in 1956 for a local house break . One of them was sentenced for a house break in 1956 . The two men were convicted of the crime in 1956 in Concord .
 A pair of old hands joined with a blind date partnership to capture top honors in the draw team of four practice rounds held Wednesday, September 27 .
 Seven teams completed the round robin for an average score of 18 points . Marge Sexton, Bill Duryea, Carl and Irene Sittinger combined for 27 points . The seven team field completed the tournament for the first time ever .
 George and Alice Kimball, Marthat Walker and Ellen Schofield lead the pack with 24 team points . Close behind was the foursome of Alice and George Kimball with 24 points .
 Tied for third place, with 19 points, were Alta Stewart, Donna Redpath, Guy Mingolelli, and Bob Haskell, together with the husband and wife pairing of the Symmeses and Roots .
 Section B survived a congenital case of halftable hiccups . Section B was played as a straight Mitchell to accommodate 29 pairs . Section A survived the birth of a baby girl with a condition that required a birth certificate .
 ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW . Screen is self-storing. Screen is also self-storage . Walter Mainberger, James Byrne and Edward Sullivan .
 You are sitting North and hold: S9 5, HQ 9 8 6 5, DK 8, CK 6 5 2 . You are also sitting North, holding: HQ 9, DK 9, CK 8, NT 9, NT 6 5 .
 The actual North was less than satisfied with his spade support, and held little hope for his hearts after that suit .
 North passed . Not wishing to penalize partner, who may have been stretching a point or two to “compete,” North passed.
 South actually has a little slam and even has a fine play for all 13 tricks against any lead except the ace of clubs . South's play for 13 tricks includes a play for every lead except ace of a club .
 West had “unusual no trump” written on his card and figured that here was the time to use it . West had "unusual trump" written in his card .
 West might have 22 plus points with balance with balance, a possibility which both North and East had to consider . North might have balance, with balance of 22 plus plus points .
 He decided to bid only three spades in his own hand . Envisioning a "busted" partner, and five possible losers in own hand, he decided only to bid .
 Gerry Lawrence and Betty Yeomans earned a fine top on this board at an imaginative contract of six no trump by North . Gerry Lawrence was the man to the top in the board .
 EW's top score was set by Rose Hickey and Lillian Sheridan . Rose and Sheridan managed to set six spades .
 A social hour will be held at 7:30 followed by the evening’s entertainment gi\ron by the “Two-By-Fours” a double male quartet from Winchester . A double male quadruple from Winchester will also play .
 For inorr information or free delivery of free delivery, call BR 2-3187, EM 1-2642 7.5-7.5.5 . For more information, call the Samaritans on 08457 909090 .
 MAINE CORN DEL MONIE PEAS 5 FRUIT COCKTAIL . DOLE PINEAPPLE JUICE 4 FACIAL TISSUES^ 6 II VI VI /tll£ LADY LEN0X NT I I teSY* %
 Cook, former minister at the Second Congregational Church of Winchester, is a former minister . Cook is a member of the Second . Congregation of Winchester Congregation .
 The section on “Adult Leaders’ pro’ vides aid and suggestions for work; ers with adults in local churches, j . ers  with . adults in . local churches . Senior Forum .
 Horace M Bosecker Jr., Jr., of Lexington will be the guest speaker at the Senior Forum this Sunday at 9:15m. in Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church . The Senior Forum will be held at 9 a.m. Sunday at Ripley
 Rosemary at Farrington in Lincoln, a summer camp for mothers and their children from tenement areas of Boston . Her chief responsibility is the direction of ('amp Rosemary' Rosemary) Rosemary .
 The Roseekors came to Lexington ten years ago from their home state of Pennsylvania . They moved from Pennsylvania to Lexington, Kentucky, in 2003 .
 As pariah* ioners of Hancock Church, they became interested in volunteer work with City Missionary Society . They became involved with the mission work of the city mission .
 From her training and experience, as well as from her spirit of enthusiasm and enjoyment of the work she is doing, Mrs. Smith will be able to learn from her experience and experience .
 The annual Fall Outing of Forum will be held on Columbus Day, October 12 . Forum will also be held in honor of Columbus Day .
 Arrangements are being made for a day of sports and fellowship at Cherry Hill in Beverly . Cherry Hill is located in Beverly, California .
 Frongillo hurling empty dixie cups among the roses and shrubs donated by Winchester people to make their Town more beautiful . Winchester people donated the flowers to make the town more beautiful, Frongillillo said .
 Officer Frongillo made a bee-line for the gang, and ordered them to get busy cleaning up the Common as efficiently as they had messed it up . The gang was ordered to clean up the mess up .
 Rakes were secured from the Fire Department and put into the hands of three specially appointed teenage foremen . Others set to picking up litter from the roots and leaves of the rose bushes, by hand .
 The “Show Toppers” and the “Four Rascals” will be featured . Both are talented and experienced groups their efforts are sure to please .
 Six young singers have won acclaim at the Terrace Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton in Boston . The "Show Toppers" are a group of six young singers .
 They present a smoothly polished well-balanced program that combines supper club sophistication with memorable music . Performers performed with warmth, youthful zest, humor and dramatic flair .
 Crittenton will have a chance to win as a door prize an evening for two, all expenses paid, at the Statler Hilton Terrace Room . The winner will be able to win a two-night ticket to see the show .
 Uamelot Philbrick posed as a ‘Communist’ to gain first-hand knowledge of the methods of the U.S. government . Philbricks had gone underground to gain knowledge of how to take over society .
 Mr Philbrick will give an account of his experiences with the Communists . When he speaks in Winchester at the high school auditorium on October 19th, he will tell local residents what they can do .
 John Scherban, Ktovt* Dee, Dean Anderson, Bob Kiley, Alan MacDonald, David Brock, George Laban and George Goethals are all on the panel .
 Dean Erieson, Scott Ers-Ers-ine, Guy Hutchings, Jay Handy, Neil Kirkpatrick, Reed I .ovvry and Reed I.ovrry from Winchester . Geoffrey Bell and John Man sur from Reading High School .
 From 9 until 1 on Friday evening, October 13th, and from 9 to 12 on Saturday night, October 14th, a telephone answering service will be maintained at the Town Hall . The Town Hall will also be closed from October 13 to October 14 .
 Don't iniss this beautiful and exciting dance, one of the nicest social events of the year . The event is a great way to spend time with your friends and family .
 Collision At Wildwood And Cambridge Sts. Collision at Wildwood and Cambridge St.s. Motorview 9-1447 Open Til 9:00 Collision
 A 1957 Chevrolet driven by Denzil Pack of Cottle, Kentucky, was in collision with a 1955 Ford operated by Lillian F Cheever of 41 Grove Place . Police responded to the accident call at the corner of Wildwood and Cambridge Streets on Friday night .
 Mrs. Pack was proceeding north on Cambridge Street when the collision occurred . She was proceeding on Cambridge St. when the crash occurred .
 It spun around into Wildwood Street so that it was facing in a westerly direction . The incident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Neither driver received medical attention at the time, police report . Both complained of injuries, but both complained of minor injuries .
 More volunteers are still urgently needed to help make this year's United Fund campaign a success . United Fund leaders report that more volunteers are needed for the United Fund .
 To keep United Fund agencies open and able to serve, they must have more funds . To keep agencies open, they need more funds, says United Fund chief .
 Those wishing to share as volunteers should call United Fund Headquarters . United Fund will provide information on how to donate to the charity .
 The Everett Avenue representative appealed for the support of Massachusetts Independents and disaffected Democrats to join with Republicans . He said he called political opportunism which has made Massachusetts and Boston politics so notoriou throughout New England and the nation .
 All people of good will and intelligence regardless of party must join us in this battle against those who put political expediency before the interests of the Commonwealth .
 The legislator expressed his views on the current political situation in a special visit to the Star office on Monday afternoon .
 Mr Chadwick said he was less worried about disappointing turns in his own political fortunes than about matters of party principle . He said naturally he was disappointed in his failure to win the House leadership post .
 The caucus last Thursday represented the House Republicans' second attempt to elect a successor to Mr Giles .
 Rep. Chadwick polled 36 votes in the July 27 caucus . In the earlier caucus, Representative Chadwick won 36 votes . Rep. Chadwick won the majority of the votes .
 Curtiss polled 37, with 43 votes, or a majority of the entire Republican House membership required for election . Curtiss won the election with 37 votes, a majority required for the election .
 In the caucus last Thursday, the rules were changed to permit the candidate receiving a majority of votes of Republicans present at the caucus to be elected . In the caucuses, the candidate must receive a majority vote of the Republicans present .
 Later this month, Jeremy Whatmough will move from Highland Park to Redford Township, Michigan . He and his wife Jeremy move to Inkster Road .
 VV,n<h f st,, r Hospital, following I860 in Malden . Graduated from Mpv '-‘'al month • iIIiicms. V.I.n.m. Hospital, followed I860 .
 Mr Smith an of 4 Marvernment employee and a veteran of died late Tuesday . Mr Smith was employed by Stone & Webster Engineering Corp.
 Army m the Ord1 ( ; niver ,j lv . had |, vc . d for t5ve nance Department at Edgewood years in Winchester . He continued ' Malden his career in the printing and ad for years .
 In 1941, Mr Smith served as Public Relations and Recreation director for the George A Fuller Construction Co., at their construction projects in Ireland and Scotland . Mr Smith was Public Relations Director for Fuller Construction Company .
 He returned from Europe and was employed by Northeast Airlines in Labrador and Presque Isle, Maine .
 Smith was prominently known in Winchester for her active participation in many civic organizations . Smith was a member of Winchester's largest civic society .
 The couple moved to Chula Vista, California, after returning from the Orient . They have jointly operated a real estate management firm for nine years .
 Mr Smith was 32nd degree Mason in Malden and a member of the Aleppo Temple . He was a 32nd-degree Mason and a 32th degree Mason .
 Mr Smith is survived by his two sons, Lucius, Jr., of Hingham and Law rence Talbott of Winchester . His sister, Mrs. Mrs. Smith, also survived by her brother, Lawrence Talbott .
 Christian Science services are to be held today at the Humphrey Mortuary in Chula Vista . Burial will be in the military cemetery at Fort Rosecrans, San Diego .
 During World War II Mr McGowan enlisted in the Army ami served overseas in the European Theatre . He enlisted in 1941 and served in Europe during the war . During the war he served in the British Army .
 Flags on the common and town buildings were displayed at half-staff in his honor . Flags were displayed on the town's common and buildings in town buildings in honor .
 On April 19, 1942, Mr McGowan married Mary Delaney of Malden, who is his only survivor . He is survived by his wife, Mary, who he married in 1942 .
 The funeral was held Saturday morning from the late residence with Solemn Requiem High Mass celebrated at St. Mary's St. Michael's Cathedral .
 Miss Mabel Laurinda Vinton, 81, died early Friday morning, Sept., at the Emery Nursing Home in West Medford, after a long illness . Vinton was a lifelong resident of Winchester .
 She attended Winchester schools and was graduated from RadclifTe College in the class of 1902 . She attended the Winchester schools .
 She lived with her parents until their deaths . She attended Ida Ida School in Newton, after which she lived with them .
 She then built a smaller house on Fairview Terrace where she lived with Mrs. Edmonds . She then moved on to a smaller home in which she later lived with her husband .
 Miss Vinton was an honorary member of the Fortnightly Woman’s Club . She was also a member of Winchester Historical Society and a former member of Women's Republican Club .
 She was one of the older members of the First Congregational Church, which her father served as deacon and in other capacities during his lifetime . Her father was a deacon at the church .
 She was also a member of the Mission Union of that church, which she took an active part in her earlier years .
 Funeral services were held Monday afternoon at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with Dr. Dr. Michael Bennett . Dr. Bennett's funeral home was held in the Chapel of Bennett, Norris .
 Dwight Cart minister of the First Congregational Church, officiated . Dwight L Cart minister officiated at the service .
 Chester Wolfe, long time Winchester dentist, of 19 Jefferson Road, died early Thursday afternoon, Sept., at the Emery Nursing Home in West Medford after a long illness . Wolfe was a long time dentist and dentist from Winchester .
 She was born Sept., 1892, in Norwood, and spent her early life in that town . She was educated in the Norwood schools .
 Wolfe and his wife lived first on Myrtle terrace, and since 1929 at 19 Jefferson Road . Wolfe and Wolfe moved to Winchester at the time of their marriage . Wolfe was married in 1929 .
 Wolfe was a member of the Winchester Unitarian Church and of the Eastern Star in Norwood, Norwood . Wolfe was married to Robert Wolfe Jr. Wolfe's wife . Wolfe's funeral was held at the National Funeral Home in Winchester .
 A sister, Mrs. Peter Knox, of East Walpole, is also survived by two sons, two sons and six grandchildren . Wolfe was married to Chester Wolfe, Jr., of Ashland, Massachusetts .
 Family services were held at the late residence last Saturday afternoon with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister attended the service .
 Mrs. Sullivan, secretary-treasurer of the Minute Man Branch for 1961-62, will be other members of the executive hoard . Mrs. S. Sullivan will be the first woman to serve as a member of the board .
 The Minute Man Branch welcomes members and newcomers from many neighboring communities including Lexington, Arlington Winchester, Concord, Lincoln, Bedford, Bedford and Waltham .
 A special Guild project which will continue this year will be to act as a hostess committee for foreign students and wives and to procure warm winter clothing for students from warmer climates .
 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr. Established in 1880 . Mission H-04DS I the Winchester Star .
 Winchester’s representative in the ( ireat and ( ieneral Court, Harrison C. hadwick, was not elected House leader of the Republican minority in last week's election on Beacon Hill . Harrison C hadwick was elected to the House of Representatives .
 We believe that Mr Chadwick has many of the attributes necessary to do an effective job in this important post . We believe he has the attributes needed to do a good job .
 Mr Chadwick sees the need for stronger, more cohesive action on the part of his colleagues on Beacon Hill . For the sake of a strong bi-partisan approach to State problems we can sincerely hope he will go as far as he can .
 Mr Chadwick, we believe, would have put his best effort into forging the Republicans in the House into the real opposition party they should he in a two-party government .
 This is not to say that under Mr Chadwick’s leadership the (r.O.U. in the House would opj>ose all legislation proposed by the Democratic majority . This is . not to . say .
 Mr Chadwick has said publicly that his party should support the Democratic leadership in effecting good legislation .
 The Republican minority should stoutly oppose any and all attempts of the Democrats to pass legislation which Republicans consider not in the public interest, he says .
 Republican members of the House should make known their opposition to what they conceive to be bad legislation, says Chadwick .
 The Star believes there are many in Massachusetts who arc far from pleased with the way things have been going at the State Mouse .
 Massachusetts politics is viewed askance, not only by many residents of the State but elsewhere through the* nation . Massachusetts politics are viewed as askance by many .
 Recent exposes of graft and corruption in our body politic arouses resentment among those who cherish honesty in government . This resentment can well result in a shifting of party lines, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Independent voters and conceivably many within the Democratic ranks would welcome the opportunity to align themselves with the party that stands four-square for honesty in government .
 Convince people that any party stands for these principles in government and they will flock to its standard . Convince them that any Party stands for such principles and it will attract voters . Convincince them to stand for such a party and they'll flock to their standard .
 Mr Chadwick hoped, if elected House minority leader, to get the G.O.Fk on Beacon Hill to, as he says, ‘change direction”
 Its opposition to past excesses has been something less than vigorous . Its voice raised against legislation believed to be bad has been far from clarionion . It has not been as vigorous as it has been in opposition to the past .
 Chadwick did not get backing in quarters where he had every reason to believe he would receive strong support . "Uncomprising refusal to make deals and promises in advance of election mav" contributed to his defeat .
 Political resentments for which he could not be. held responsible also probably counted heavily in the balance . Political . resentments . also probably count heavily in balance .
 For himself, Mr Chadwick likely has no particular regret over his defeat . For himself he is likely to have no particular regrets over the defeat .
 The present rote of the Republican House leader on Beacon Hill is not likely to be a happy one . House Speaker John Boehner is expected to lead the GOP in the next few years .
 Mr Chadwick sought the minority leadership because he felt he could contribute in this post to the revitalizing of his party and could also effectively assist his neighbor Governor Volpc, in his plans to improve his plans .
 His past record in the General Court bespeaks his effectiveness in office . He has been in office for more than 30 years .
 He has lost the chance to bring these talents to the assistance of his party on Beacon Hill . He has also lost the opportunity to help his party in the Senate .
 Chadwick wishes for a strong and articulate Republican minority in the House . Perhaps he shares the Chadwick wish for a Republican minority .
 If so, he will have Mr Chadwick’s active support in his effort to affect this change, he says .
 Mr Chadwick has said he will assist the new leadership in any program that is in the public interest .
 Police Chief Derro, together with other friends of the town’s youth, is becoming increasingly concerned over the drinking that seems to be more and more evident among our young people . Police chief Derro and other friends are concerned over drinking .
 It is useless to say that such drinking does not exist and it surely serves no useful purpose to ignore it . It is not a good idea to ignore such drinking, it is a bad idea to say it doesn't exist .
 Boys and girls in their teens should not be drinking for their own physical and mental welfare . It's important to not drink too much for your own physical, mental health .
 Anything that can be done to curtail youthful drinking is entirely worth while, says CNN.com.com .
 Chief Derro is of the opinion that one of the most effective ways to cut down or eliminate youthful drinking is through the parents . He says parents are the key to cutting down or eliminating youthful drinking .
 Many parents have no idea that their youthful son or daughter is a party to juvenile drinking . He is probably right when says that many parents don't know that their children are drinking too much .
 Chief Derro is quite sure most people do not know most of them do not . How they can avoid knowing is hard to understand, perhaps, perhaps . But Derro says most people don't know what happened .
 Boys and girls in their teens would have had a hard time getting home from a liquor party without parental knowledge and subsequent parental action . In what are usually referred to as “the gocxl old days’’
 Cief Derro is trying to secure the cooperation of parents in an effort to curb youthful drinking . Derro's men are notifying parents when they have knowledge of youthful drinking parties in which their children have been involved .
 It is the Chief’s belief that most effective progress in combatting youthful drinking can be made by the cooperative effort of parents and police, rather than in merely punitive action on the part of the authorities .
 Chief said it is too soon to say how his plan is working . Asked by the Star how it is working, Chief replied it is 'too soon'
 This is discouraging to the Police who feel they are giving the parents of youthful offenders a break in the hope that they will appreciate the opportunity to assist the authorities in stamping out youthful drinking in town .
 The Police of course can make mistakes, both in the identification of youthful drinkers and in their method of approaching problems involving them .
 Parents urged to report to the Chief any action of his men which they consider to have been improper . Failure to cooperate because of this is not the proper reaction for parents, says the Chief .
 A frank discussion will clear the air and result in improved understanding on both sides of the debate .
 Town members are now asking the cooperation of town parents in their effort to do something constructive about teen age drinking . These members of the town council are concerned about teen drinking .
 It would seem that their effort should have the hacking, especially parents, but also of all who are worried over the spread of this deplorable practice . The hacking is not the first time parents have been hacked, but it's a good start .
 The Star has met no one who has not applauded your action in making a group of hoys clean up the mess they had made on the Common .
 Getting rakes from the dire Station and putting the hoys to work immediately was a most effective way to bring home to them the consequences of a careless act while the evidence was there for all to see .
 The town likes to have its Common clean and was asking your future cooperation in keeping it that way . Beyond that he was reminding you that the town likes the town clean . He was also asking you to help keep it clean .
 In the three centuries since the founding of the colonies of Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay, local government in Massachusetts has evolved from a simple, informal structure to a complex set of institutions reflecting a vast and intricate urban industrial civilization .
 The number of municipalities has expanded from 27 in 1640, with a population of but a few thousand, to .351 communities in 1060 embracing 5. million inhabitants .
 Originally the responsibilities of these municipalities were limited to support of a church and school, poor relief, roads, military defense, the suppression of crime and the collection of taxes . The responsibilities of the municipalities are limited to supporting a church, school and poor relief .
 Now they encompass a wide range of public services, social programs and public works . Now they include social programs, social services, and public services .
 Legally, local government originated in the commercially oriented royal charters authorizing the establishment of the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay Colonies . Legal Origins of Local Government: Local Government . Local government originated legally in the colonies .
 The charter of the colony was granted by King Charles I in 1628 . The charter provided for a colonial government consisting of a Governor, a Deputy Governor and 18 Assistants .
 The first local governments were established by the settlers without prior authorization by the General Court . They were developed without significant legislative oversight for many years .
 In part, local government institutions reflected innovations by the colonists, and in part they borrowed from the administrative practices of the Puritan Church and English local government .
 The election of committees of “select men’s” to manage administrative matters was a natural product of English love of committee government . Thus, the election of committee members was the birth of the committee system .
 Dorchester institutions were regularized in Dorchester in 163. and spread swiftly throughout the Colony . Dorchester was first established in 1881 .
 In the beginning, the General Court was content to legislate only on major policy questions affecting localities . In the past, the court was only legislating only on minor policy questions .
 The isolation of many towns, the difficulties of travel, and the preoccupation of the central government with commercial, religious and military problems limited the control of the General Court over local governments, limited the local spirit of independence .
 The General Court enacted the first General statute of local government establishing central control over the activities of these frontier communities . Two years later the General Court . enacted the . first General Statute of Local Government establishing central . control over . activities of frontier communities.
 In the next half century the General Court increased its control of the towns, especially the Town of Boston, despite the ‘home rule” sentiment manifested on several occasions .
 The Town of Sudbury defied the General Court when it intervened in their quarrel with their clergyman, who was attempting to dictate town policy in non-ecclesiastical matters . The freemen of Watertown refused to pay a 1632 assessment by the Colonial government .
 In 1688-1680, Lynn and other towns resisted efforts of the dictatorial royal Governor, Sir Edmund Andros, to impose heavy property and excise taxes .
 The overthrow of Governor Andros enhanced the ‘rights of Englishmen’, but did not halt the trend to greater central control of local government .
 The General Court required towns in 1692-94 to submit their by-laws to the judiciary for approval . It also empowered justices of the peace to convene town meetings if the Selectmen refused .
 Of these six forms the towns enjoyed far greater autonomy than the latter units of government, all of which were to disappear by the mid-nineteenth century . All of these six types of government were abolished by the end of the century .
 County governments were first created in 1643, with the organization of the four counties of Essex, Middlesex, “Old” Norfolk (partitioned in 1680) and Suffolk . County governments of Essex and Middlesex were created .
 County government responsibilities then, as now, were largely related to the maintenance of county courts . County courts, probate courts, registries of deeds, jails and houses of corrections, and county roads . County roads, jails, and roads were largely maintained by county government .
 This multiplication of counties reflected the need for judicial services beyond the capacity of most individual towns . The counties were created in response to a shortage of judicial services in many towns .
 Many interpreted the Declaration of Independence to mean that the central government had been abolished . Localities advanced various theories of inherent municipal rights as a basis for almost complete independence of central government . Many interpretations of Declaration meant that central government was abolished .
 These theories were accepted by the General Court for a brief five years . During that period, the court was more a convention of local ambassadors than a legislature .
 Local autonomy was encouraged by the disruption of central authority during the siege of Boston, and by the preoccupation of the succeeding revolutionary government with general military and economic problems . Local autonomy further encouraged by disruption of the central authority .
 The need ror a stable central government for Massachusetts was soon apparent, and resulted in the Constitution of 1780 . Reestablishment of the state authority was established in 1780.
 This document established a powerful bicameral General Court consisting of a Senate of 40 members elected from as many legislatively determined districts, and a House of Representatives consisting of one to three representatives per town depending on the number of voters therein .
 The General Court restored to the General Court in almost the same language the legislative power it had possessed under the Massachusetts Bay Charters of 1628 and 1691 .
 With this restored power in hand, the General Court reasserted its control over t*he localities .
 Legal requirements effecting town administration were strengthened by the General Court . The General Court also strengthened the requirements of town administration .
 Some local autonomy existed when the Eighteenth Century ended . Some of this autonomy existed in the 16th century .
 In the nineteenth century the Industrial Revolution brought economic and social changes which tremendously strained the political institutions inherited from a slower moving agricultural past . In the 19th century the social and economic changes were the result of the revolution .
 The inability of the municipalities alone to deal with these changes, the demand for more state action, and judicial review by the courts all combined to subordinate the communities fully to the General Court . The communities are no longer able to handle these changes .
 Massachusetts lost 79 per cent of its territory when Maine was admitted to the Union under the Missouri Compromise of 1820 . The state’s population rose nearly sevenfold from not quite ahalf million in 1800 to 2. million in 1900 .
 Textile and shoe mills sprang up along the rivers of the state often resulting in great political stresses between the mill and agricultural populations of the towns . The mills often resulted in political tensions between the mills and the agricultural population .
 In the Great Depression of 1929 many of these densely settled mill towns, with their small territory, became municipalities of questionable viability when the mill closed .
 The growth of the state’s railroad network after 1826, and especially after 1860, spurred the evolution of metropolitan areas surrounding Boston, Worcester and Springfield .
 Many foreign born laborers poured into the central cities to work in the mills and industries . The process hastened as many foreign born labor poured in to the cities .
 In 1957 Vance Packard wrote “The Hidden Persuaders,’’ He warned that, depth psychology is being used to make us buy products and politicians we neither need nor rationally want .
 The psychologist’s cynical appeal to our subconscious hope and fear to sell us beauty in soap, status in cars, and security in T V.-deep statesmen . He exposed the psychologist's cynical appeal .
 Dichter, bibliography blazing, replies to anyone who implies that he is less than a prime agent of human progress .
 "It's just his culture that makes him that way. That is to say he’s not nasty," he says . "That is to . say he's not nasty; it's just that his culture makes him . that way"
 He discovers what actually motivates people, in choosing a wife, a whiskey, or a cake of soap . First, he discovers what motivates him to choose a wife .
 Second, he remotivates them toward more desirable goals that effect self-fulfillment, he says . Third, he re-directs them to more desirable targets that are more desirable, he adds .
 He knows that you tend to equate weight with quality, silk with sex, and slogans with truth . He also knows that silk is sex with sex and that slogans are truth .
 Step Two is not to move on Step Two, but to correct or re-direct your motives . Step Three is to correct your motives, but it's not to change your mind, it's to correct it .
 His actual concern is to exploit the motives he has discovered, to determine the most effective way to make you buy what his client wishes to sell, be that a smooth margarine spread, or a smoother Presidential candidate .
 Depth psychology is here used to manipulate man, to freeze him in un-reason, to capitalize on his fears and insecurity . Depth psychology was intended by Freud and responsible psychologists to liberate men from the tyranny of the irrational subconscious .
 Dichter, as a good Viennese, is still troubled by Judeo-Christian morals to feel the need to rationalize his nasty business in ideological terms .
 It is clear that our friend is inordinately more concerned with the fortunes of floor wax than with those of freedom . But when all of this is said, it's clear that .
 In the “psycho-economic” struggle, anything goes as long as the product is sold, even that old huckster trick of letting people keep their illusions so long as they do things, or buy things, your way . In the "psycho" struggle,
 Dichter’s book, moreover, is itself a masterpiece of not-so-hidden persuasion . The book, however, is about to be published in Germany on Sunday .
 The author is too brilliant, too much aware of aspect, however, to hide even his worst thought . The novel is a masterpiece, but the author is also aware of its darker aspect .
 Even as he affirms a theory of moral therapy, his book makes it clear that his main interest is to exploit moral sickness . The book, with abundant detail, makes the point that moral therapy is necessary, he says .
 He placates traditional moralists even as he delights his colleagues in manipulation . That is to say. That's to say he placates moralists, but also placates his colleagues .
 He publishes generous and telling quotations from the works of his harshest critics to indicate that he has read them and disproved them . But he fails utterly to deal with these criticisms, he says . Similarly, he publishes generous quotations from his critics .
 As a disciple of Freud, he knows full well that what he is doing is scientifically irresponsible and morally sick . He knows full . well well that . what he does is scientifically . irresponsible and moral sick .
 What he is doing, therefore, is only less appalling than the fact that he is entirely aware of it . What is less appalling is the fact he is aware of his actions, he says. What he's doing is more appalling than what he's aware of .
 In a man of civility knowledge is power, hut it is also responsibility . In the world of politics, knowledge is also power, says David Cameron . In this case, he says, "knowledge is power"
 Dichter says his toughest problem seems to be to persuade himself that what he is doing is morally tolerable . He says he has to convince himself that it is morally acceptable .
 When all arguments are heard, one still shrinks from casting the first stone . And when all arguments have been heard, the one still grows from casting stone .
 In a sense, the brutal candor of a Dichter is preferable to the moral hypocrisy of those who evade basic illness by prating about symptoms . "In a sense of a . sense, it is preferable" to the . moral hypocrisy .
 OLDest NEWSPAPER PRINTED in WINCHESTER, serving Ihe Community 81 years . Largest Sworn Circulation .
 Chiefs Suggest Law Enforcement Aids Crawford Remember When m Remember When . At the recent conference of the New England Association of Chiefs Services demanded of law offiof Police at Dixville Notch, N.H. oors ar< > .
 Youth Choir 200th time, it’s . . .and all for free, For tht the hank Shown here at the Winchester Saving., Hank, little Jan Wrisley smiles as she receives her very own bank book .
 She is the 200th youngster to receive a free $2 savings account, at the Bank as a gift from Converse Supermarket . The 200th child received the free account as a free gift from the supermarket .
 Wrisley, shown with Jan, is a regular Converse customer, and has been saving green tapes for years . She got $2 in cash for every $99 worth of tapes she presented at the store .
 Both Winchester institutions are proud of the ever growing army of young savers they are helping . Some as young as two months old, some are helping to save money . Some of the money is in the hands of some of the world's biggest banks .
 We inquired how big some of these bonus accounts may look after several years worth of Supermarket shopping and tape saving . We asked how big these accounts could look after a few years of shopping .
 Wrisley volunteered, with a for Jan, Converse depositing the $2 wink, that all her family had won which opened the account . Converse donated $2 to the account.
 Wrisley plans to see her children’s future $2 Converse bonuses build up rapidly . She plans to add all her j to her children's accounts .
 J Stanley Barnes of West Harwich, a former widely known resident of Winchester, has been elected president of the Harwich Chamof Commerce . He was elected Monday night at the High ; School and McCall Junior High .
 About 20 enrolled Monday night and some of the 13 courses offered i are filled and closed to late comI ers . About 20 students signed up Monday night .
 Two new courses, each of which offers a very particular return for time invested, have room for more applicants . Each of the courses, however, offer a very special return for the time invested .
 Woodworking and Furniture Repair with Paul Goodwin will have to be cancelled this fall if there are not more enrollees by the end of the week . The program has been successful in the past .
 Adult Education programming is something familiar to those programming for Adult Education . Adult Education is trying to present courses in answer to expressed public interest . This kind of unpredictable class enrollment is a familiar problem .
 Eaton’s Ko-Rec-Type enables you to correct mistakes in typing without having left town to take up residence on erasing . Eaton's Ko Rec-Type lets you correct mistakes without having to go to town .
 Among other activities it has sponsored Cranberry Harvest Days, Air Force Band concerts at Brooks Park and square dances at the Harwich Recreation Center .
 It has also been instrumental in getting an exit olf the Mid-Cape Highway in Harwich and getting a comfort station erected .
 The Chamber donates money annually to a milk fund and to the Harwich Women’s Club for Christmas j^ifts to veterans . The Chamber also donates to the women's club for Christmas gifts .
 Harwich High School gradauting class of Harwich wins commercial award . Harwich students also receive commercial award for their commercial success .
 Mr Barnes and his wife, Muriel, are now in the real estate business in West Harwich . They were active civiely and politically while in Winchester .
 While in Winchester they lived at Ravenscroft Road and later on Canterbury Road . The couple lived in Winchester, Hampshire, for more than 20 years .
 Youngsters and adults enjoy the suspense and rivalry of working out the picture-word puzzle solutions .
 Ronel ’s Toy Department Open Friday Evening 23 25 Thompson Street PA 9-1708 ways in which law' enforcement can be improved and the influence outside the police ranks that affect luw enforcement efforts .
 The chiefs urged the active personal interest of members in the objectives the Association has set for itself . The Association has been in a hit of soul searching .
 The Association strongly recommended that its members give the widest possible dissemination of the Association’s recommendations so that people may know for what the chiefs are working and assist their elforts .
 Law enforcement education is considered of great importance by the Police Chiefs . It enables law enforcement agencies to provide greater and improved service to their individual communities and the over-all enforcement system .
 Chiefs expressed their appreciation to the FBI for its continued assistance in polieje training . The Chiefs urged all members of the Association to avail themselves of the opportunity to get for its personnel the instruction being* offered at the various FBI training* schools .
 The Chiefs call upon all lawabiding citizens together w’ith the press, radio and television to join in a community effort to support the rights of society and support law enforcement .
 Chiefs found that the life of a nation rests in part on the strength of its families . Children through this family strength develop respect for their parents, which reflects itself in a sense of community responsibility .
 The Chiefs emphasized the grave responsibility resting with parents to concern themselves with the activities and interests of their children . The Chiefs said parents must guide their children in the path of good citizenship .
 Chiefs found that good gov eminent and good law enforcement require respect for the agencies that create and interpret the law, the legislature and the judiciary . The Chiefs say good govt. eminent and law enforcement need to respect the agencies behind the law .
 The chiefs agreed that while those in law enforcement work may well differ from judicial decisions . This lack of agreement in no way diminishes their respect for the authority of the decisions .
 The Chiefs saluted Director J Edgar Hoover, dean of law enforcement, for his lifetime of service and sacrifice to our nation .
 The Chiefs came out strongly for uniform legislation authorizing law enforcement officers to carry firearms in states other than those where they are employed . Officers should be able to carry guns in states where they're employed only on official duty .
 The Chiefs will ask the International Association of Chiefs of Police to prepare a uniform code . The code will be presented to the law enforcement association in each state of the United States for adoption .
 Present laws of the individual states permit law officers to carry firearms within their borders to protect themselves and their communities against law violators . Present laws allow law officers in the U.S. to carry guns in their communities .
 They do not however provide uniform authority to empower such officers to carry firearms between states .
 The Police Chiefs feel strongly that the absence of such authority seriously challenges the safety, legal position and lawful responsibility of such officers . Police Chiefs say absence of authority is a serious risk to the safety of officers .
 Chiefs want uniformity in compensation for players and coaches . More uniformity of compensation is another matter over which the Chiefs are concerned .
 They feel that such a lack of uniformity handicaps the recruiting of competent personnel for law enforcement work . They feel such a problem is recruiting competent personnel . They say the uniformity of law enforcement is a problem .
 Police service is becoming much more complicated, less strong arm man-handling and more science . The Chief believe that their Association should set as its goal minimum compensation for police chiefs of $7,500 and $5,500 for patrolmen . Police service requires young, energetic and competent
 Chiefs consider reasonable amounts reasonable in view of existing conditions . Chiefs consider it reasonable to pay for existing conditions such as medical conditions .
 The Chiefs went on record’ as whole heartedly endorsing the objectives of the Jimmy Fund, and to further its support appointed a committee of one member from each state in the Association to coordinate its activities and efforts .
 This compilation was made with the cooperation of the Women’s Archives of Radcliffe College . This compilation includes photographs of the women's archives at Radcliffe .
 Larson was born in Isle of Wight, Virginia . She was the daughter of Rev. Rev. and Mrs. Mrs. Larson .
 Larson served on the Medford School Committee, studied law, and was admitted to the Massachusetts Bar in 1946 and the Bar of the United States Supreme Court in 1960 . Larson served as a Medford school committee member .
 As an active Republican, she served nearly twenty years on the Republican City Committee of Medford . She now is a member of the Winchester Republican Town Committee .
 She was recently appointed to the Legislative Committee of the Massachusetts Association of Women Lawyers .
 She is on the executive board of the Massachusetts Association of Trial Lawyers and is co-chairman of their Public Relations Committee . She is also co-chairs of the Middlesex County Bar Association and is Executive Secretary of their grievance committee .
 Gloria Maifeld will continue as the j director of this choir and the choir | “mothers” will again lie Mrs. Gloria . Mrs. Maifell will continue to direct the choir .
 The choir is made up of boys and j girls from the fourth through the j ninth grades . It is limited to about fifty members .
 To make a better schedule for rehearsals some minor adjustments have been made in the church schedule and order of Morning Worship . The church has also made minor adjustments in the order of morning worship .
 Church Services will start at 10:45 o’clock and a youth sermon will he included in the service . Youth I sermon will also be part of the service.
 They will hold rehearsal during the hour following and will be ready to go home when their parents come out of the church service . The children will go home after the service .
 This week’s picture is of the former home of the late Thomas Hutchinson on Hutchinson Road, just olf Ridge Street . Remember When series continues this week on Remember When .
 This old house was not the original Hutchinson mansion which stood adjacent to it . The Hutchinson mansion was not. the original . Hutchinson mansion . It was located in Hutchinson, Arkansas .
 Remains of the cellar and granite work of the older structure were visible for many years . There was at one time a family burying ground on the property . The property was once a burying ground .
 In Colonial days the old Hutchinson house witnessed much entertaining with British officers coming from Boston to attend parties there .
 The Star knows little of the history of either house and would he glad if any of our readers can fill us in on details .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist will observe the fortieth anniversary of the Laying of the Cornerstone of the present church edifice this Sunday . Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist Church is located in Crawford Township .
 The cornerstone was laid on October 7, 1923 during the pastorate of the Rev. The Rev. Rev. William Johnson was the pastor of the church .
 Alliston B Gifford, with Bishop Edwin Holt Hughes preaching the sermon . Bishop Edwin Hughes was also present at the service .
 At the Morning Worship Service this Sunday at 10:45, the pastor, the Rev. The Rev. Rev. David Johnson will lead the worship service at 10-45 .
 The Senior High Methodist Youth Fellowship will leave the church at 1:30m. to attend the I Lynn District Fall Rally at the j Old South Methodist Church in | Reading . The Youth Fellowship is going to attend a Fall Rally in I Lynn district .
 Student notebooks, paper and dividers are available at the Star office, 3 Church Street, New York .
 Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf Legal Holidays Named Police Chief Joseph J Derro .
 All shops, workshops, stores, warehouses, places where persons do any kind of business or work must be closed on the above dates . January 1 May 30th July 4th Labor Day Oct. 11 Thanksgiving Christmas .
 The provisions relating to the observance of such a holiday shall apply to the following day . When any of the legal holidays fall on Sunday the provisions relating . to the . observance, such a Sunday, shall apply . The following day will be the same day .
 Public offices must be closed but places of business may he open for business on those days . Places of business must also be closed for those days, not public offices .
 Winchester $27,900 -- cry pretty seven-yeur-old Cape Cod House in best location . Cape Cod house in best . location .
 Nice, sunny kitchen, downstairs lavatory, downstairs bedroom, screened porch . Nicely sunny kitchen . downstairs bathroom . downstairs bedroom. downstairs bedroom .
 Two twin-sized bedrooms up, with tiled beds, loads of closets and room for unother bedroom.-foot paneled play room .
 Wedgewood Apartments in Winchester Center are tin* newly completed . All-electric, simplified, luxurious, all-electric living .
 Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area . Each apartment is located in one of the world's most luxurious homes .
 Make an appointment today to see these apartments about which the whole town is talking . The apartments will be available for sale at the end of October .
 Oct.5-tf Paragon Candles, an unusual assortment of 6in.6in. twists in attrac tive colors . Also color-flow Fiesta candles that change color as they burn .
 This harmonious dwelling has on first level, ample guest closets, lavatory, laundry, storage area, stairway that leads down to panelled fireplaced family room .
 Hall leads to second level with huge living room, family dining room, modern kitchen and porch . Modern convenient kitchen and modern convenient kitchen .
 The third level has three large chambers with double closets and two full buths . The third floor of the house is located in the basement of the building .
 Nearly new home has 1 V6 baths, oversized master chamber, garage and landscaped lot . $20,500 on quiet street in the West Side section of town .
 Executive living is the theme of this oversized ranch home with two-car garage in the finest residential area of town . Three-bedroom, three-bedroom home is located in the best residential area in town .
 Large living room, pine-panelled den with large screened and flagstone porch . Flagstone porch, pine panelled den and large screened porch .
 Spacious dining room, lavatory and completely modern kitchen . Modern kitchen with dishwasher and disposal . Luxury dining room .
 Third floor offers excellent storage or could be converted into one or two additional bedrooms . Third floor is also great storage or can be converted .
 Two new homes in excellent locations in West Chester, Pennsylvania . Realtor Kathryn P Sullivan, Kathryn P Davis, Barbara DeCamp, Jean Gibb and Horace Ford are selling .
 Three chambers, 2*4 ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage . Two-car garage .
 Four chambers, two full and two half ceramic-tile baths, den, den and 26-foot puneled family room with fireplace .
 Large ’61 kitchen with double-oven stove, dishwasher, and all other electrical equipment . Large ‘61 kitchen . Double-oven oven and dishwasher also included .
 Remodelled six-room Colonial in convenient central location . Six-room home in convenient location in central Pennsylvania .
 Three bedrooms, 1 \4 ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining room, good living room with fireplace . One of the most beautiful homes in the world .
 Call exclusive brokers for appointment to see this modestly priced home . The modestly-priced home is on the market for $1.5 million .
 Unusual value in almost new* eight-room brickfront Colonial Ranch . Eight-room Colonial Ranch is located in Pennsylvania .
 Attractive fireplaced living room, family dining room, large all-electric built-in kitchen, tiled hath, three twin bedrooms on one level .
 Lower level offers fireplaced family room, bedroom, bathroom, lavatory, and garage . Lower level has fireplaces, bedrooms, bathrooms, and garages .
 $19,900 — Four rooms and bath on first floor . Exclusive Brokers BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 Thompson Street .
 Large contemporary ranch on a heavily wooded and private lot . Large contemporary contemporary ranch .
 Four bedrooms, two baths, two-car garage, and large fireplaced kitchen . Two car garage, large fireplaces, large kitchen, and two-bedroom home .
 Cathedral ceiling contemporary with many bright and appealing features of decor especially suited to blend with modern furniture . Cathedral ceiling ceiling contemporary . Cathedral .
 A Co-operative Bank makes it pleasant and safe for you to save regularly . The Co-op Bank is a bank where you can save regularly and save regularly.
 Open your regular Savings Account here today . Add to it regularly ...it mounts up fast . Add your regular savings account regularly .
 Newsy Paragraphs Processing by Kodak at the Winchester Camera Shop . Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street .
 Half Size Foundation with easy zipper front closing by LaResista or an all elastic with side zipper by Smoothie . Half Size foundation with easy front closing is available on sale for $99 .
 Carl Newman of 8 Fen wick Road put in two busy, but happy weeks caring for his granddaughter, Judith Bertha, for two weeks . The baby’s parents enjoyed a vacation at Rockport, Rockport .
 Dorothy Ellis, serving Winchester with Curtains, Draperies, Window Shades, Fixtures and Venetian Blinds, 52 Wyman Street, West Medford .
 Pavement Sealer in 5 gal. cans, various sizes and colors, to give your driveway a new life .
 Two Winchester students have begun classes at Emerson College in Boston . Winchester students will study at the college .
 Dr. Gerald B Tall man and their daughter Lucy will arrive home tomorrow from Tanganyika . Dr. B Tall and Lucy will be together for the next few days in Africa . Gerald and Lucy are in the middle of a three-month trip .
 Tallman has been conducting an industrial survey for the Arthur D Little Co. in Cambridge . Tallman was conducting the industrial survey in Cambridge, England .
 Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000. A Waltz Evening host and hostess will welcome you to the King Arthur table at the Camelot Ball, October 13 .
 Winchester Kiwanis Club offers the use of these items to Winchester residents . Winchester residents can use the items to help with their daily errony .
 John M Geoghegan of 14 Hemingway Street completed recruit training on September 16 at the Naval Training Center at Great Lakes, Illinois . John M
 The end of nine weeks of hoot camp were marked by military ceremonies, including a full dress parade . It was the first time the U.S. troops had been in camp for nine weeks .
 Eva G Twombly of Lawson Road is among those who will receive certificate awards for services rendered in behalf of the disabled veterans at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Bedford . Eva G. Twombley is one of those who received certificate awards .
 The awards will be presented in the Hospital Theatre on Wednesday, Oct 11, at 7:45m. The ceremony will be held at 7.45m .
 The Pauline Gordon Taffeta Bra Slip is a must under the brilliant new fall look of knitted dresses .
 Robert E McCaffery of 14 George Road, began classes at Simmons College on Monday, September 25 . Robert E. McCaffrey of 14 . George Road began classes on September 25, 2014 .
 A Stoneham youth appeared in Woburn Court on Wednesday morning and was fined $20 for trespassing in the Fells area .
 Winchester Police apprehended a party of five . (two boys and three girls) who were apprehended by Winchester Police for drinking and trespassing . The youth was in I party of . five., (2 boys and 3 girls), (two girls and three boys) Winchester Police were apprehended for drinking
 In leaving the wooded area their car hit a tree, injuring some of the youths and necessitating their treatment at the Winchester Hospital . The youths were injured in the incident .
 Another Stoneham youth was scheduled to appear in court also but did not do so . He was arrested in connection with the incident in Stoneham .
 A Main Street man was taken off a bus near Winchester Center Sunday evening at 6:30 when he became profane and abusive while under the influence of alcohol . The man became abusive and profane during the incident .
 Officer Nurnberger took the man off the bus when the driver refused to proceed with the man any further . The man was taken into custody by the officer when he was stopped by the driver .
 Daniel Friel named as Public Relations District Manager for the northern area of Greater Boston . Parkview Taxi PA 9-0666: Friel Named To New Post by Edison Boston Edison Company .
 He will represent the electric utility in East Boston Chelsea, Somerville and Woburn . He'll represent the utility in the towns of Arlington, Bedford, Burlington, Carlisle and Carlisle .
 He joined Boston Edison in 1936 as a clerk in the Transmission and Distribution Department at the Woburn Service Center . He joined the company in 1936 .
 He served as Lineman, Trouble Despatcher and an Overhead Supervisor at Walpole, Hyde Park and Woburn . Subsequently he served the Company as . Lineman . He served . as Linemen, . trouble Despatchers and Overhead supervisors .
 Mr Friel is currently serving as Chairman of the Woburn Boy Scout Committee . He is a member of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Wobburn Kiwanis Club .
 David M Stowe, Boston, will speak at the 9:15 and 11:00 services Sunday morning at the First Congregational Church .
 The Massachusetts Mothers of Twins Association Inc., Founding Chapter, held its second executive board meeting of this year, on Oc tober 2 .
 Members are either mothers or grandmothers of twins . Regular monthly meetings are held on the last Monday of each month at the Robbins Library Arlington .
 Stowe and his wife, Virginia Ware Stowe, were serving in North China under the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Mis sions in late 1948 when the Com munists seized power in that region .
 The Stowes refused to leave, insisting that this was an opportunity to demonstrate their Christian faith . Though they had two young children, they refused to let them leave .
 They stuck to their posts until the summer of 1950 when a serious health problem and the outbreak of the Korean War made it imperative that they return to this country . The Korean War ended in 1950 .
 While in China the Stowes did evangelistic and student work in Tientsin counseling and training Chinese students and pastors for intelligent and courageous leadership .
 Stowe has served as secretary of the Commission on Theology of Mission of the World t’ounil of Churches and the International Missionary Council . Stowe is a member of the Council on Missionary Missions .
 The 25 member international commission is composed of leading theologians >f many Protestant and Orthodox denominations . The commission is made up of 25 members of the world's most prominent theologians .
 Before going to China he served for two years as associate minister of the First Congregational Church of Berkeley .
 Autobridge lets yoil play bridge any time by yourelf and have -world champions as irtners . Autobridge is a game that lets you play bridge at any time and have world champions as champions .
 Winchester Star is the official aluminum duplicate bridge boards and the udvanced course in contract bridge . See this fascinating game at the Winchester Star, also the official duplicate bridge board .
 The LWV of Winchester will hold its first General Meeting October 1 1 at the home of Mrs. Mrs. V. Winchester . The Winchester LWV will meet at Mrs. Winchester's home .
 Relations with Latin America, following brief speeches by two South American students, follows brief speeches from two students .
 Jaime Urrutia of Columbia, South America, has been studying in the U.S. for about 6 years .
 Mr Urrutia’s father is the former Ambassador from Colombia to the United Nations . Arturo DeMelo is from Rio de Janiero, Brazil, and has been in the United States for 4 years .
 He is a junior at Harvard and studied here during his last 2 years of secondary school . He is also a junior .
 Both Urrutia and DeMelo have returned freluently to their native countries during the past several years .
 The speakers will outline the major problems of their own country stressing the unofficial point of view . Within the general framework of United States Relations with Latin America’s relations with Latin .
 Each is well-informal about his own nation, and is n a unique position to analyze the U.S. relationship with the man on the Latin American street .
 It should be a refreshing approach to a serious and increasingly pressng problem, it should be refreshing approach .
 Ellis Green, Finance Chairman, will give a program report of the LWV’s current finance drive . Ellis Green will also give a report on the current financial drive for the organization .
 This meeting has been arranged by the Foreign Affairs Committee . This meeting is an informal and stimulating introduction to United States Latin American elutions .
 Any non-member who is interested in attending the General Meeting, or in becoming a member of the League should contact Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The League will hold a General Meeting at the end of September .
 The Women’s Auxiliary of the Middlesex East Medical Society opened the new season with a very pleasant meeting September 28 at the Country Club in Winchester .
 Professor John Lerch was introduced by the President of Mrs Henry Magno . Professor Lerch introduced by Mrs Magno at the end of the meeting .
 Professor Lerch is the professor of Radio and Television at Boston Uni versity . He presented a fascinating and, at times, amusing tape recording of excerpts from radio programs starting as far as 1925 .
 At any rate, the sampling he did present was enough to make all of us wish there were more to hear . At any . rate, it was enough for us to wish for more .
 This “nostalgic excursion into the past” included such sounds as a pianist of the early ‘20’s playing a very tinny “3 o'clock in the Morning”, the C-liquot Club Orchestra, Dr
 Mr Lerch feels that radio suffered a decline after the war, hut that the quality of programs is now improving with the advent of stereophonic sound . Lerch says that radio suffers a decline .
 Many people Agreed with his statement that radio offered the listener the opportunity to use his imagination while television lacks that necessary ingredient . Many people agreed with him that television lacks the necessary ingredient of imagination .
 The November meeting of the Auxiliary will be at Hadley Hall, Winchester, on the 16th. November meeting will be held at the Church of the Epiphany in Winchester .
 Mr Milton Babcock will talk about antiques . It is hoped that women will bring articles to be looked at and Appraised .
 Guests are most welcome at this meeting, so please keep the date in mind so there will be a large number present .
 New Scout Executive Mr Frederick Smith, Scout exej outivo, Minuteman Council, Boy Scouts of America, announced at October 5. Mr Smith is Scout ex-Scout ex-Ex-Scouts ex-executive of the Minutemen Council .
 Wclloslry Club in Hndley Hull, pointment of Anthony N Toto as j Church of the Epiphany . Second in soric* of the council executive board the ap ^ t • -<-• M .nin. ,,, , . , .
 Scout executive sorvin K ; t 0 m lf ,,,r M A * w,u <i,,nn nt Stoneham, Burlington, Winchester October ft. CnfTof* nt 9:4ft district Scout executive Sorvin K; t 0
 Coiicvc Club Art Group will meet in the Rich Room of the Public Library, promptly nt 10:1ftm.
 October IT and 14 Friday nnd SaturI <l«y, Waltz Evening, Town Hall, 9:00 a.m. Town Hall will be held at Town Hall in New York .
 Bay State Historical League Fall Meeting at State House, guest, of Commonwealth of Massachusetts . Massachusetts. Massachusetts .
 October 24, Friends of Winchester Hospital, Volunteer Training Program for ALL HOSPITAL VOLUNTEERS. 8 p.m. at Wyman School. Winchester Hospital . Winchester Hospital is hosting a volunteer training program for all hospital volunteers .
 Mr Toto succeeds Henri Erkelons, recently recalled to active duty with the Army . TOTO succeeds Mr Erkelon .
 Mr Toto served as district executive for Malden and Melrose for four years .
 Mr Toto also serves as camp director at Parker Mt. in addition to his duties as district executive .
 Scout Reservation, one of the Minuteman Council Camps, is a member of the council advancement committee . The camp is located in one of Minutemen Councils, and as advisor to council advancement .
 Mr Toto is field executive of the Quannapowitt Council . He taught in Chelsea school system prior to entering the professional service of the Boy Scouts .
 Executive Toto served scouting in a volunteer capacity as scoutmaster, explorer advisor and a member of the district committee . In such capacities earned the Scouter’s Key for service .
 Mr Toto is currently active in the Knights of Columbus, Holy Name Society and the Young Men’s Christian Associations of Chelsea .
 Charles G Phippen of Marlborough, Connecticut, are the parents of a fourth child, third daughter, Cheryl Ann . Cheryl Ann was born October 1st at the Hartford Hospital .
 Rachel A Morse of this town is the great-grandmother . i i i Mr and Mrs. Morse are married and have been married for more than 30 years . Rachel Morse is the daughter of Rachel Morse, who is also a great grandmother .
 Arthur A Fowle , a sixth child, third daughter, Lucy Munn Fowled, September 25th in Waltham . Arthur A . Fowles was born in September .
 Hair Styles for fall will be lose at the nape and ears — full at the crown — very lacy .
 C WAFFLE CREAMS each 69c each 59c P k g29c 2-lb. pkg. pg. C WFFLE EACHACHACHES each 69C each . Ribamli Chops 10, 11, and 11 89c lb. p
 “Tessie the living symbol of this year’s Greater Boston United Fund campaign, will be these three attractive young ladies, left to right . The three young ladies will be part of the campaign .
 Miss Lillian Zirakian of Winchester, Miss Helaine Jones of Beacon Hill and Miss Anne Mckinney of Back Bay . Miss Lillian Zerakian, Miss Helen Jones, Miss Anne . Mckinsney of Winchester . Miss Zirkian,
 A lovely lady from Boston's past named “Tessie” is being introduced this fall as the living symbol of the Greater Boston United Fund “People Helping People"" campaign .
 Her initial appearance this fall was at Fenway Park Tuesday (September 26) before the Red Sox game with the Chicago White Sox . Her first public appearance was in Boston on September 26, 2013 .
 i|ualily Footwear for men, women and children sin«e lOGO Coward Shoe I Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m. Tessie was introduced to the crowd .
 Tessie will make appearances at all United Fund functions and will represent the Fund at public events throughout the campaign . Tessie is a member of the United Fund and will appear at all public events .
 On November 3 she will visit each of the 49 cities and towns in the Greater Boston area participating in the campaign . She will help kick off the Fund’s residential and small business campaign .
 Miss Helaine Jones of Beacon Hill, Miss Lillian Zirakian of Winchester and Miss Anne McKinney of Back Bay were selected to portray Tessie .
 30-60-90-day budget plan: Pay nothing down, then 1/3 each month for three months . We bill you at the end of the month. We pay nothing down .
 Mt. Mt. Weil's, Hoys' and Laities' Shop Mt. W.W. Wils', Hoy's, and Loys' shops will be on sale at the end of the year .
 That year the Red Sox met the Pittsburg Pirates in the first World Series . The Red Sox and the Pirates met in the World Series at the beginning of the season .
 A group of the Red Sox most loyal fans followed the team to Pittsburgh to cheer them on . The Royal Rooters are known as the 'Royal Rooters' The group of fans are known for their support .
 That year the Royal Rooters were in the habit of marching to the ball park in a body singing “Tessie” and led by the mayor, John F “Honey Fitz” Fitzgerald .
 The 1914 season brought the Boston Braves a pennant and a four-game triumph over the Philadelphia Athletics . Boston won the 1914 season by four games over the Athletics .
 Bostonians too young to remember the original Tessie and the spirit she engendered will see her in person at many public functions and rallies . The song will be revived over all local radio stations .
 I was chosen ‘Child of the Mopth’ in the August contest among children photographed by Pinocchio Studios in Quincy, Quincy, .
 "My parents will receive a large heavy -oil portrait of me as a prize, but really, just between us," she said . Her parents will also receive a portrait of her as a gift .
 The Bay State chief executive was one of ten new directors electd to the corporation . The corporation was established in 1956 under a special charter from Massachusetts legislature to make unsecured personal loans .
 October 5, 1961 omen Bowling ’s S 0. 0. omen . Bowling ‘s 0.0.’s omen.
 F Home on Leave Town League Bowling Fragile Completes Basie . Third week of scheduled bowling completed in full swing .
 The Diamond* are in second place winning by pinfall . The j Emeralds and Garnets are tied j with the Diamonds with a close score of 8 wins and 4 losses . The Diamonds and the Emeralds are in a close second place .
 Our million dollar friends from the Diamond team came sporting | their tV4 carat mascots . The Diamond team is sporting a $1 million worth of tat-carat mascot .
 Maybe they though that by blinding opponents they would scon* four easy points . Maybe they thought they would get easy points. Maybe they did that .
 Emily Buzzotta bowled a string total of 103 . Buzzotta won last season of the high single trophy . She bowled 103 .
 Ginger’s fourth year of bowling and her second year as chairlady . Ginger is known to the league this is her fourth year and second year of chairing .
 Eleanor Russo is an excellent bowler and shared the honor of being on the top winning team last season . She was on the winning team for the first time in her career .
 Just last week, Eleanor got four spares in a row, which even had the opposing team cheering for her .
 Rose Fiore, a veteran bowler of four years, maintains a good average . Fiore is the ex-venerable of the Lodge, and a veteran bowling bowler .
 Sue has a distinctive style of her own by ever so gently placing the ball on the alley with amazing results . Sue has her own unique style of placing the balls on an alley .
 Jeanne Di Donato has a lovely style of howling with good re suits . She has a great sense of humour and style .
 John M Geoghegan of 14 Hemingway Street is home on two-weeks leave en route to the Fleet Sonar School, Key West, Fla., after completing nine weeks recruit training at the Naval Training Center .
 The young bluejacket enlisted at the local Navy recruiting station, City Hall, Medford, under the guaranteed electronic schooling program . The Navy enlisted under the guarantee of electronic schooling .
 6f Hv of the bowlers have an average over 90 . 6 f Hv bowlers also have a 90 Hv average of over 90.
 Winchester Wee Sachems opened the 1961 season at Needham on Sunday, September 24, at 2:00m. Winchester will play Needham in the first match of the season . Needham are the only club to open the season at the same time .
 October 8 — Dedham at Winchesch ester October 15 — Winchester at Wellesley October 15 - Winchester at . Wellesley at Hull . Winchester at Hull at Hull October 22 — Winchester .
 Coaches Don MacElwee, Bill Sipp, and Ed Gravalese are working hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needhum . The team will be in action at Woburn at the end of November 5 .
 With the return of a dozen veterans from last year’s team, Don expects to field one of the best teams in the league . Don expects a strong start to the season with a strong season .
 Springfield College, Springfield, for the student who likes all his . She is a graduate of Winchester notes in one neat volume . A real economy item j Springfield .
 On Montvale Avenue in Woburn the bus broke down stranding the boys for half an hour . The boys were left stranded for around an hour after the break .
 Approximately 50 runners started the race with the Salem men surging out front . Salem men surged out in front of 50 runners .
 Reardon of Salem was chased across the line by team mates Murphy and Ribicki . Winchester’s co-captain Jack Scherban tried unsuccessfully to break up this trio .
 Scherban, Johnson, Anderson and Bird of Winchester placed 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th respectively . Bird, Johnson and Anderson of Winchester, were also in Winchester .
 He was followed by Guiliani, Thoms, and Hills, whose places were enough for him to win . Hills was the only person to reach the top three places .
 Kellev McClay Tofuri Russo Kimball Anderson Wilson Griswold Cassidy B Nash 109 . Kimball was awarded 109th place on the field .
 Winchester High School’s football team, smarting from its defeat at the hands of Stoneham last week, will try Saturday to take it out on Cambridge Latin in a nonleague game at Russell Field in Cambridge, starting at 1:30. Winchester High school’ll try
 Cambridge Latin has yet to win a game, having beaten by Maynard and Methuen . Cambridge Latin is yet to play a game in a row .
 The Cantabs are reputed to be better than last year, but even after their poor showing at Stoneham, the Sachems will be favored . The Cantabes will be hoping to bounce back from a poor showing last year .
 Winchester came out of the Stoneham game in good shape and the first stringers should be ready for action Saturday . Winchester will be looking to win their first game of the season at home .
 Coach Knowlton will probably use many second stringers to get an idea of how they perform under fire . Coach Knowllton will likely use many of them to get a look at how they will respond under fire in the game .
 T.V. football team did better against Stoneham than its big varsity brothers . Stoneham wins 16-6 at home, beating T.C. 16-5 .
 Bill Branley set up Winchester’s first score with a 53 yard run to set up the Stoneham two . Stoneham scored a touchdown in the first half .
 Winchester drove 70 yards in the third quarter for their second score . Erskine went over from four yards out for Winchester . Winchester scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Serving went on from 6:00-9:00 p.m. and was followed by music and dancing until midnight .
 The evening was a most successful one with all in attendance enjoying the meal and entertainment afterward . All in attendance enjoyed the meal, entertainment and meal .
 O.I. is a “Stag” Columbus Day Banquet being held by the Mens’ Lodge for members of the Lodge only . Members of the Mens' Lodge only attend the banquet .
 The banquet is set for Wednesday, October 11 at 7:00 p.m. at the Club Hall on Swanton Street . The banquet will be held at the club hall on October 11 .
 Richie Penta, Bill Fiore, Carl Bertolucci, Joe Paeonessa, Pat Bruno, Boss Dattilo, Nick Ronzio and Randy Kazazian are among the stars .
 Members urged to contact these men for tickets as soon as possible . Members are urged to get tickets for the event .
 A strong contingent of members of the Ladies’ and Men’s Lodges has arranged to attend the Columbus Day Dinner to be held by Mass. Mass. Lodges .
 Grand Lodge, Order Sons of Italy, held Thursday evening, October 12 at the Hotel Bradford in Boston, Boston .
 Winchester Lodges extend congratulations to Governor John Volpe . Governor John A Volpe has been Governor of Winchester since 1973 . Governor Volpe was elected to office in 2010 . Winchester lodges express their pride in his accomplishments .
 Upon completion of special technical training at an Air Force technical training center, airmen are assigned to operational units of the USAF Aerospace Force .
 When started the program will be held every Tuesday night at the “Y’’ during the school year rom 8 to 10m. A.m. is held at the "Y"’s .
 These classes will be organized | for ‘high schoolers,” clubs and or1 ganizations on an amateur level, not just for the heroes and stars of high school athletic groups . These classes are organized for high schoolers and clubs .
 Others willing to learn, as well as the more experienced boys, will be given a chance to take part in the program . In other words, ‘duffers’ will be able to learn .
 Winchester girls registered as freshmen at Mount Ida Junior College in Newton . Miss Ellen DeVries is daughter of Mr and Mrs. DeVries . Miss DeVries, daughter of the late Dean DeVries and Mr DeVries of Winchester, is a member of the Winchester family .
 Miss Deborah Wadsworth, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Leo A Donovan of 12 Dartmouth Street, is named Miss Wadsworth . Miss Deborah Donovan is the daughter of Leo Donovan and Miss Donna A Donovan . Miss Donovan is a former member of the Donovan family .
 Winchester Cross Country Team traveled to Reading Friday, to what they hoped would he a victory . Miss Deborah Donovan, also of 12 Dartmouth Street, has begun her senior year at Mount Ida . Miss Donovan is also a senior at Mount Ia .
 W inchester had thoroughly trained for this race by intensive road work on South Border Road . Winchester had trained extensively by road work in the past .
 Reading has a longer course than most other schools and it is run completely on tarred roads . Reading is run entirely on the tarred roadways . It is run by the school in Reading, Essex, rather than any other school .
 The locals took charge of the race with Scherban, Anderson, and Bird taking over the leading positions . Scherban and Anderson took over the lead in the first stage .
 Winchester move three more runners, Johnson, Dee, and Gallagher, into the top six places . By the half-way mark the outcome of the race had already been decided with Winchester moving three more runner-up places . Winchester move into sixth place in the race .
 Jack Scherban ran his best race of the season and compiled one of the fastest times in recent years for the Reading course . Scherban covered the distance in 13m, 33s.
 He was followed closely by Frank Johnson who also ran an excellent race . Frank Johnson also ran a superbly well into the final stages .
 Winchester also placed Dean Anderson, Steve Dee, Dave Bird, and Phil Gallagher to insure the win . Dean Anderson and Steve Dee were also placed in the top five .
 Neil ' Loam the Piay W;iy “Flash newcomer to cross | Card*” is now on sale at the Winchester Star . Neil 'Loam’s ‘Flash newcomer’ to cross is on sale now . Neil ‘Loam the .
 Kirkpatrick, a country, running an excellent race was first home, closely followed by Gerry Hills, an up and coming so phomore . Gerry Hills was the runner-up .
 DARR0, our voice teacher, announces openings days or evenings for all those interested in VOICE instruction . Voice teacher: "Darr0" is a voice teacher who teaches voice instruction .
 STEVE TABB PIANO and ORGAN INSTRUCTOR “FULL ORGAN and CHORD ORGAN Instruction Now Available “Lessons given at home for these instruments only” Complete RENTAL and SALES on All Instruments Phone WE 3-0094
 Susan Bryant and Laurel Ingraham will tell of their experiences abroad this summer . Two members of the group will tell how they spent the summer abroad .
 The troop holds regular meetings Tuesday night between 6:45 and 8:45 at the Parkhurst School .
 All boys, 11 years of age or over in the Parkhurst and Vinson-Owen School areas are cordially invited to attend .
 Troop 524 is the oldest troop in Pennsylvania . Troops are looking for adults interested in scouting and wanting to help in the program . Any adults who are interested in Scouting are urged to contact them .
 PUNT, PASS & KICK Contest sponsored by Ford Dealers in cooperation with the National Football League . You don't have to buy a thing to enter ... or to compete in the contest .
 You must be accompanied by your father, mother or legal guardian in order to register . But remember, you must be with your parents, mother and legal guardian .
 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. PArkview 9-1448 or Winchmore Sport Shop 43 Church St., Winchester, Massachusetts .
 There will be no howling next Thursday bccaui se it falls on the holiday . Vespucci, R Rotondi, Murphy holidav, Murphy, Murphy will not be howling .
 In second place is California, whose members are F DiMambro, J Faietta, F Dattilo, M Buzzotta, A Amico, R Fiore and R GiacaIqne . California, in second place, is California .
 Bowling for Notre Dame are S Bellino, A Bavuso, E Amico, D Mistretta, R Fiore, J Dattilo and T Saraco . Bowling for the Notre Dame is S Bellini, A . Bavusi, A. Bavusio
 Harvard takes on I2th-place Army this week . Second-place California vs. fourth-place Yale, third-place Notre Dame vs. sixth-place Maryland . Harvard vs. Army is Harvard's first game this week.
 Pucky Perritano has returned from the armed services . St. Mary's expects to climb, now that Pucky has returned to the team .
 Randy Kazazian lowered that this year, and now Pat Bruno has the dubious distinction of holding honors in that department with a 30 . Bruno bowled in his first string last week, which he bowled last week .
 Nick Molea did not bowl because of the death of his mother . Georgetown dropped four points to Yale in a loss .
 All the members of the league express sincere sympathy to Nick and his family . All of the players express their sincere sympathy for Nick .
 Stoneham High finally heat Winchester at football last Saturday afternoon.-8, at Recreation Park in Stoneham, outclassing the hapless Sachems before a big crowd of slightly delirious Stoneham rooters .
 Stoneham High students celebrated their school's first birthday on Saturday . They were dancing in the Stoneham streets and at one point there was a traffic jam .
 Cars of gleeful Stoneham students invaded Winchester after the game with horns blaring . Stoneham won the game 2-1 at the Stoneham School of Technology .
 Douglas Griesemer is a June, 1961 graduate of Winchester High School . He is a graduate of Antioch College . He was born in Winchester, Massachusetts .
 Miss Griesemer was a National Honor Society member in Winchester . She served on the school newspaper staff and 'on the school radio' She was also a member of the National Honor society .
 Winchester's Mike Bellino broke into the elear deep in his own territory late in the game . Bellino and unidentified Stoneham met head-on in the first half of the match . Winchester won the game 2-1 at St. Patrick's Hall of Fame .
 Their crash was jarring and tile Stoneham hoy was slow to get to his feet after it . The crash was the first of their kind in the world .
 My motto for the fund drive this year will lie ‘People Helping Koeh’ o rumors circulated by ing (dot ha II sel ‘By encmie Tin is that you have increasingly cynical comments on the crazy world we live in’ “My motto
 A warm sunny week end in the seventies this week turned off for another wqek thoughts of winter cold and the end of the sailing sea son .
 Every skipper will agree that this time of year is a sailor’s par adise . This time of the year is the perfect time for a sailor to sail .
 Win Chester Boat Club's Indian summer with its stiff steady breezes and lovely weather will come to an abrupt end . It’s too bad it couldn’t last longer, but soon Indian summer is over .
 Juniors this week end as ap proximately 60 young people en joyed the annual dinner-dance .
 Parents provided delicious homemade salads and desserts in one of the most enjoyable buffets of the year . The “Fabulites’” a band strictly composed of Juniors topped off a per feet evening .
 The Snipe that was raffled off at our club and won by Robert Gabine of Winchester, was sailed by the United States Team and took 2nd place . The United States team took second place .
 The winning boat of the World Championships which was sailed by the Brazilian team, was bought by Air Force Col. Col. Eduardo dos Santos . The Brazilian Air Force bought the winning boat .
 Stationery imprinted with the Winchester Sachem in red . Dick Preston for the high schooler, faculty or student, stationery .
 MaryVWoburn Pop Warner League football game at Woburn Stadium last Sunday . Mary Mary Mary played for Mary in a Pop Warner Football League game . MaryMary Mary played in the game .
 Winchester Philosophy Club will meet at Winchester University on Sunday afternoon . Discussion will be at the first fall meeting of the club's Philosophy Club .
 The club was organized last Febuary by Lisa Bieberman, a student at Radcliffe College . The club is an independent, nonpartisan forum for philosophical discussion .
 WHS students and their friends are welcome to meet at WHS games . Meetings are held throughout the academic year .
 Offensively Gentile ran for three long gainers in the losing cause . Dalton, Grant and Gannon were the defensive standouts for St. St. Louis .
 The Boston Wheaton College Club has completed plans for a dancing party to be held Saturday veiling, Oct.. at the Massachuqua . Lawrence Longworth, a junior from Winchester, is a candidate for setts Institute of Technology's 1961 varsity soccer squad .
 John D West, Jr. of High year, opened the 1961 season, is one of the patronnesses | against Hartwick on September 30 . Clarkson, Cornell, and Cortcommence land. land .
 Pupils from upper elementary and junior high grades met at the high school to march to the playground be hind the Colors and color-guards the Stoneham High band, major ettes and cheerleaders . Before the game mem bers of high school student bo dy with many other pupils
 Marchers were still pouring down the short street leading to the field . Front ranks were scrambling for the few seats left in the packed stands . Marchers still pouring into the stadium .
 A group of Stoneham enthus iasts hung Winchester’s Mike Bel lino in effigy at one of the goal posts . Some one had the good sense to get the figure down well before game time . The dummy they actual ly suspended from the cross bar wore Lennie
 Stone ham has trotted onto the field for the game, running between lines of majorettes in real big league style .
 Win Chester rooters beat Stoneham 1-0 in the first half of the match . Stoneham's win over Win Chester was the first of the season for the local outfit .
 The Light Blue and White was hungry for victory hit hard, blocked and tackled effectively and fought like wildcats for every inch .
 Halfbacks Mike Niazzo and Rick Tasker drove hard all afternoon, gaining plenty of yardage after being hit by Win Chester defenders . Win Chester won their first game of the season at Win Chester .
 Stoneham line continually got the jump on the bigger Win Chester linemen, opening holes through which their backs drove for consistent gains . Stoneham offensive linemen got the start on Win Chester offensive linemen .
 The Light Blue stayed strictly on the ground and completely outplayed the Sa cherns after the first few minutes of play . The Sa herns had the best start to the game .
 Second string quarterback Rod Blethen came on the field in the first quarter after an injury to the regular signal caller Jim Hureau . The real Stone ham hero was second-string quarterback Rod Rlethen .
 Blethen did a great job of running the team, handing off smoothly and deceptively and occasionally contributing good gainers on keeper plays .
 Two of the fifteen yarders prevented one Winchester touchdown and called back another . Two of those stops prevented a Winchester touchdown, one called back by Winchester . The Winchester defense intercepted one of the shots .
 Despite the shellacking Stoneham handed the Sachems as things turned out, the game might well have been quite different if these touchdowns were scored .
 The Sachems made seven first downs and were held to 90 yards on the ground by Stoneham . Stoneham was held to nine first downs by the defending Stoneham defense . The defense made it tough for the Sachem defense .
 They tried 12 passes, completing five for 64 yards, with two of the completions being actually for no gains . They completed five passes for 64 yard, two for no gain .
 Stoneham took the opening kickoff and drove from its 25 to a first down at the Winchester 23 . Stoneham drove to the opening drive of the game and drove to its 25-yard first down . Winchester had a first-down at the 23.
 Bellino on a pitchout reached thc 34, Rowe added seven, but Stoneham was off side on thc play . Winchester chose to take the penalty, the ball going to the 34 .
 Bellino broke through for a first down at the 47 and Benincasa added five for the first down . Bellino's first down came at the end of the first quarter .
 Stoneham was assessed 15 yards for piling on, the ball going ahead to the 30 and first down there . Stoneham received 15 yards from Stoneham for the pile pile-up .
 Bellino dropped for a four yard loss on a draw at the 35, but Benincasa, driving hard, reached the 18 . Bellino was dropped for four yards on a four-yard loss on the 35 .
 A holding penalty against Winchester put the ball back at thc Stoneham 36. Rowe picked up short yardage, hut a holding penalty . Rowe was on target for Stoneham in the first half .
 Benincasa got hack 10 and a pass from Colliander to Donlon was good for additional yardage . Benincasas got hacked 10 yards and a touchdown for Donlon .
 Winchester was called on the play for back in motion and the ball went back to the Stoneham 35 . Winchester was ruled out of play for a back-in-motion violation . Winchester had the ball returned to Stoneham after the play was called off for a violation of a back in
 Bellino took a pitchout and dodged and faked his way in a great individual effort to the Stoneham five . At this point Bellino was playing a major role in the game . Bellino dodged and faked his way to the five .
 Winchester was called) this time for clipping, and the ball went back to the 20 . Winchester was also called for clipping in the first half of the game .
 Nicholazzo got 15 to start a Stoneham drive just before the end of the opening quarter, and a 15 yard penalty for clipping against j Winchester gave the Light Blue the ball at its 16, first down .
 The teams changed goals here, and with Nicolazzo carrying on | four out of five rushes drove to < the Winchester 23 . The Winchester 23.5-23.5 win .
 The Light Blue fumbled and Winchester re covered at the Sachems’ 25 . Winchester won the match by a single point in the first half .
 Winchester in turn fumbled pitchout and Stoneham recovered at the Winchester 18 . Winchester fumbles pitchout . Stoneham recovers to win at Winchester 18. Winchester lost to Stoneham 18.
 Nicolazzo foun<J a huge hole off his own left tackle and drove to thc Winchester six . Nicolazzi foun foun <J a massive hole off the left tackle  and drove the drive to score a six .
 Nicolazzo bucked over Blethen for the extra points on a keeper play in the first half . The second half of the try-and-bodies was added by Nicolazzi for the second half .
 Winchester beat Winchester Winchester at the Winchester Stadium . Sachems kick-off kick to Tim pone on the Winchester 48 made two first downs . Bellino had to kick to the Stoneham 12 .
 The Sachems stopped Tasker cold, but a 15 yard penalty for which the signal was holding put the ball ahead to the 29 . The penalty was held, but the penalty was for holding .
 Stoneham put the ball in play and drove to a first down at the Winchester 16, only to have a penalty for clipping move the ball back to the 31 . How 15 yards can be assessed for defensive holding isn't apparent, but Stoneham was penalized .
 Nicolazzo sprints 49 yards to the Winchester 20 where he was caught by Bellino . He sprinted 49 yards from the Winchester secondary to sprint 49 yards into the 20th .
 Niazzo reached the nine, Tasker added five yards to the Winchester four . Tasker's five yards was five yards from the Winchester 4 .
 Joe Murray, fullback, went up the middle for the touchdown, with Blethen passing to Nicolazzo for the extra points .
 Stoneham caught holding on the play and the ball went out to the 17 . Stoneham was caught holding and it went to the end of the play .
 Penalties on both teams nullified the next .try and on the third a pass fell incomplete . Penalties were nullified on both sides .
 Stoneham, again using the short kick, booted to Timpone, to start the second half . Len was downed on Winchester’s 43rd-minute drive . Stoneham again used the short kicking to kick Timpones .
 Bellino got away for a first down, but an offside nullified the play and the ball went back to Winchester 38 . Bellino was offside for an off-side try, but the ball was returned to Winchester .
 Colliander dropped back and arched a long pass down the field to Bellino . Bellino caught the pass for the first time in his career .
 Bellino punt ed to Tasker who made a pretty runback, which was nullified by a 15 yard clipping penalty . The defense looked like interference, but it wasn’t called and after another pass fell incomplete, Bellino punted . Tasker made a runback which
 Winchester would have had the ball deep in Stoneham territory . Had interference been called on the pass to Bellino, it would have given Winchester the ball . Winchester had a chance to get back into the game .
 Stoneham, after its 15 yarder, started at its 39 and drove into Winchester territory, only to have another 15 yard penalty stall its drive . Stoneham's first half penalty was a 15-yard penalty . Winchester's second penalty was 15 yards from Stoneham .
 Bellino took the ball at the goal line, ircled a couple of yards into the end zone and then set sail up the field . Stoneham punted deep to Bellino who took it at the end of the line .
 Stoneham defender outsprinted several defenders until he reached midfield . Driving straight out, he cut to the Stoneham sideline .
 Faking nicely, he cut back toward the middle, and dodged and twisted iway from several would-be tacklers . Straightened out to outleg the emaining defenders all the way into the end zone .
 The Winchester stands were still whooping it up when the ball was called back for a clipping penalty committed 15 yards behind Bellino as he sped gonlward . Bellino was penalized for clipping penalty 15 yards from Bellino . The Winchester fans were whooping in the stands when the
 Bellino failed to gain and the ball went back to the Stoneham 43, where the ball was eventually sent back to Stoneham . Bellino was the last man to pass the ball back to Bellino in the first half .
 Rowe reached the 34 and Bellino was literally inches short of a first down at center at center of the catch . Rowe made the catch in the end of the game .
 Stoneham piled up trap right play with Benincasa carrying to take the ball at its 36 . Winchester’s last chance to get into the ball game went glimmeringing . Winchester's last chance of getting into the game was to score a goal . Stoneham's last
 Nicolazzo, Tasker and Murray alternating the Light Blue reached the Winchester 23 as the third quarter ended . The Light Blue scored 23 points in the final quarter of the game .
 Stoneham made first down at the 12 and had the hall at the two-yard line when a fumble gave Winchester the hall . Winchester had a first down of the 12 yards at the end of the first half . Winchester was forced to fumble the fumble at the 2nd down . Winchester
 Bellino circled the Stoneham right end to cross the 20, but a holding penalty was called . The holding penalty, on which half-thedistance to the goal line had to be called, placed the ball back at four .
 Aided by a Stoneham offside Winchester reached the 14, but a fake kick on fourth down failed to fool Stoneham and the Light Blue took over at the 14 . Winchester had a chance to get back into the game, but were denied a penalty penalty . A fake kick failed
 Two drives into the sagging Winchester line made a first down on the one, and from there Tasker plowed over for the score . Tasker scored the touchdown in the first quarter .
 Coach Halliday sent in his scrubs and they were playing the tired Winchester first stringers evenly . Blethen was dropped for a six yard loss on an attempted pass play . Winchester were playing evenly when he was dropped .
 Colliander hit Bellino with a pass at the Stoneham 45 . Mikey was finally forced outside at a Stoneham 20. Bellino was forced to leave the field after a long time .
 Bellino barrelled up the middle for the touchdown . Another pass to Bob Donlon went to the five and from here Bellino made it to the end of the score .
 Bellino hit the line for the additional points and seconds later the whistle ended it . Bellino scored the extra points for the second time .
 Stoneham Oil 0 8 — 22 Winchester 0 0 0 — 8 Winchester 8 — 8 . Touchdowns — Nicolnzzo, Murray, Tasker, Bellino, Bellini . Winchester 8-0 .
 Sheets and envelopes will be customprinted in the color that you choose . Custom printed with custom colors .
 CEMENT WORK DAVID J SPER0 & SON BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE MASONS Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes .
 Just 10 min. from your town For alterations on that dress You will find me the best. For alterations, you can call the dressmaker on 1-800-273-8255 .
 William BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. We 3-3417 ELECTRICIAN ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. We are happy to provide an easy way to contact us at 3.17 .
 Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Rags, also Rubbish Removal . Metal Furnace removed, Iron removed, and Rubbish removed . Iron Furnaces removed and Iron removed from homes .
 Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc. Call PArkview 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon Street, Winchester .
 MROTtH trays, small to very large, syphon, rollers, electric heater, cabinet*. lumps ami mine, items, items .
 1967 Ford convertible, tecond car, low mileage, excellent condition . Excellent condition, power brakes and steering, other 'xtras .
 West Side Ranch has twinsized bedrooms, large living room, dining room, cab. kitchen, 2-car garage, immaculate oond., large landscaped lot .
 Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, gravel, brick, all types, flue liners, drain pipe, cesspool covers, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heatilators are all types .
 Wells 60670. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheep because we use remnants. Welln't use remnants because they are dirt cheep. We'll use remnants to clean up dirt .
 Sedan, fully power equipped, including Fordomatic drive, power steering, brakes, windows, windows and & 4-way seat . Sedan fully power-equipped, with power steering and power-assisted steering .
 Fiveroom apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments . $190 up . Fivedoom apartment .
 Haverty, WElls 35389. sept21-tf FOR SALE — Hotpoint mobile dishwasher with cutting board top . For SALE, you can buy a Hotpoint dishwasher from Haverty .
 Girls’ clothes, two lovely winter coats, wool skirts, teen 14; also woman’s car coat. For sale .
 Professional office space with parking with parking on grounds, central locution. For rent for rent: professional office space . For rent: For rent, for rent, or for rent to rent out of office .
 2nd floor, 6-rm. apt... fireplaced living room, screened porch and sun porch . For rent, you can buy a 2-bedroom apartment in New York City .
 Professional woman would like to share her apartment with responsible wonmn or student . Professional woman wants to live in Cali, MI, with responsible student .
 A very interesting opening for a good secretary who likes a variety of duties and meeting the public . FEMALE HELP WANTED . A good secretary would be a very interesting female secretary .
 MALE HELP WANTED: Alert, industrious marriedmen to train for vending machine route work . Vending machine work needed for vending machines . Male help is needed in vending machine work .
 Experienced seamstress for power sewing machine . For interview call EX oot5-5-2t FEMALE HELP WANTED .
 FEMALE HELP WANTED— Office position in executive office of the Corporation . FEMEMALE help wanted for office position in Executive Office .
 Candidate must be excellent typist and like detailed record keeping . 3 weeks paid vacation, 12 paid holidays . Candidate must also be a good typist . Must also be excellent record keeping expert .
 For Trumpet or Cornet lessons, contact Bob Mingolelli . For Trumpets or Cornets, contact him at 877-7777 .
 Experienced secretary desires part-time work, 8:30 to 12 noon . Part-time job available in PA, PA 9-1525 .
 Electric Sewing Machine Repair Service. SEWING MACHINE Service . SEWing Machine Service. Service .
 All makes ineluding Japuncse manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service . Japunse manufacture .
 Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use . NOrmandy 5-4620. Do IT YOURSELF .
 TeL WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There la a way out. TeL Well's 31947 .
 Our professional services discourage burglaries as well as maintaining neat and proper car® of your property . We are happy to provide our services to deter burglaries .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent . The cost of all flights, ships, trains and hotels through the U.S. and all over the world can be paid
 Let us know your travel pluns and we will be happy to work them out with you . We are happy to let you know our travel plans .
 WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK Ralph W Hatoh, Trenimrer sop 28 -3 1 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Ralph Hatoh was the bank's chief executive .
 CHARLES W KELLEY late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of Charles Kelley, deceased, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by LOUIL C KELLEY of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on
 If you want to object you or your attorney should make a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twenty-fifth day of October 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Middlesex, ss. Middlesex and ss. John V Harvey, Register. Massachusetts .
 To all persona interested in the estate of MICHELE BUTTAFUOCO, also known . known as MICHEle BOTTAFUFUOCo. late of Winchester in said County, deceased. late .
 A petition has been presented to said Court praying that VINCENT BOTTAFUOCO of Winchester in the County of Middlesex be appointed administrator of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond .
 Esquire John C Leggat, Esquire, was the first Judge of said Court, this eighteenth day of September 1961 .
 TTS Middlesex, ss. John V Harvey, Register, Register. John Harvey .
 To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES SHERMAN KENNEDY, also known as JAMES 8.8. The estate of James 8.7. The late James Kennedy will be remembered .
 J. S. KENNEDY and J. SHERMAN K. Kennedy late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . J. J. KENSON and J SHERman KENNedy, deceased, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of sAid deceased by LOTTIE G KENNEDY of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a sure
 If you object to this citation, you should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyfifth day of October 1961 .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-sixth day of September 1961 . Witness: John C. Leggats .
 Middlesex, ss. Middlesex and ss. John V Harvey, Register. Massachusetts .
 To all persons interested in the estate of WENDELL D IRVING, late of Winchester, In said County, deceased . To all those interested in his estate, please contact the deceased .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this thirteenth day of Sep tern ber 1961 . Witness: The First Judge, John C . Legga, Esq. First Judge .
 To all persons interested in the estate of KENNETH W PRATT late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 The administratrix of said estate has presented to said Court her first account for allowance and a petition for distribution of the balance in her hands .
 To all persona interested in the estate of GRACE S. BANCROFT late of Wincheater in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of u certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARION BANCROFT and VINCENT P CLARKE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex .
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twentieth day of September 1961. Esquire was Esquire .
 Eaton's personalized stationery for men and women. John V Harvey, Register.com . For more information, visit www.register.com for details .
 James SIDNEY ALLEN, also known as JAMES S ALLEN late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition lias been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceused by BRADLEE E GAGE of Amherst in the County of Hampshire and SANFORD T ABLE of Gloucester in the .
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-eighth day of September 1961. Esquire was Esquire .
 A subdivision of land on Pilgrim Drive will be approved . A way extending from the existing approved portion southerly to Hilltop Road, and on two unnamed ways extending from Pilgrim Drive southwesterly .
 The plans may be examined at the office of the Town Engineer . Prior to the hearing, the plans can be examined .
 The premises will be sold subject to all unpaid taxes, tax titles, assessments, and other municipal liens . The said premises will not be sold after the sale .
 T-1093 issued by the Winchester Co-operative Bank and that written application has been made to said bnnk for the payment of the amount of the deposit represented by said book or for the issuance of duplicate book tnerefor. T-993 issued .
 The premises will be sold subject to outBunding tax titles, municipal or other public taxes, assessments, liens or claims in the nature of liens . Said premises will bo sold subject .
 Suffolk Franklin Savings Bank by Joseph Bucheller, Jr., KxecutJv# Vice-President of the Boston-based bank .
 Attorney Marshall R Pihl. was the mortgage holder of said mortgage September 15, 1961 . Attorney, Marshall R. Pihr. was Marshall Pihls. The mortgage was sold in 1961 .
 To all persons . Interested in the estate of ROBERT C BOONE late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last W<11 of said deceased by PHILIP BOONE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on his bond
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-fifth day of September 1961, was Esquire .
 Middlesex, ss. Middlesex and ss. John V Harvey, Register.
 To all persons interested in the trust estate under the will of ELLEN M DEARBORN late of Winchester in said County, deceased . For the benefit of WILLIAM A SCOTT, JR. and others .
 The trustees of said estate have presented to the Court for allowance their sixth account . Trustees presented to court for allowance for allowance on the sixth account of the deceased .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this thirteenth day of September 1961 . Witness: The First Judge at the Supreme Court of Appeal, Mr. Legga, Esq.
 Middlesex, ss. Middlesex was the most populous county in the state of Massachusetts . Middlesex is the largest county in Massachusetts .
 J. ANDREW MILLICAN. late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in his estate, please contact the author of this article .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain insrtument purporting to bo the last will of Baid doceased by DEAN W CARLETON of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex praying thnt he be appointed administrator with the will
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, Firat Judge of said Court, this eighth day of September, 1961 . Witness: Mr Legga, Esq. John C. Leggats, Esquee, Judge of the Appeal Court .
 The WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, Oct. 5, 1961 Page Thirteen, is published by Hallmark Publishing House .
 A morning coffee for mothers new to the Parkhurst School was given on Thursday, September 28, at the gracious home of Mrs. Johnson .
 Members of the Executive Hoard and Mr Sutula were present to meet and welcome the thirty moth, ers who attended . The thirty-year-old moth was the first moth to attend .
 You can now order Raton’s personalized stationery at the Winchester Star . The Winchester Star is now available to purchase .
 FICTION The Fleet Rabble, by Frank B Hanes Flight Into Camden, by David Storey For the Time Being, by Julia Siebel V ny are the Hearts, by Bruce Palmer Missing, Presumed Dead, by Carlton Keith, pseud. Missing,Presumed Dead
 Rogues’ Ransom, by John Creaspy The Undying Past, by Orville Prescott, ed. Rogues' Ransom. The Undied Past. by Orv Prescott. The Unending Past.
 Full nursery facilities are available for children through the age of seven . The nursery is open at 6:00 a.m. every day .
 The new fall and winter series of fashion shows will continue each Friday at luncheon with three lovely models and exquisite clothes from some of the best women's shops .
 Patrons are invited to question models about prices, fabrics and how best to wear clothes . i Sunday. i Sunday . Patrons will be able to question the models about their prices and fabrics .
 Fortieth anniversary of the leaving of the CornerHtone of this church building . 9:30m. Tlu* Fortieth Anniversary of the . leaving of . the Corner . of this building .
 Will leave this morning by automobile to attend the Lynn District MYF Rally in Reading . Will leave here by automobile . Will attend the rally in Reading, Reading .
 Meeting with Bishop Mathews for Laymen of Lynn District at Melrose . Supper and Meeting with bishop Mathews .
 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats . CASHMERE SWEATERS with MINK COLLARS and LINED s 47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED into a CAPE, STOLE or CAP
 Phone or come in W incheater 36 Church Street PArkview 9*3000 niar2-tf . Rev. Rev. John W. W. L. Cevallos is an oil producer .
 Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev. Rev. David Johnson will meet at the center of the church .
 TeHcher Training Institute meeting in Lexington, Kentucky, 7:30m. Wednesday, October 11. 7.30m . Meeting in Lexington .
 TWO-DAY TAILORING SERVICE ON MOST GARMENTS STORE HOURS Monday and Tuesday — 7 :30m. to 6m. Tuesday . Two-day service on most of the store's clothing is two days a week . The store has a two-day
 Rev. Roy W Horn, Prop. 9-2220: IMMACULULATE CONCEPTION CHURCH 1001 Main Street, Winchester . Rev. Rev. W. W Horn proposes a vision for the Winchester Church .
 ARTHUR K SMITH Guild Optician 49A PlefciBant Street, Woburn WElls 3-1704 •u5-tf . Sunday, October 8.
 The title of his sermon will be ""The World Looks at the Christian Church” 9:15 und 11:00 a.m. The title will be "The World looks at theChristian Church"
 Why hunting law of God can't be relied upon to overcome ain and aickneoe will be explained Sunday at Chriutiun Science church services .
 Members of the club will be on hand all day to help hunters properly sight-in their guns . The club will also be offering sight-ins for hunters .
 The club is offering this opportunity as a public service to hunters in this area . It is part of a nationwide program conducted by the National Rifle Association .
 NRA affiliated clubs throughout the country are taking part in this program . Hundreds of NRA affiliated club members will take part in the program .
 A correctly sighted-in gun is an important step to safe and accurate shooting . The gun is a key part of a successful shooting success .
 The range is located off Salem Street in Woburn . It is located one quarter mile south and one eighth mile west of the intersection of Washington Street and Route 128 .
 A special program on Christian Science will be broadcast Sunday morning at 8:35 in the local “Call to Church"" series of radio station WEEL . George Favre, First Reader of First Church of Christ, Scientist, Lynn-Swampscott, will speak on the subject
 The program will be presented through the radio facilities of The Mother Church, The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Boston . It will be broadcast through the .
 Anchors machine firmly, reduces noise, lessens fatigue and increases speed and accuracy . Anchors reduce noise, reduce fatigue and increase speed . Anchoring machine reduces fatigue and reduces fatigue .
 1962 "calendar towels,"" size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to flt any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 The report is being distributed by the League to all Massachusetts legislators on both state and national levels, to state government agencies, to local government heads, to college and university heads .
 The only comprehensive document on the Mass. personnel system, aims to tell the average citizen what he is entitled to expect of a merit system and administration ures up to thoi .
 Past League study of several state government services has repeatedly pointed up the fact that the people who administer the service are the real key to its success or failure .
 Massachusetts League members in 1959 elected to study the ‘people’ in government service, the public personnel system itself . Members of the Massachusetts League were convicted of corruption in 1959 .
 Organization and Administration of the Public Personnel Agency; Civil Service Coverage; Recruitment for the PublicService; Selection; Selection and Compensation; and Career Development in the Merit System . The Public Service Agency is responsible for the public service .
 The final chapter of the report is "Recommendations for Improving the Commonwealth’s Personnel Program" The report brings together suggestions and proposals from other interested groups and individuals .
 Local League groups will be discussing the findings during the coming year with the purpose of arriving at their own recommendations for change . Local league groups will discuss the findings in coming year .
 The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very grateful to the patrons and patronesses of the 1961 Waltz Evening . When the 12,000 Massachusetts League mem. water colors and Sketches of Homes Creations .
 Winchester is one of the areas which is actively participating in the current membership drive at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts . Three of its residents, all members of the ladies’ committee, give full support to broaden the community awareness and support of the museum .
 Unlike most art museums, ours in Boston receives not a cent of city or federal money . Unlike most museums, we receive no city, federal money, museum says .
 Free admission to films and private views, a free illustrated calendar of events, discounts at the museum sales desk and reduced class fees . Few people realize that, for a very modest sum, they get a lot of benefits, including free admission .
 The Fall meeting of the Friend* of 1 Winchester Hospital will he held at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Methodist Church in Winchester on Thursday, October 26th .
 The meeting commencing at 3:00 pan., will be dedicated to the “Candy Stripers”, the junior volunteers who work so faithfully at the hospital during the past year, Mrs. Mrs. Johnson says .
 Harry P Hood, Jr., Jr., Progam Chairman, has planned i most interesting meeting . Progam chairman, Harry Hood Jr., has planned an interesting meeting. Harry Hood is chairman of Progam .
 There will be a brief program including slides on “Do’s and Donts” for volunteers, after which a special social hour will be held for the young people . Awards will be presented to these volunteers .
 A tea to welcome the new members of the Winchester Junior Circle of the Florence Crittenton League was held on Tuesday, September 19 at the home of the new president .
 William Wilde, Jr., Jr. and her able committee served delicious reI freshments . William Wilde Jr. served delicious freshments.
 Mr and Mrs Charles b' Doe Murray Bryce Bryce Bryce Charles E Potts Sheppnrd Holt Dr. nnd Mrs Mae Adams and Mrs. Donald Richardson . Donald Richardson was married to Donald Richardson, Donald Richardson and Donald Adams . Donald and Mrs Richardson were married at the time of
 W.hester High School students Kate Robinson and Kate Robinson are students at the school in Rochester, Arkansas .
 Kate and Janet have given many hours as volunteers at the Winchester Hospital . Kate and Janice have been volunteering at the hospital for more than a decade .
 Holyoke Club members of the committee in charge of planning the Fall Tour of Homes met for morning coffee at her home on Glen Road . Holyoke club entertained members of committee planning the event .
 These tillers can help turn a sparse stand of grass injo a nicely filled-out turf . If plants have the nutrition they need for proper growth, they will need to be nourished .
 A feeding of protein-building turi builder® can do more for your lawn at this time than at almost any other season . Turi builder can help your lawn grow faster this year than any other year .
 Lots of homes have Gas burners that arc . still giving trouble* farce service after 25, even 30 years . Lots of gas burners still give trouble*.
 More than 20 million American homes now heat with Gas. . An additional million are being added to theuiks each year .
 This summer save $ k00 on a Gas Burner gas . Gas is competitive in price with other automatic heating fuels . Save $1,000 on a gas burner .
 It has NO 1 IIDDliN COS I S . It assures your home of clean, warm heat and laithful service . No trips to the basement to check fuel supplies .
 Call us now for a FREE LSI IMA1 h of how little it will cost you to beat with Gas.com . Call us to give you a FREE IMA 1 h of the cost you will beat .
 If at the end of one heating season a home owner is not completely satisfied, we will remove the burner and refund <*»r* ry cent paid on it . We will also refund the money spent on the burner .
 Everythin# you ne*d, wfth directions, for a really fascinating craft game . Craft game is a fun way to make a craft .
 “The Consistory in Rome” will he the subject of a talk and movie to be presented by Gerald Hayes after the 7:45 Mass on Sunday Oct. 31 .
 Hayes is an assistant vice president of the National Shawmut Bank of Boston . Hayes is in heavy demand as a speaker .
 The usual book prize will be presented and there will be coffee and doughnuts available . There will also be a chance to win a book prize .
 Every man in I the parish should make an extra effort to be present on Sunday, says parishioner .
 Winchester Chapter is starting a 1 (J hour Standard Standard Standard course on Monday evening . Winchester Chapter will start a 1-hour Standard Standard First Aid Course .
 The classes will be limited so please register early for the Red Cross Chapter at PA 9-2300. Please register early .
 Any boy ofgirl interested in refreshing his knowledge and skills is invited to contact the Winchester Chapter . Winchester Chapter.
 Six years ago in September 1955 jackets were still dripping from I classroom techniques . Six years later, jackets still drizzled from class .
 This leisurely outdoor fellowship gave a welcome midday break to the Mystic School teachers and the members of the hoard supplying the luncheon .
 The next morning on that hectic first day bouquets of fresh flowers greeted each teacher before the opening bell rang .
 The new mothers at the Mystic School were invited to a morning coffee, just for them, at the home of the school's new teacher . The event was held in honour of the new students at the school .
 Each guest was personally contacted by a member of the board who made aure that she had transportation and someone to attend this event with .
 Ganson Taggart, president of the Mystic Mothers' Association, was there to greet and welcome each guest . She spoke briefly about the various committees that function as part of the Association .
 i Weaver was most sincere in i Weaver’s directions, his invitation to all members to j a parent an understanding of what i and dealt almost exclusively in the teacher is trying to accomplish to ys at discount prices . i Weaver: "I’m most sincere"
 Fall Meeting of any organization is always brisk, full of promise, and yet almost as exciting as a college homecoming week end . The Fall Meeting is always always brisk and exciting .
 The September 25th meeting lived up to all of this and it was further stimulated by the guest speaker, Mrs. Mrs. Smith, who was a guest speaker .
 Her topic was “Child Gui dance in the Elementary School and its Availability.” Her talk will be on the topic of a new book called “The Child Gui’s Gui Dance”
 Keville stated in clear terms what child guidance is in Winchester, why it is needed, how it is given and what the aims for this program are . Keville said that the aim of the program is to teach children how to behave .
 Keville brought to this audience a wide encompassing subject and her lecture excellently prepared and delivered exposed many facets of interest to all . Keville's lecture was an excellent example of her preparedness and delivered .
 This is a subject that should be understood by all parents of school children . This is an important issue for parents of children to be aware of .
 Tray Painting Classes include Oil Painting, Gold Leafing on Furniture, Tinware and Wooden articles . Stenciling, Oil Painting classes include gold leafing on furniture and tinware .
 Fall is a lovely time of the year | in New England and a busy one . Fall is also a busy time of year in New Hampshire .
 I Committees are formed, projects I are planned, dates for many community activities are set, and it | sometimes becomes a mad dash I between bulb planting and comImunity efforts . I committees are formed .
 The Armchair Benefit Program at the Mystic School gives you a chance to help your school association carry on its activities and yet gives you hours of free time to spend with your children . The moral of this story is please give your room mother at Mystic School your dues now, before the snow
 October meeting of Fireside Guild will be held Wednesday, October 18, at 8m. Meeting will take place at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson at 8:30 a.m.
 Wayside Bazaar has become the fastest growing discount house in the area . The discount house is growing in leaps and bounds . Wayside has been a popular discount house for years .
 A large staff of personnel is necessary to provide Wayside’s customers with a world of bargains . People told people, people sent people, and people brought people, until today a large staff is necessary .
 Department after department after department has been added and now there are 32 . Each department carries a wide assortment of merchandise at low, low prices .
 Wayside Bazaar is conducting an anniversary sale with spectacular savings throughout the store . The store is celebrating its sixth birthday .
 Daily specials, month-long promotions, peirodic give-a-ways and free toys for the kiddies make up the attractions for the whole month .
 With every Christmas lay-a-way of $15 or more, a choice of two Christmas figurines is given Free . Also with every Christmas . lay-A-way, a selection of two . Christmas figurine is also Free .
 Wayside Bazaar is a popular shopping mecca with wide aisles, helpful personnel, ample parking, discount prices, high quality, refund guarantee, bigselection, all these features have contributed to the growth of this popular shopping site .
 Registrar Riley ordered his inspectors to place inspection reminder cards under the windshield wipers of motor vehicles that have not been inspected . Registrar Riley chairman of Massachusetts Highway Safety Committee, ordered his inspection .
 Only about half of the registered motor vehicles have been inspected . The inspection period started September l, and ends Sunday, October 15 .
 We have about 2,000,000 motor vehicles and trailers and must be inspected in the next two weeks . The inspection is expected to take place in the coming weeks .
 Registrar Riley suggests you drive to your neighborhood inspection station today and get your green sticker . Registrar Riley says it's important to get a green sticker from your neighborhood .
 Monday morning, October 15, registry men and police will patrol every highway .
 The new season for members of the Mary cl iff Guild will be initiated by a preview of colorful fall j and winter fashions . Peck and Peck of Winchester of Winchester will present colorful fall and winter clothing .
 Mesdames Richard Berthiaume, John Finamore, Paul Kelehor, Robert O’Brien, Timothy Henigan, Robert Luick, Joseph Lepore, Joseph Luick and Joseph Lepureki .
 Frederick Ricci, George Rose, Virginia Nilo and Jane De Marchi were students at the Academy . The Academy was founded in 1903 .
 After the ladies aesthetic tastes have been satisfied, they will be served light refreshments . The event will take place in a bid to keep the ladies happy .
 Cardinal Presents Marine Band His Eminence Richard Cardinal Cushing is bringing the famed United States Marine Band to Boston . The band will play at the Donnelly Memorial Theatre in aid of Cushing's charities .
 The band, which appears anywhere only by special approval of the President of the United States, will play two concerts in Boston, one at 2:30 in the afternoon, and the other at 8:30 the evening .
 The United States Marine Band came to Winchester some years ago, presenting a concert of outstanding excellence in the Town Hall under the auspices of Winchester Rotary . The Marine Band was presented a concert in the town hall . The band was awarded a gold medal for their outstanding performance .
 The band will perform in Boston on October 15 .
 Waterfield Opticians offer A COMPLETE OPTICAL SERVICE Physicians’ and Hospital Prescriptions Accurately Filled Glasses Fitted — Lenses Duplicated Hand Readers — Frames Repaired Batteries, Cords and Repairs for Most Hearing Aids .
 Newcomers to Winchester Junior High School are cordially invited to a tea to be held in the home economics room of the new school, Tuesday, October 10, at 3:15pm .
 Board members of the Lynch Junior High Associates urge all newcomers to attend to meet the principal, Mr Gardner Handy, and to become acquainted with the new school . Board members say all newcomers should come to meet Handy .
 Winchester Chapter, Guild of the Infant Saviour will open the coming season with dessert bridge . Guild of The Infant . Saviour . Winchester Chapter . Guild . The Winchester Chapter. Guild of . The Guild .
 This is to be held at the Knights of Columbus Hall, Winchester Square, on Tuesday, Oct. 10, at 1:00m.
 See our complete line of quality wood, chain link and ornamental fencing . Noted tor Quality and Workmonthsp ' ALL STYLES'
 Landscaped exhibit of wood fencing, garden furniture and tool houses . Outdoors display includes wood fencing and garden furniture .
 "Here is a motor car that has already oatablished its mastery in everything that makes an automobile good and fine and desirable," says the author of the book .
 In appearance, it is clearly a Cadillac masterpiece — graceful, clean-lined and elegant . The Cadillac Cadillac is "a Cadillac masterpiece," says the designer .
 In safety, it is in a class of its own— with a host of exclusive features, including remarkable new side cornering lights .
 Every 1962 Cadillac will undergo more than 1400 inspections to assure its quality and goodness . In craftsmanship, it is simply without rival; every 1962 Cadillac .
 But however lengthy, that list could never replace the experience of inspecting the car and driving it .
 The Cadillac One is the finest motor car ever to bear the Cadillac name . It is the first time you've ever seen the Cadillac One in its history .
 Banks across the couni ry make loans for home repair work . Banks also make loans to pay for home repairs .
 At our bank, prompt action is the policy, for we know that the longer a householder is obliged to put oft making a necessary repair the greater his ultimate cost is likely to he . The bank says the longer you wait to repair your house, the greater the cost you are likely
 Get contractors’ estimates on the work to be done; decide how much cash you can assign to the project . Sit down with one of our officers to work out details of borrowing the balance at low cost .
 Four East German soldiers guarding the Berlin barricade decamped en masse to the West . One unit of four East Germans guarding the barricade in Berlin decamped .
 One wonders what would happen if all troops engaged in this venture should suddenly wheel wheel and follow suit . One wonders if all Troops engaged in the project should suddenly follow suit and follow it .
 Aletheon Chapter O E.S. will again sponsor a Pops Concert this year . Aletheons Chapter O O.E.S.'s. to sponsor the concert . The concert will be held in New York City .
 It will be presented in Hadley Hall, Church of the Epiphany on Saturday, October 14th at 8:00m.
 The program this year will include well known arias, American Folk music and selections from ‘Camelot,’ ‘Finnian’s Rainbow,” ‘‘Porgy and Bess’ and other familiar songs .
 Accompanists will be Mrs. Barbara Wood, Mr Allan Higgins, and Mr William Calhoun . Barbara Wood will be accompanied by Mrs. Allan Higgins and Mr Allan Calhoun.
 William Cusack of 2 Lakeview Road is to be the gracious hostess at Winchester Auxiliary of M.S.P.C.A.’s next meeting on Monday afternoon, October 9th . Winchester Auxiliaries will meet on October 9 .
 Mr Albert Governor, assistant editor of Our Dumb Animals, will speak on a Day in the Life of the “Animal” Editor .
 Why (tales Are Gals Orta in ladies have shown more or less justifiable resentment at the current practice of bestowing feminine names on impending hurricanes .
 A New Orleans matron found the idea “insulting” adding that she’d rather have an unnamed hurricane hit her house than one reminiscent of one of her hushed hand’s old flames .
 For the lady’s comfort, let us say that the controversial business of naming hurricanes appears to have no connection whatever with the war between the sexes . For the ladies, it appears to be a matter of business .
 Ivan Ray Tannehill is chief of operations of the United States Weather Bureau . He has studied some 1,000 hurricanes recorded since the days of Columbus .
 One of the worst storms in Santo Domingo was called Padre Ruiz, for a priest who was being buried when it struck . One of them was the one that devastated the city .
 Tho horn, a young meteorologist, christens the threatening low-pressure areas after girls he has known . The most destructive one is Maria, he says, calling the most destructive .
 In World War II, armed forces made up lists of girls’ names to identify typhoons in the Pacific . To designate them three lists, each from A to W, are sometimes required annually . The typhoons are so numerous that to designate them, three lists are required .
 Three of them roamed the Caribbean simultaneously causing confusion in official weather communications . Then, in the first week of September, three of the Caribbean islands roamed simultaneously .
 A labeling system was adopted at the next hurricane conference . As a result, a labeling system has been adopted at a hurricane conference.
 Simple numbering was no solution in the face of the complexity of things. Simple numbering is no solution to the problem of numbering problems .
 Alice, Barbara, Carol, Dolly, Edna, Florence, Gilda, Hazel, Irene, Jill, Katherine, Lucy, Mabel, Norma, Orpha, Patsy, Queen, Ra chel, Susie, Tina, Una, Vicky,
 Only two names were picked, says Mr Tannehill, with real people in mind . Only two people were chosen for the project, he says .
 The resignation of former Chief Joe Moffett was announced, also the following promotions by order of Chief Derro, Fred Wier, Auxiliary Chief, Anthony J Puzzo, Deputy Chief, Roger McTighe, Captain .
 It has been a very active year for the Auxiliary, assisting the regular police department . The Auxiliary has covered churches, parades, Rotary Auction, Medical Missionaries of Mary, P.A.L. dances, band competitions and band competitions .
 A special letter of appreciation was received from Chief Derro . The Auxiliary was honored for their services over the 4th of July and Labor Day week end .
 Due to the present civil defense step-up and the possibility of arising emergencies, we have openings for several qualified public spirited citizens . We have opened the doors to several qualified citizens .
 Hospital Volunteer Training Program for hospital volunteers will be held at Wyman School in Winchester on Tuesday, October 24th .
 A most instructive and worthwhile program has been arranged, and it is earnestly hoped that ALL hospital volunteers will attend . The program will be held at the hospital .
 Registration will he at 8:00m. with the chairmen of the various volunteer services . Registration will be held at 8 p.m.
 Richard J Clark, president of the hospital staff, Miss Mar Marjorie Snyder, director of nurses, and Mr Reese James, hospital administrator . Mr James was hospital administrator.
 Andrew Cornwall of 57 Grove Street was recently accepted as a cadet in the Air Force Reserve Officrs Training Corps at Colby College, Waterville, Maine .
 Cadet Cornwall, a freshman at Colby, is m igned as a flight basic airman .
 Continued acceptance and training will lead, upon graduation, to a commission as a second lieutenant in the Air Force Reserve . If qualified, if qualified, you can receive silver wings of a pilot or navigator . Continued acceptance will lead to commission in the Reserve .
 Members of the ladies’ committee of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston admire “Bronze Dancer” by Degas .
 Both are working on the muscuufs current membership drive . es already had Olga, Opal, Olive, and Ophelia .
 More coverage at less cost . 1 Mt. Mt. John B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ” Homeownership .
 Homeownership and insurance are among the most important services available in the country .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . PArkview U-1062 FREE DELIVERATION ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 If you get yourself a dog, you can be sure he’ll have a dog’s temperament, a dog's disposition, and that he'll act like a dog . You can also be sure that you’ve got a dog with a dog temperament and a dog
 A do-it-yourself enthusiast who had lost the tip of his index finger in the hungry teeth of a power saw was making a plane trip . Do-it's-a-self enthusiast was making the plane trip after losing the finger .
 His seat companion was a charming, rather sophisticated ten-year-old . He chatted about a number of things until her eye fell on the shortened digit .
 Ronnie was most anxious to make a good impression on her, so he took her to Tiffany’s to pick out an engagement ring .
 ERASMUS Morning Coffee For New Mothers at Vinson-Owen School will be held on Thursday, October 5 .
 The association will be particularly happy to welcome mothers of children from the Wyman School area, who are attending the Vinson-Owen school this year .
 Mothers of new students at Winchester High School had the opportunity to meet members of the ParentFaculty Association at a coffee on Tuesday morning, October 3 .
 Forty mothers of new students received invitations from the Parent-Faculty Association for this fall event . The event serves annually to welcome these new members to the school community .
 The Parent-Faculty sponsored Open House at the High School will be the evening of November 2 . It was announced that the major event to help parents become better acquainted with the High .
 Mass. fa M KM BURS NKW YORK STOCK KXCI IANCiK Allyn’s nation-wide facilities handle your stock and bond buy or sell orders quickly, efficiently— provide up-to-date information .
 Allyn . . . where every investor gets individual personalized service# j4.yl//^n d Co. Allyn is a company that caters to individual investors . Allyn. Co. is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 Vinson-Owen School Dispute Nearing Arbitration Arrangements for arbitration of still disputed excess expenditures are now being discussed by Winchester officials . Winchester officials are looking at arbitration arrangements for the school's excess expenditures .
 Town Counsel Vincent Clarke, Chairman of the Hoard of Selectmen Sherman W Saltmarsh and the Town Accountant, James J Costello are working on this problem . The Town Council is also working on the problem .
 Selectmen will meet shortly with the Johnson Road School Building Committee . Selectmen also meet with Johnson Road school building committee . Selectman will meet with the committee shortly after .
 The object of the arbitration proceedings will he to determine whether the Keystone Construction Co. or the Town of Winchester is liable for the costs of certain change orders in the contract specification as construction of the school proceeded . The town of Winchester and Keystone Construction will be involved in arbitration .
 Ciipaid items as of the moment total $23,310.08, of which $1,121.31 is for the architect’s fee, plus $0,310 being held out as rclainage against the contract .
 Lynch Junior High School Building Committee urged Selectmen to call a Special Town Meeting to appropriate at least $11,000 more to complete furnishing and supplies and to build a fence around the wells on the school site .
 Selectmen petitioned for the school to be removed . Barbara Clark Bailey, Chairman of the Building' Committee, and Assistant Superintendent of Schools Richard Desjarlais appeared at the meeting .
 The building committee would know with greater certainty precisely how much more money it would need and precisely what it would be needed for, they say . In arbitration proceedings, contending parties try first to agree on an arbitrator acceptable to them both . The town meeting was held in November .
 The Selectmen last week voted to pay all hut $6,805 of the most controversial excess expenditure . $16,243 for swamp work and drainage necessitated by shooting springs on the construction site after the actual building began .
 Of central importance in this connection, has been the contour map used by the architect and contractor . The map was used to draw the contours of the site .
 The Town Engineer has maintained that the map he provided to the contractor at his request was intended only for general and superficial purposes . Construction should not have proceeded until a more detailed map was made of the construction site, the Town Engineer said .
 Town Engineer maintains such a map was given to the contractor and architect as promised . Such a map, the Town Engineer says, was given as promised by the contractor .
 No definite date has yet been set for the arbitration proceedings, nor has the specific amount to he arbitrated been settled . No specific date has been set when the arbitration will be held .
 Selectmen are hopeful that the legitimacy of more items can be determined before arbitration proceedings begin . It is known that the Selectmen hope more items will be determined .
 In response to many requests, the Star has reprinted copies of its August 31 editorial on nuclear war .
 The editorial considers what would happen to Winchester if an H-bomb were dropped on Boston . The editorial cites statistics concerning the H-Bomb threat . Winchester would be the site of the bomb attack .
 Winchester’s strong response to this editorial is very grateful for Winchester's strong response . Winchester's response to the editorial was very positive . Winchester is very proud of Winchester's support for Winchester residents .
 The Homefronters will hold a tag day on Saturday, October 14, from 9m. until 5m. The tag day will take place from 9pm until 5pm .
 Volunteers will collect money for the Charistmas packages to be sent to Winchester boys and girls in the armed services . Volunteers will be in the downtown area and at the football games to collect money . Winchester will be sending the packages to the boys in the military .
 Henry Desjardins of Beverlv. governor of district < 93 of Rotary International . Winchester Rotarians at their meeting last Thursday .
 Selling of masterpieces had been prohibited during the war . Americans seem to he the chief as the selling of masterworks had been banned .
 She also showed cases of suspected forgery which were proved to be originals, and some which will never he settled . Some cases will never be settled, she said .
 Artists at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts sometimes make copies of paintings and sculptures which can scarcely be distinguished from the originals . These are put on display .
 To preserve the originals in air-conditioned vaults away from the harmful Boston air. To preserve them, keep them in air condition vaults in Boston .
 Fakes of the paintings of old master^, old sculptures and other art objects are now a million-dollar industry . Forger can circumvent tests which can be made on pictures by using old canvas .
 Hausen told about Hans van Meegeren who painted many pictures sold as genuine Vermeer’s . One of which was called by critics Vermeers best, one of which is called .
 Even the audience could guess correctly which was the genuine and which the fake . By means of slides she showed the difference between van Meegeren and Vermeer’s style .
 Meeting. Meeting . Meeting . He finally had to prove to the Dutch court that the pictures were fakes done by himself .
 Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke tells the Star, a simple majority vote would he required to approve the additional appropriation . Clarke says no excess expenditure has been incurred and since no bond issue is being floated, the town would not need a bond issue to approve .
 Selectmen hope to have the complete list of expenses from the Lynch committee either this week or next . Chairman Saltmarsh told the Star that the Selectmen hopes to have a complete list .
 Accountant James J Costello and Finance Committee Chair John T Lyman attended the meeting . Also attending the meeting, which was less than amicable, were our own accountants and finance directors .
 One Selectman indicated that neither he nor the Board of Selectmen was in a mood to consider calling a T Meeting to appropriate more money for a school than was originally appropriated . The matter could wait until the Regular Town Meeting in March, he said .
 Selectmen have not made a decision as to whether they will call a special town meeting . As of the moment, the Selectmen haven't decided whether they'll call a meeting .
 Town Hall is awaiting the arrival at Town Hall of more specific figures concerning the amount of additional money the building committee wanted, and what they wanted it for . The building committee is expected to arrive at the Town Hall this week .
 Lynch Building Committee had definitely not over-spent its appropriation . Chairman of the Board of Selectmen Sherman W Saltmarsh and Town Accountant James J Costello both said .
 The building committee could not make an excess expenditure without reconciling it with the balance of money in its appropriation account . Under the recently established encumbrance system, no building committee may make any expenditure without first reconciling the amount of money .
 Lynch Building Committee has a balance of $9,000 in its account . In fact, the committee has a total of $10,000 .
 The difficulty arises from the fact that the Committee considers as essential additional expenses amounting to at least $20,000, or at least . $11,000 more than its original appropriation of $1,500,000 . L.e Town Meeting of May 19, 1960 .
 $6,000 of the additional $11,000 asked for by the Lynch Building Committee is for a picket fence around the well field . It is estimated that some $ 6,000 is needed for the fence .
 The erection of such a fence was a condition of the transfer of the site from the . jurisdiction of the Water and Sewer Board to that of the . School Department .
 The Star has learned that there is some question as to whether the fence should be paid for by the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee or the School Committee itself . The school committee is considering whether to pay for the fence .
 If Lynch Junior High School Building Committee bears the expense it will get some $1,800 in state aid . No aid will be forthcoming if the School Committee pays for the expense .
 No final list of Lynch Building Committee expenses has been received by the Selectmen . At the moment, no final list has been given to the Selectman .
 Selectmen have not given the Building Committee any indication as to whether they will call a Special Town Professor Aiken . This is why the Selectmen haven't given the building committee any indication of whether they'll call a special Town Professor .
 Howard H Aiken was hon ored Friday, October 6, at a surprise gathering of his friends, former students, and leaders in the design and use of large computers in industry and government .
 Rotary international has awarded grants of more than $3,750,000 in the past 14 years through its program of student fellowships . The delicately crafted replica, about two feet AIKEN, continued to be made .
 Rotary Foundation Fellowships have been awarded to students in 70 countries for study in 50 countries . Since l'J47, when this program was established, there have been 1,454 fellowships given to students worldwide .
 Mr Desjardins urged all local Rotarians to attend the Rotary district conference to he held in Swampscott in April .
 Citizens Radio Service Organized n April 19, 1961 . Organized to promote good will among personal and business users and provide a service to the community in the event of local or national emergencies .
 In the United States there are more than 180,000 C itizen Land licensees and the service is still growing . In the U.S. there are now more than 200,000 licensees .
 Applications are being received, by the Federal Communications Commission, at the approximate rate of 12,000 a month . Applications are now being received by the FCC at the rate of about 12,00 a month.
 Citizens Radio Service piaivides the largest common radio outlet in the United States, even outnumbering radio amateur stations . Citizens Radio is considered the most common radio station in the U.S.
 The book will cover all major aspects of the life of the midshipman, whose athletic prowess is already legendary .
 The hook was written by Winchester’s Cynthia Barone, assisted by her husband, Dr. Dr. David Barone . The hook will be featured in a new documentary, "The Hook of the Hook"
 Winchester Publishers will publish the book by their newly formed firm, Winchester Publishers . It will be published by the Winchester Publishers.
 There is every likelihood that it will be a best-seller among the nation’s sports fans . There is no doubt, whatever, it will he a top item on Winchester Christmas lists this season .
 It will include a pictorial review and a special chapter on his senior year at the Naval Academy, game by game . The Naval Academy is a four-year-old Navy captain .
 The writing and publication of this book are themselves a feature story . In a sense, the writing and publishing of this feature story is themselves a story .
 The idea of writing it occurred to the Barones last year during the Army-Navy game, and Dr. Joe Barones wrote it .
 Barone immediately got to work collecting pictures of Joe published in various newspapers throughout the country . Barone's photo collection of Joe included in the collection of photographs .
 Every time a good picture came out showing Joe the Jet on the field, at public gatherings, on the Annapolis grounds, or shaking hands with some celebrity it was filed away and promptly obtained . Joe the Jets played for the Baltimore Ravens between 1996 and 1998 .
 David C McLean wins DuPont Grant In Journalism . McLean is son of Dr. and Mrs. McLean . The Barones’ table was a little less fancy .
 David C McLean graduated from Bowdoin last June as a philosophy major . McLean served as editor of the Bowdoins Orient as a senior .
 McLean was a letter winner in rifle, was publicity director for WBOR, the Bowdoin radio station . He was a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon Fraternity . McLean won a letter in rifle .
 CITIZENS RADIO SERVILE cheeking out units oil operational map . Photo hy hy Uycrhon Citizens Radio Service .
 The ceremony took place aboard the world's first guided missile cruiser at Pier 4, Boston Naval Shipyard in Charlestown .
 Altair on which he has served as ommanding officer for the past 15 months . Altair has been in charge of the Altair for 15 months and has served in the air force for the last 15 months. Altair is based in New York City, New York .
 Barker emained aboard for a period of five years, the last year and one half of which he served as Commanding Officer in the rank of Lieutenant Commander . Barker as an Ensign and emained on board for a year and a half of that time .
 During this time the Barker participated in the Java Sea Campaign and in number of anti-submarine-warfare operations . During this period the Barker was involved in the Indonesia Sea Campaign .
 In December 1950 he reported for duty in the office of the Chief of Naval Operations . He was assigned to the Politico-Military Affairs Division .
 In the spring of 1956 while attending the Naval War College, Newport, R. I., he was assigned to organize and act as director of a new course for Senior Free World Naval Officers .
 After two years in this assignment at the Naval War College, Captain Colbert was ordered to the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Stall* in Washington, D . He was assigned to the Long Range Plans and Basic War Plans Branches in the Plans and Policy Directorate .
 His new orders send him to Hawaii where he will report to Commander, Hawaiian Sea Frontier . His orders will be sent to the Commander of the Hawaiian Sea Force .
 The Boston with a crew of over 1,300 men plays a key role in the Second Fleet’s antiuir-warfurc operations . Equipped with Terrier surfaceto-air missiles and air intercept control facilities .
 October is dividend time at Winchester Savings Hank, another October custom of long-standing . Winchester savings Hank is a long-time favorite of long standing . Winchester's monthly dividend is $1,000 .
 An excellent time to get your savings started — without missing out on any of the earnings in our new dividend period, just starting . The new earnings period is just starting, so you can start your savings at the moment .
 Mrs. Cusack's fall flowers and candles graced the table of her homecoming party .
 E William Johansen had made, as representatives of our group, out to the Buddy Dog Humane Society in Sudbury, Sudbury .
 This newly-started “nonprofit society dedicated to the care and .placement of homeless dogs” is a most worthy and appealing project, Mrs. Robinson .
 An enthusiastic vote was taken to become a sustaining member of this dedicated organization . The vote was carried out by an enthusiastic vote of support .
 Lyle Longworth and cochairman Mary Knox detailed last minute ‘polishing up’ plans for the October 19th Fashion Show at the Winchester Theatre . The Winchester Theatre will host the Fashion Show on October 19 .
 Speaker was assistant editor of Our Dumb Animals magazine published by the Mass. Mass. Animals magazine . He told of his work as assistant editor .
 The touching and amusing stories and pictures of pets are often contributed to readers' pictures .
 Mr Governer described the Braille edition of ‘Animals’ which is doing so much to bring happy rending matter to blind animal lovers . The Braille version of "Animals" will be available in Braille .
 Art Mills and Bob Joslin won the New England Junior Veterans’ Doubles Championship over Hill Powers and Henri Salaun Sunday at the W eston Golf Club . Mills and Joslin beat Powers and Salaun 2-6, 6-1,6-4 .
 Local pair came from behind to upset Powers and Salaun, who were top-seeds in the draw . The pair were heavily favored to win the coveted title . The local pair were in a tense struggle to win .
 Joslin yielded only one point in his two service games, but could not find the court with his overhead . Hills' serve was exploited by the eventual losers to achieve a double break through of Hills’ serve for the set . Hills won the first set in the second set, but
 The champions rallied their resources and attacked without let-up breaking Powers’ serve twice and controlling play at the net throughout . At this point, the champions rallied and attacked .
 Salaun held his service game for his team's lone game in the set . Salaun was badgered through three deuces, but held his serve game for the win .
 Hills was cracked on a perfect lobvolley by Hills after a fast exchange with all four players at net . Jalaun Jalaun sol ved for a 1-0 lead in the decisive third set . Joslin served another love game and Powers cracked a lob lob on a lobvol
 Hills held serve, as his overhead, which was the last word, thundered two over the fence and flushed two golfers out' of the rough on the adjacent course . Hills won the tournament by two shots .
 Salaun’s turn to serve and his fate was sealed as the winners returned low and set themselves up for winning volleys at the net . Once again it was Salaun's turn, it was his turn, and the win was sealed .
 A volleying lapse by Joslin and nn untakable return of serve by Powers gave the losers their only service break of Joslin in the sixth game of the match .
 Hills and Joslin held their own serves for the win in the tenth game . Hills hit a volley to the backhand corner which Powers could not handle . Joslin and Hills were unable to break their opponents serves again .
 Hills and Joslin reached a goal which had twice before eluded them in the final round . Hills won the New England title by reaching a goal that had twice failed to elude them in a final round of matches .
 Salaun rarely has known defeat, making the victory particularly sweet . And to win over their arch tormentor and such a fine player as Salaun, made the victory especially sweet .
 Lawore is a high school math teacher in her native land where her husband is in the diplomatic service . She is married to a diplomat and is a math teacher .
 During the past summer she was active in youth conference work throughout New England . During the summer she worked with youth conference groups in New Hampshire .
 Her visit to Forum will add special meaning to the year’s theme of “Building a Better World” since Mrs. Obama's visit . She will be the first woman to visit the Forum since President Obama took office in 2009 .
 Lawore is an example of how the Christian churches through their missionary programs are helping build international understanding and peace . The Christian churches are building international understanding, peace .
 Mike Hammel and Eric Schaefer will be deacons . Fred Cardin and Dwight Bellows ushers will be ushers . Fred and Dwight Cardin will also serve as deacons.
 Sunday evening the Woburn Association of Pilgrim Fellowship will hold a rally at the Lynnfield Centre Congregational Church . The rally will be held by Rev. Rev. Paul Allen of Lynnfield, who is a member of the group .
 Plans for annual Work Day for Christ are being made by Forum members . Forum members under the leadership of Linda Carter and Jane Hood, co-chairmen .
 This year Congregational young people of Massachusetts are hoping to raise enough money to provide a library for Mt. Mt. Johnston . This year they are raising money for a library .
 Mr R Carr Program Chairman, Mr R, Whitman Assistants, Dr. R Hillger Assistants . Mr C Stebbins Cubmaster, Mr J Bradley Cubmaster and J Mulcare Treasurer .
 Mr G Kaufmann, Mr J Lanigan, Mr R Richmond, Mr E Palmer Master of Achievement, Mr H Woodward Assistant, Mr . Woodward Assistant and Mr H. Richardson Publicity, Mrs. L. R. A. R .
 C Stebbins Webelos Master, Mr R Westwater Visitation To Beacon Hill . A look at the old and the new. Beacon Hill is a new home for Beacon Hill residents .
 Seven different residences will be on view including those of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. and Mr. Gwyneth . The event will take place at 7 p.m. on Saturday .
 Beacon Hill Friends House, 6 Chestnut Street, with its two-story Music Room; Mrs. Rhys Williams, 7 Chestnut St., among the first houses to be built for speculation on Beacon Hill .
 Barbara Brooks Walker, 13 Walnut Street, has mantle from Hancock House . The Hancock House was the original Hancock House, built in 1883 . The house is now located in downtown Minneapolis .
 Time out from this valuable public relations work to attend the convention of the Am* I eriean Association of Workers for I the Blind in St. Louis .
 Norma 1 and her faithful dog, Patty, checked out for a well deserved vacation camping trip . Norma served as one of the school staff representatives in St. Louis, Missouri . She and Patty went camping in August .
 She has friends in her old home town who follow her career with interest . She has many friends in the town of her former home town .
 The Police Athletic League with the assistance of the PAL Recreation Committee is now forming Pal Co-ed Bowling Teams . PAL Forming Co-ED Bowling Teams is now being formed .
 The teams meet every Saturday at 10m. at Strike Lanes on Converse Place . The teams will meet each other on a Saturday morning .
 Registration will take place at the police station Friday evening, October 13, from 6:30 to 9:00m. Registration will be held at the station Friday .
 Every person that joins the league must remain with their teams during the season . The league requires that they remain with the teams during that season .
 Police responded to a report of an automobile collision at the intersection of Church and Cambride Streets, Tuesday, at 8:02 m.m. A Plymouth sedan owned and operated by 67-year-old Arthur W Leighton of 97 Talbot Avenue, Medford, and a
 Mr Leighton was proceeding north on Cambridge Street and was making a left turn into High Street when the collision occurred . He was accompanied by his wife Frances, who was making the turn .
 His Ford was damaged on the front mudguard, bumper and headlight, while his Plymouth was damaged . The Plymouth was also damaged on its mudguard and rear door .
 Winchester Public Librar Film programs at the Winchester Public Library will begin again next week . Film programs will be held at the library in Winchester . No injuries were indicated in the incident .
 Each week from October through March families are invited to view the* program together on Friday evening at 7:30 a.m. ET . Families will be able to watch the program together every Friday evening from October to March .
 Junior and High School students are invited to attend the Friday night programs . Junior High and High school students are particularly invited to participate .
 Children younger than 7th Graders must be accompanied by an adult to the evening program . Children under 7th grade must accompany adults to the program .
 On Saturday morning at 10:15 a Children’s Program showing the same films is held for all schoolage boys and girls . The children's program is held on Saturday morning .
 Hobbies, historical subjects, animated children’s books, geography and geography, geography, current affairs, and current affairs are treated in various ways during the year .
 A summary of the subject matter of the film will be found in the Star each week . The program is listed under Coming Events .
 Tickets for the Saturday morning program must he obtained in the Boys’ and Girls’ Room after 10:00 m. each Saturday . Seats are on a first-come first-serve basis .
 Watch for detailed information on the first program in next week’s Star . The first program is scheduled to be held in Toronto .
 New members of the Marycliff Guild enjoyed a coffee hour at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Mary Cliff . New members enjoyed the coffee hour .
 The Guild’s membership comprises residents of many surrounding communities . This was a gracious way to welcome newcomers and to acquaint them with the aims of the organization .
 Francis Gallagher, the newly elected president, addressed the group and chatted with each new member . Gallagher was elected president of the U.S. College of Technology in New York City .
 The Tandem Club of the Church of the Epiphany has planned a pot j lurk supper in Hadley Hall, October 18, followed by a treasure hunt .
 All owners of Polaroid cameras are asked to contact Bob Gallant, PA 9-4672; cameras will be supplied to other participants . Cameras will be provided to participants .
 Please phone the Bensons, PA 9-4461., or Thayers, 9-1126 by Sunday, October 15 to guarantee your participation in this gala occasion and indicate what dish you will prepare for the supper .
 John Broughton Dinners, Mr Thayer and Di Benson Publicity, Mr Hall Tickets, Mr Washburn The Potpurri and Polaroid Pandemonium are just the first of many interesting and informative programs which have been arranged for your enjoyment .
 Closed all day Thursday, Oct 12 / St. Louis County, Missouri, is closed all day . Pric** Effudlu# 0c » 11,13 aid 14 .
 Everything you need, with directions, for a really fascinating craft game . Craft game is a fun way to make a craft .
 Club for the 1961-1962 season was held on Wednesday evening, October 4, in St. Louis, Missouri .
 Everyone was given a chance to select or "swap" a choice gift . The very capable chairmanship of Andy Bubser led the event .
 Many of the prizes (such as an “antique” sewing basket) were swapped many times throughout the evening .
 i committee provided delicious reAgalin Rutherford, Nancy Clark freahments at the close of the and Polly Lee Knowlton. j meeting . Chris Wendy Ellison, Debbie Gregory and Debbie Gregory, | und Jack MacDonald and their Mary Elise Suulnier, Janet Puffer, Janet
 Stanley H Withrow of Dix Street, gave a party for a group of her little friends on Friday, September 29, in honor of her seventh birthday . Stanley H
 The first meeting of the Winchester Circle of the Florence Crittenton League will be held on Friday, Oct. 31 . Enjoying the fun with Cherie Parker, Jody Parker, Crittent .
 A dessert and coffee party will be served at 1:30m. followed by the business meeting and program . The event will take place at the end of the evening .
 Plans for the annual Florence Crittenton Bazaar were discussed at a meeting of the executive board held at the home of the circle president, Mrs. Mrs. Edmonds . Plans for this meeting and for the pre-sale were discussed .
 Pre-sale will be held on November 15 at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline .
 All Florence Crittenton members are urged to attend this first meeting on October 20 . Florence members urged to get the year off to a good start to the year .
 Norma Porraa of 11 Hutchinson Road, is among a group of sixty practicing pharmacists enrolled in the second annual Postgraduate Seminar program offered by the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy .
 The program includes a series of eight lectures given on Tuesday evenings from September 26th through November 14th . The lectures will be held at the University of Cambridge, Cambridge .
 The 1961 Seminar features a basic review of organic chemistry with discussions of organic nomenclature, reactions of functional groups, isomerism, and the relationship of chemical structure to physiologic activity . The seminar was held in 1961 in New York .
 Associate Professor Joseph D Mutthes and assistant professor Ronald N Du vail of the Department of Chemistry are lecturers for the extensive review course .
 Happy Birthday EIGHTY-FOUR YEARS OLD OCTOBER 14 . Happy Birthday October 12 .
 Donahue was proprietor of the Central Hardware Store on Mt. Mt.Donahue as customers used to see him in the days when he was a local hardware store owner . He now runs a local business called Central Hardware, which he sold out of business .
 Joe founded t lie business in 1907 in a little store on Main Street at the Abcrjona River . He ran it until he sold out in July of 1959 . Joe sold out of the business in 1958 .
 No special celebration has been arranged for his birthday, hut a host of friends and former customers will extend best wishes to him .
 Even the most expert forger leaves a bit of his own style of painting in his forgeries, she says .
 Those who missed this lecture missed a real treat, and it is hoped many more will come to the next meeting on the first Tuesday evening .
 Membership in the association is not costly and families may join at reduced rates . Families can join the association for reduced rates and membership is not necessary .
 This organization is for all who enjoy art and not just for those who paint . It's for all those who enjoy it, not just those who do .
 Donald Van Roosen, program chairman, is to be congratulated for securing fine speakers and for all programs of the year . Donald van Roosen is to thank Donald for securing great speakers .
 Clarence Luitwieler helped with the arrangements on this month’s program, and also invited all present at the meeting to an open house at her home afterwards, to meet the speaker and enjoy refreshments .
 The “Membership Jubilee” will take place Monday October 23, at 8:15m. at the home of co-Vice President Mrs. Albert Steigmann of Winchester .
 Winchester Toastmistress Club meets in the Common Room of the Epiphany Church, Winchester, at 8:00 a.m. October 9 . The club meets in a common room at the church .
 Catherine Swauger, Medford, put in her application to join the dub . She is the first woman to be named a member of the cast of the show .
 Phyllis Thorensen, topic mistress of the evening chose varied subjects such as, “Should One Retire at Age 05,” “Craze Diets” and “To Adopt or Not to Adopt Children” for the two minute
 Mrs. Beulah Thompson spoke on “How to Make Enemies and Influence Nobody,” Mrs. Thompson . Thompson was the author of the book, ‘How to make enemies and influence nobody,’
 Toastmistress training from 50 states was "unbelievable" Toastmistresses from all 50 states took part in the program . The program was designed to encourage women to self-improvement through self-confidence .
 Toastmistress members have an opportunity to get up at each meeting and learn to think on their feet . Members have a chance to learn how to use their feet at Toastmistresses meetings . Members can also learn to use the skills of speech .
 Many of the members plan to use this gained ability in their club, church and civic affairs . Many of them hope to use it in their clubs, church, civic affairs.
 Spring marks Hadassah’s Anniversary . All are invited to attend or call Ml 3-9536 .
 The associates have set the date for Thursday, October 20th, from 8 to 9:30 in the gym . The associates will be in attendance at the gym on October 20 .
 Mr Mickey Meurling will be in charge of this evening of gay square dancing . A mixture of novelty, ballroom, and folk dances will feature .
 Melvin Sidebotham will be at the school in the morning and afternoon on Wednesday, October 25, and Thursday, October 20 . Sidebothams will be in the classroom at the time .
 When she completed it recently she made the round of publishers, urging them to publish the book this fall . Joe Bellino’s brilliant last season was still fresh in the public mind .
 The Barones were convinced that with the start of a new football season the book would pack an additional punch . The Barons are convinced that the book will pack an extra punch .
 The best publication date that any publisher could offer them was sometime next year . But the best date for publication was sometime in the next few years .
 When their book hits the stands in a few weeks, we suspect their many friends as well as Joe Bellino’s many fans everywhere will be delighted . The book is due to be released in September .
 The Barones are convinced that their venture of faith in the great public interest in Joe will prove well-justified . The Barons say they are committed to the public interest of Joe .
 Winchester Police Relief As sociation has chosen Tuesday evening, November 7, for the annual concert . The Winchester police Relief As . As . has replaced the old time Policeman's Ball in the town hall in recent years . Winchester Police relief .
 Concert will be held as usual in the Memorial Auditorium of the high school . Already a fine program of professional entertainment has been booked .
 Winchester College Club will meet at Crawford Memorial Methodist Church . Annual fall meeting will be held on October 16 .
 Mr Paul G O’Friel, general manager of WBZ and WBZ A for the past three years, will be guest speaker . Mr O'Friel will be the guest speaker at the event .
 Members and their friends are cordially invited, as well as all those interested in College Club membership . The College Club will hold a special event at the end of the year .
 At Korn Frank Dunn for the convenience of ils customers who pay their *:as hills or merehamlise hills over the counter . For the convenience, customers pay their 'as hills' or 'merehamlised hills'
 Mystic Valley (his Company has appointed the Winchester Appliance Company to act as it:-, agent of (Letoher 2, 1 9(> I . this extra accommodation for the benefit of the . benefit of . li customers. Mystic Valley . Mystic Valley.
 WBZ, the Boston and Springfield station of the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company, recently celebrated its 40th anniversary . WBZ is a Boston-Springfield and Springfield-based station . The station has been in the news business 40 years .
 On this occasion the station was awarded a certificate of merit by the New England Council and the governors of the six New England states .
 He has served as director of labor relations and personnel with the DuMont television network . He has also served as assistant sec retary of DuMont Broadcasting Corporation .
 In addition to conducting a law practice, he has served as a special agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in several field offices .
 A Navy veteran of the Pacific theater during World War II, he presently makes his home in West Newton . He is a Navy veteran .
 Mr O’Friel is unusually alert to the cultural and educational implications of the recent great expansion of the radio and television media .
 Charles Joyce is appointed Assistant Librarian of the Winchester Public Library . Charles Joyce will be the new assistant librarian at the Winchester Library .
 Mr Joyce replaces Mr William Buckley who left his post to accept a position at the Lexington Public Library . Mr Buckley replaces Mr Buckley .
 Following his graduation with a Bachelor of Arts degree he served until 1953 with the U.S. Army . He served with the Army until 1953 .
 He graduated from Simmons College with a Master of Science degree . After that he entered Simmons College following a oneyear course in library science .
 Mr Joyce brings to his Winchester post an impressive six years of experience in practical library work . Mr Joyce has been at the Winchester library for six years .
 From 1955 to 1957 he served in the Detroit Public Library, first as director of the young adult service of the library . He also served as educa tional film librarian .
 From 1957 to 1959, Mr Joyce served as head librarian of the Blackstone Memorial Public Libra ry in Branford, Connecticut .
 From 1959 until recently he served first as head of catalogue department, and later as associate librarian at the Wellesley Free Public Library . From 1959 to recently he was head of the catalogue department at the library .
 Mr Joyce was born in Tremont on Mount De sert Island in Maine . He grew up in South Portland, Maine, Maine .
 Mr Joyce’s central interest and training in library work have been associated with administration . Mr Joyce's central interest is in administration .
 I am very much interested in young adult people using the Library. But I am dso very much concerned with young adult use of the Library .
 We all them adolescents, and some older people, I’m afraid, consider them as problems . We all are adolescents and adolescents, says the author of the book .
 They are forming the eading, or non-reading habits that they will take with them into later years . The eading habits are forming with them .
 I think it’s important to help them form the right patterns of reading, says author . "I think it's important for them to learn how to read," she says .
 "I want them to know that ony of my jobs, and interests, is to help them any way I can," he said . He added that he is proud of his work with Mr. Smith and wants to help him do so .
 He carries with him the best wishes not only of the Library staff, but of all readingpeople of Winchester . The Library is an increasingly impor tant part of Town affairs, for whom the Library is increasingly important .
 The Massachusetts Audubon Society has received numerous queries about the danger posed to our bird life by the current nuclear testing in the Soviet Union . The society is concerned about the threat posed to birds .
 These populations would be decimated by such explosions coming at the right time . The explosion would decimate the populations of these populations .
 The species whose nesting habitat is in the far north could be in danger of extinction . The species could be threatened by extinction in the wild .
 There is little question but what birds would be more susceptible to radio-active fallout than people than people . There is no doubt that birds are more likely to survive than people in the U.S.
 Most shore birds are already in South America by now, and waterfowl down into Canada en route to warmer climates . Most of our shore birds have already moved to South America .
 Frank Dunn will still be available to devote his full time to the merchandising requirements of Gas Company customers in Winchester .
 See modern all-Gas homes on “Builder’s Showcase’ WHDH-TV, CHANNEL 5 — every Sunday at 12 noon. Mystic Valley Gas Company. See modern homes on "Builder's Showcase"
 Following this he was appointed to the Men’s Rehabilitation Department in Pittsburgh, Albany and Boston . Following this, he has been appointed to a number of rehabilitation departments .
 Reservists in the 11th Special Forces Group recently spent a weekend in the New Hampshire woods . Reservists are looking forward to a weekend drill this month at Fort Devens .
 Reserve unit is now conducting an autumn recruiting campaign to fill enlisted vacancies .
 Young veterans invited to visit Special Forces headquarters at Boston Army Base on Tuesday evenings . Young veterans are invited to meet with Special Forces leaders at the base .
 New men must either be paratroopers, or willing to attend airborne training within one year of enlistment . New recruits must be either a paratrooper, or are willing to go airborne training .
 The mission of Special Forces in wartime is to travel far behind enemy lines to organize and train guerrilla fighters . Special forces in wartime are to travel behind enemy forces to organize, train and organize guerrilla fighters.
 Reservists would expect to infiltrate enemy rear areas by parachute or submarine to attack supply and communication lines . Reservists expect to attack enemy supply lines by parachuting or submarine .
 On October 21 and 22, parttime soldiers plan to encamp at Fort Devens . The part-time soldiers will camp on October 21, 22 .
 Special Forces demolitions experts will teach them how to destroy bridges and railroads . They will use small charges of TNT and Composition C, a "plastic" explosive .
 Satin finish gold tone top mokes this a most attractive match boob cover . For pocket, purse or pocket, use it for pocket or purse .
 He had been ill and twice hospitalized with a heart ailment during the summer . He was hospitalized with the illness .
 He was bom January 27, 1911, in Winchester and was educated in the Winchester schools, graduating 1 from high school in the class of 1928 .
 The tour went bankrupt in Hamburg, Germany, and it was several weeks before the U.S. consul could get him passage back home . The United States consul was able to get him through the United States .
 In 1942 he was made general agent in charge of the Philadelphia branch office . May 1 of this year he was transferred to the Boston office as general agent . He was then transferred to New England territory as general . agent .
 He was widely known in railroad and refrigeration circles . He was also a member of several traffic busimis organizations .
 Richard Sweeney of Stoneham; also two brothers, Henry T Knowlton of Winchester and Hal F Knowtton of Stoneingham . Richard Sweeney, Richard Sweeney and Hal Knowllton also survived .
 Funeral services were held Monday forenoon at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Bennett . Funeral was held at the Chapel with Rev. William Bennett . The funeral services are scheduled for Monday .
 Antionette L McKeering of 38 Middlesex Street died suddenly Friday morning, October 6, at her home . Charles L Mc Keering, wife of Antionetta, died suddenly October 6 .
 Her death was unexpected, but she had not been in good health for several months . She was not expected to die for a long time .
 She was born 49 years ago in Frenchville, Mo., and had made her home in Winchester for the past 23 years . She had lived in Winchester, Missouri, for 23 years before moving to Winchester, Mo.
 Besides her husband, she leaves her parents, Ruth Ann McKeering of Winchester and two sisters . She leaves behind a daughter and two older sisters .
 Henry Costello and Sylvio Martin, both of Sanford, Me., and a brother, Sylvio, Martin, of Sin clair, Me. Martin, was killed in a car crash in June 2010 .
 Funeral was held Monday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at the Immaculate Conception Church . The funeral was held in honour of the deceased .
 Burial was in Calvary Cemetery where the committal prayers were read by Father Kenny . Father Kenny was also present at the service .
 Grace Gould Hallowell, a former resident of Winchester for nearly 30 years, has died in Harvard . She was one of the last residents of the Winchester area to leave Winchester .
 She came to Winchester in 1933 and lived at 14 Fenwick Road with her son and daughter-in-law . Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Fanny came to the city in 1933, and lived with her family .
 MisB Doherty was a graduate of Winchester High School and Salem State Normal School . Doherty is a native of Winchester .
 She taught the first grade in the Rumford School and later in the Noonan School, her teaching service covering 43 years .
 She was a member of the League of Catholic Women, Aquinas Guild and many missionary societies, as well as the Winchester Historical Society . She was married to a woman who died in 1944 .
 Miss Doherty is survived by four sisters, Rose E., Mary A, C Frances and Marguerite F Doherty, all of Winchester . She is also survived by her four sisters .
 The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with a Solemn High Mass of Requiem at the Immaculate Conception Church . The funeral will be held Tuesday .
 Interment was in the family lot in Calvary Cemetery, where the committal prayers were read by Father Kenny . Father Kenny also attended the funeral .
 Winchester Home and Garden Club has lost its friend, founder and first President Mrs. Alonzo Woodside . Mrs. Woodside was the club's first President and its founder .
 Woodside passed away Sep tember 26 after a long, active and useful life . Woodside died at the age of 92 .
 An ardent gardener, she knew a great deal about horticulture and gave her time and knowledge freely . She was an avid gardener and gave freely .
 She founded the Winchester Home and Garden Club, then known as the Better Homes and Garden club, in April, 1934 . Her pride and interest in the club continued until her death .
 As a living memorial to its first President a book on horticulture will be presented to the Winchester public library in her name . The Winchester library will also be given a book in her honour .
 Presented to Winchester Public Library by the Winches ter Home and Garden Club in memory of Mrs. Mrs. Terrence .
 Gretchen Spaulding, formerly of Winchester, died suddenly October 2 at her Bethesdu, Md., home . She was known for her work in Washington, D.C. She died October 2 of a sudden illness .
 Mrs. Spaulding leaves her husband, John, and her son, William, William . She leaves behind her husband and her parents, Captain and Mrs. Captain Spauldings . She also leaves her son William and her father, Captain John, as well .
 She is survived by her brother, Garrett Van A Graves, Jr. and her grandmother, Mrs. Mrs. Graves . She also has a brother, Mr. Graves, and a sister-in-law, who is also a grandmother .
 Mrs. George Graves; all of Chevy Chase, Md., also her sisters, Mrs, Peter B Gray of Portland, Maine, and Mrs. Peter Gray of Maine, Maine . Mrs. Graves was also married to George Graves, a physician in Chevy Chase .
 The 80th season of The Fortnightly opened most auspiciously in Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall on Monday, October 9th with a very delicious luncheon at 12:30m.
 War Veterans and Community and Hospital Committee were among the committee members . The Social Committee headed by Mrs George French and Mrs George W French were also present .
 Miss Mabel L Vinton, an Honorary Member, died recently . Hatch conducted a short memorial for Miss Vinton . Hatch held a memorial for the Honorary member of the Society .
 Attention was called to the next meeting on October 23, which will be guest night, with dessert at 7 :30m .
 Salvy Cavicchio, Marimba-Xylophone artist and Dan Cavicchchio, accordion soloist . The musical program should be most enjoyable with the popular Salvy and Dan .
 The Massachusetts Federation of Woman’s Clubs will meet at the Bridgewater State College at 10:15m. for an all day meeting with luncheon in the gymnasium .
 The cast, all in authentic costumes, was Selina by Ruth Baker, Aunt 1 Missouri by Maurene Trities, Aunt Muy by Thelma Atwood, and Betty, the housekeeper, by Louise Forsythe . The cast was all in costume .
 Bay State Historical League will be guest of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the House of Representatives in Boston on October 21 . The group will be the guest of Massachusetts .
 An interesting tour of the rest of the State House will be available in the morning . The State House is located in New York City, New Jersey .
 The afternoon meeting will begin early, at 1:15 in the House Chamber with Col. Col. John Defterios . The meeting will take place in the afternoon meeting .
 Members of Winchester Historical Society are also members of the Bay State Historical League . Many should take advantage of this outstanding occasion, and should register as early as they can after 9:30m.
 The entrance opposite Shaw Memorial should be used to register . Registration will be in a nearby anteroom .
 4th at the WDBO as 19 teams we invite you try to identify the clash in competition for the 1961 contract . Before commenting on the board, 4th is 4th in the league table . The contract reached at our talcum of four c hampionship.
 We doubt whether you could spot it, even if you i * v re P rGsents the took the time to write out 25 guesses .
 Zavan Garabe dian and Donald Ponniman scored 37 points for the Zimbabweans . Zavan dian dian scored with a team score of 37 points with a total of 37 . Donald Ponniman was also on 37 points .
 Average score was 26, or one point for each of the 20 boards played by the field . Average score of 26 was 26 or 26 points .
 Fourth and fifth places were shared by Robert Haskell, Guy Mingolelli, Edward Sullivan and Richard Herlihy . The team tied with the team of Mr and Mrs. Mrs.
 At duplicate, however, the traveling score slip gives a pretty complete picture of the game .
 At spades, one South made after the jack of diamonds opened by West . One South made the move at spades . One of the diamonds was opened by the West .
 South held to 3 spades when the king of clubs was led . South was held to three spades at another table . At another table, South was led to 3 clubs by the king .
 In both spades and no trump, some tables reach game while others settle for part score . Some tables reached game and some settled for part scores .
 Your correspondent was sitting East on this one and kept his mouth shut throughout . Your correspondent kept quiet throughout .
 During the last quarter of 1960, nearly 28,500 traffic accidents were reported injuring 28,000 citizens and killing 167 . 167 people were killed in traffic accidents during that period .
 Seasonal traffic hazards of early darkness, slippery highways caused by wet leaves, frosty roads, snow and ice, fog, and rain were nature’s contribution to this bad accident .
 Nature requires motorists to slow down during the Fall season of the year if they wish to avoid becoming traffic accident statistics . Drivers should slow down in order to avoid being traffic accidents .
 "We have expanded our program of enforcement and education to meet this challenge," says D.C. police chief .
 Insurance Department official predicts an increase in compulsory liability insurance premiums for 1962 and 1963 . If trend continues, an added increase is expected for 1963 .
 It was reported that more than 100,000 personal injury claims had been filed this year . It is reported that over 100,00 people have been injured in the past year .
 More than one-half of our traffic accidents are caused by driving after drinking, study finds . The study reveals the startling fact that more than half of our . traffic accidents were caused by . driving after . drinking .
 We are making an earnest effort to reduce this tragic toll of suffering and death during the last quarter of 1961, 1961 . We are trying to reduce the tragic death of people in this country .
 A fractional master point point was played as a Howell movement . On the same evening, Section B was played in a Howell piece .
 West doubled to suggest a lead against some eventual contract with North as declarer . West doubled, to suggest that North would be the next Premier League leader .
 Georgie Gamage and Joseph Bai ley, .648 Isabelle Chilton and Linda See . The queen of spades was Mr and Mrs. See .
 Mansfield .574 Rose Hickey and Lillian Sheridan, .557 led and declarer was down one. Mansfield. .557 .
 After trying duplicate, players frequently find that it has a bit more “zing” than rubber bridge j and that it holds their interest more completely than the older version of the game .
 Park Department is currentby the traveling score slip which ly working on plans for a new bath . One of the big reasons for this is provided by the Park Department .
 At the WDBC, we also follow the procedure of writing in the opening lead, which so often has an important bearing on the outcome of the game .
 An excellent case in point is provided by board 13 in the championship round . Board 13 provides an excellent example of the importance of board 13 .
 The old bath house was of wood construction and had originally been a school house used at the rear of the old Wadleigh Building . KaleidosCope North * A 8 6 V 9 8 5 ♦ A K Q 8 *962
 The Park Commissioners’ present plans call for the erection of a concrete block building at Palmer Street similar to the one built at Leonard Field beach after the fire there .
 Park Commissioners are getting together cost figures to submit to the town . The new bath house will be 24ft. by 50ft. Park Commissioners will be submitting cost figures for the town to submit .
 Sealed proposals plainly marked “Town Report Bid” and addressed to the Board of Selectmen will be received at the office of the Selectmen, T o w n n Hal 1 .
 Some of the copy will be supplied about December 20th and a large part of it by January 17, 19(52) and final Accountant’s report by January 30th . Final Accountant's report will be by January 31st .
 Complete delivery of the paper-bound copies at the Town Hall is REQUIRED by February 16, 1962 .
 All copy and proof to be taken from and delivered to the Selectmen’s Office. All copies and proof must be delivered to and from the Selectman's Office.
 The right is reserved to reject any or all bids, or to accept such bid as deemed for the best interests of the Town of Winchester . The right to reject bids is reserved .
 By order of the Board of Selectmen October 9, 1961 long and six inches high, accuratemammoth Mark I — down to tiny flashing panel lights, and thumb-nail-sized electric typewriter with keys and keys .
 Aiken also received congratulatory telegrams from all over the world, many from former students whom he trained to use tools of automation .
 Computation Laboratory has pioneered in several important new fields related to computers . Research on mathematical linguistics and the automatic translation of languages, the automatic transcription of shorthand, and the development of the new subject of switching theory .
 The laboratory also assisted scholars in research in such fields of astronomy, chemistry, economics and business administration . The lab also assisted university scholars in astronomy and chemistry .
 His awards include the palmes de l’Aeademie Francaise, Ingeniors Vetenskaps Academien, National Fonds voor wetenschap Pelijk Onderzoek .
 Two 1962 heavy duty Police Special, 4 door, 6 cylinder, 6 passenger, Ranch Type automobiles with Standard Transmission . There is room for a collapsible cot stretcher making same a Cruiser Ambulance .
 12-volt, 70 amp. heavyduty battery. 50-amp generator low cutin or alternator. Spare tires and rims. 4-ply tube tires . Spare tire tires and tire covers .
 Radio and Siren and underhood speakers to be transferred from old cars to new cars . New cars will be able to have radio and speakers on the inside of the engine .
 Cars to be equipped with switch to control under the-the-hood radio speakers . Cars will also have a switch on the inside of the car to control speakers .
 One 1959 Plymouth Ranch Wagon 4 door, 8 cylinder, color blue and white, to be turned in toward purchase of one . Plymouth Wagon is a 4-door, 8-cylinder, color white and blue .
 1959 Ford Custom 2 door Sedan 6 passenger, 8 cylinder to be turned in toward purchase of second ranch Wagon . One 1959 Ford custom 2 door . Sedan . 6 passenger . 8 cylinder .
 Winchester Police Chief Joseph Derro is the Chief of Police in Winchester, Mass. He is the chief of Police for Winchester, Massachusetts .
 The Board reserves tho right to reject any or all bids or to accept such bids as may be for the best interests of the Town of Winchester, Mass. The Board of Trustees reserves the right to accept any or any bids .
 Board of Selectmen October 9, 1961 of Arts and Sciences and of the Institute of Radio Engineers . Board of . Arts and . Sciences and . Institute of . Engineers .
 A native of Hoboken, N. J., he received his early education in the Middle West . He is a native of New Jersey .
 He has taught at Harvard since 1935, and | became Professor of Applied Mathematics in 1946 . Has taught since 1935 .
 Professor Aiken’s idea for developing a large-scale computer grew out of his vexation with the amount of hand computations necessary to prepare his doctoral dissertation in physics at Harvard .
 Paragon Gandies, an unusual asj sortnient of 6in. twists in attractive colors; also color-flow Fiesta candles that change color as they burn . Fiesta candles change color when they burn, changing colors as the candles burn .
 The W ini' Chester Star is the official home of the Chester Star . Deodorize and refresh the air as they burn . See them all at the W.I COCKTAIL LITES .
 Long after other cartridges dry, the big 45 cartridge goes on writing . The big 45 cartridges go on writing long after they are dry .
 The Parker 45 is a classic clip and semi-hooded gold point . The slim-swept clip and gold point give it an air of elegance .
 Just slip in giant size spill-proof cartridge of Parker Super Quink ink . Neat-and-Easy To Fill .
 Overflow in the collector prevents leaking ...keeps fingers, clothes and paper clean .
 Choice of 7 Gold Polntsl . Select the point that fits your handwriting . From superfine to extra-broad, choose the point to suit your writing style .
 1961 Common Walks Planned for Fall in connection with the overall beautification of the Common . Park Commissioners are planning to resurface the walks on the Common and to add two new ones .
 One of these will border the Common on Waterfleld Road and another will extent along Caraway Road . Another will be part of the Common, along with another part of Caraway .
 Another new' walk will extend across the Common from opposite the Congregational Church to Laraway Road . The walk will be extended across the common to the Church's side of the road .
 The Women’s Fellowship of the First Baptist Church will gather for their first meeting of the Fall . First Baptist Women's Fellowship meets at 7:45 a.m. October 18 .
 The following women will present a play entitled “Wing My Words’’; Mrs. David Thoms, and the following women . The play will be presented at the National Museum of Art in New York .
 The goal of this presentation is to make every woman aware of the importance of her personal witness for Christ . The goal is to encourage women to become more aware of her testimony to Christ .
 All members and friends of the First Baptist Church are cordially invited to attend the service .
 Come to enjoy the fellowship of the group and be inspired for greater service . Come to be inspired by greater service.
 Winchester’s population, m e n women and children, is getting taller all the time . Winchester residents are getting taller every time . Focal residents getting taller .
 Each succeeding generation is becoming loftier than the one that preceded it, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Today, men who are six feet tall and women who are 5 feet 7 inches are commonplace . 20 years ago, only 10 per cent grew to those heights, compared with 20 per cent of men .
 The records show that way hack in the year 15.10, when the local population amounted to 9,309, the average man was 5 feet 7 inches and the average woman, 5 feet 2 inches . The average man in the town was 5-foot 7 inches, and a woman
 Today’s young man is taller than his father was at a similar age . Insurance company actuaries, Department of Agriculture and others on a national basis, say studies .
 Extra S&H Stamps Jet Bon Ami with a 1 5 oz can with a . 1 5oz can . Extra S & H Stamps Dust 'n Wax Furniture Polish with one Extra S . Stamps O'Cedar Sponge Mop Mop with one .
 Pineapple 1 1 oz Cello 49c M&M Candies P fw,°t r cello 29c 4c Off on 4 Blue Ribbon B tZT 4 & 33c Dinty Moore beef stew ,L c/ n ol 47c R&R
 The Winchester High School dance will be held on Friday night, October 27, in the Winchester High school gym . The Winchester dance will he held on October 27 .
 The wasting and resultant weakening becomes more and more apparent and the patient is confined to a wheel chair and eventually to his bed . Over a period of years the wasting and  weakening becomes increasingly apparent .
 All proceeds from the dance will go to the Muscular Dystrophy Fund . Research has indicated that it may be due to faulty metabolism of the muscles .
 During the summer, many of the patients are sent to a summer camp from two to five weeks, which at times is the only opportunity they have to leave the confines of their homes. headway .
 They have added nearly 1 and 1 and one half inches in height since grandma’s day . They have grown nearly 1.5 inches in length .
 If both kinds of growth were to be taken into account, the local population would appear in a new light . The local population has increased in recent years .
 If everyone in the town were set lengthwise along a straight line, head to foot, they would cover a distance of 19. miles, compared with the 8.10 miles that would have been spanned by the 15)10 population .
 Beds and mattresses must be longer, chairs must be deeper and wider, shoes larger and clothing roomier, to mention a few . Shoes must be larger and larger to make clothes roomier .
 Authorities say progress in medicine, sanitation and nutrition is responsible . The authorities say that progress is responsible for the problem .
 For hospital patients, shut-ins, vacationists, or any one who likes cards, cards are available . The cards are designed for patients and shut-in patients .
 Apell. ft'i a grand oporfunity to become a good dancer and atari *ith free leuons . Now, your ]ob U to find those three words end corectly spell .
 Phone your answers to DAI-8785 Cell 10m. to 10m . weekdays & certificate good for $25.00 in private dancing leaaona will bo mailed for all correct answers .
 Sit Sit The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P> Wilson, Sr. Winchester Star .
 Why We Are Concerned? Ask us why we are so concerned over the anti-social activities of our young people . Why We are concerned about the young people?
 W e e do not agree that young people of today arc just the same as they were years ago . W e does not believe that today's young people are just as young people as they are now .
 The conditions under which they now grow tip. the multiplicity of influences to which they are exposed would almost guarantee that boys and girls with a twist of . that direction will get into trouble, almost without trying .
 The young people of even twenty-five years ago had no such temptations as those existing for their modern prototypes . "Young people of  25 years ago" had no temptations such as those of today's young people," says author .
 As for the hoys and girls of the ‘horse and buggy’ era ; it was so much harder to get into trouble in their time . The hoys were able to get away from trouble in the 'horses and buggy era .
 It is useless to deny it. and an ostrich-like ignoring of the problem only aids and abets it . Winchester has its fair share of juvenile delinquency .
 "Having them grow up in the right way is not only important to them but vital to the country," says President Obama . Having children grow up is vital to them, says Obama .
 Winchester's boys and girls are all right . Fortunately, the vast majority of Winchester's children are fine . Winchester is home to the Winchester Museum of Remembrance .
 "The trouble they get into is negligible and prompted by no vicious motives," the author says . "They get into trouble with no vicious motive," he adds . "It's a good thing for the world to see," he says .
 There is beginning to form in town a little hard corps of youngsters whose activities can be called neither thoughtless nor mischievous . There is, however, commencing to form a . hard corps .
 The Star feels that such activities should be brought to the attention of our townspeople, especially to those who seem to believe our Winchester boys and girls can do no wrong . The Star also feels that those who believe Winchester boys can do nothing wrong should be aware .
 "We feel that it is our duty as the town newspaper to convince them that they can," says the town paper . We feel it is their duty as a newspaper to . convince them they can .
 We also feel it is our duty to point out that it is high time the authorities adopt a much stronger attitude in dealing with these young marauders . We urge the authorities to adopt a stronger attitude to dealing with them .
 The police have been patient and long suffering in their treatment of them . The Star's way of thinking their leniency has not paid off, and to the Star’s way, it's not paying off .
 It seems definitely time to clamp down, and bring home to the error of their ways . The young wrongdoers should be brought home to see what they did wrong .
 In most instances they are able to locate those responsible for the trouble that takes place in town . Police say they are always able to track down those responsible .
 And it can be said with entire truthfulness that the jx> licc are not trying to persecute our young j>cople who deviate from good conduct . And it's said with full truthfulness, the licc is not trying .
 Chief Derm's appointment of a Juvenile Officer to work with and for the town’s young people is proof positive that our law enforcement officers have the welfare of our youngsters at heart .
 There have been times in the past when parents with sufficient influence have succeeded in preventing the prosecution of their progeny after they were caught in serious misdemeanors .
 Officer tells of being ridiculed by a youngster because his “old man” got him out of a trip to court when he was caught slobbering paint around in a house from which the family was absent . The boy said his ‘old man,” as the
 Such parental action is of course bad for the boy and doubly bad for police morale . Police morale must be boosted by the boy's parents' decision to take him to jail .
 The Star is happy to state that most of the town’s young people are sound, pleasant to know, and headed for alert, informed man and womanhood . The Star says most of them are sound and pleasant, but not dangerous .
 There are those with a tendency toward mischief and a sufficiently adventurous spirit to want to try something devilish, just for the lark of it . However, even in this group, there are those who have a tendency to try out mischief .
 These young people know about the wrong doing of their really anti-social mates . They know about wrong doing, they say . These people are very angry about their mates' behaviour .
 They learn that they have been apprehended by the police, for some escapade . They eagerly wait to see what is done to them. They learn . They learn they have . been apprehended .
 They learn that nothing actually has been done, that they have been placed on probation, or the case against them lias been continued . They learn they have to be put on probation or that they are placed under probation .
 If the youngster gets into no further trouble within a given time his case is dismissed without a finding, and he has no record at all . This in effect means probation, except that if the youngster, whose case has been continued, is continued, and probation .
 In the disposition of cases involving juveniles it is necessary to look beyond the original wrong doer . Consider the effect leniency for him may have on many others who are considering doing what he did .
 The understandable disinclination of the authorities to give a youngster a court record can result in a springboard for others to follow in his footsteps . It is understandable that the authorities are reluctant to give the youngster a record .
 The prevention of crime, which is always more important than its punishment, would seem best served in making an example of the few malefactors .
 The Star is sorry it has to write about the anti-social activities of our voting people . We are sorry we have to write this article .
 It's so much more pleasant to write about the winning of a Merit Scholarship or making All America in the football arena . It's more pleasant than writing about winning Merit Scholarships or All America .
 We will continue to stress the importance we attach to the inroads it is making among our young people . But until we can see a lot more clearly that we are winning the fight against juvenile delinquency, we will not be able to say that .
 Columbus discovered the New World in an attempt to fatten the old . In one of history’s great ironies, Columbus found the new world in an effort to fatten the old.
 Italian seaman was seeking treasure in the Orient when he bumped into America bv mistake . Financed by Spanish royalty, he was on his way to the U.S.
 He proved that the earth was neither so square nor so cozy as Hu rope had thought . Hu rope proved that he proved that it was neither square nor cozy as he had thought.
 There was a green, new world across the sea, a rich, unformed world where men might begin again . There was also a rich and unformed new world, the author says .
 Columbus was followed by C ortez, and by the Redcoats, and the Columbusians . Well, ul course, Columbus was . followed by the Columbus .
 We know that the green, new worldbecame an unhappy stew of colonies . And we know that it became an unhappy world of colonies. We know this is because we have a history of colonialism .
 The real meaning of C Olumhus’ discovery was not to become clear until 1715, when the richest and most ornery of those colonies shook ntf its chubby king and declared itself free .
 All things being relative, we Americans are not faring terribly in this regard . We're not far out of favor in the social media world .
 Science and the ll-homh have changed all oi this. i i i Ii
 Science has given us the jet, reducing oceans to lakes, making all men everywhere neighbors in tact it not yet in spirit . War in Korea, traditionally one of the world's most exotic and remote areas, reaches into Winchester and takes our boys away .
 The ll-boinh unites all nations in a single human unit of fear . National boundaries become legal fictions as the ll-binh becomes a single nation .
 Since I Tib we have declared liberty and justice for ALL as our objectives. Since I have been in the U.S. I am committed to liberty, justice and liberty for ALL . I am proud to be a member of the Libertarian Party .
 The celebration of the discovery of the Jtew World is a good time to consider just how new it is . The discovery of this new world is a time to reflect on the importance of this discovery .
 Whenever we can answer ‘yes’ to these questions, then we are still the new world, and we deserve to call ourselves sons and daughters of the American Revolution . The American Revolution was founded in France in 17th century .
 Early in the nineteenth century, it became evident that the town meeting system could not function properly in Boston and certain other large towns . City government was established in 1903 in Boston .
 A city form of government was not possible since the State Constitution required election of state officers at public meetings of town inhabitants . A city government would not have been possible in the state of 18th century .
 The number of cities increased to nine by 1850, 21 by 1875 and to 33 by 1000 by 1000 .
 In 1857, voters adopted a constitutional amendment which weakened the relative political power of the towns . Weakening of Town Political Power was the result of the constitutional amendment .
 This amendment replaced election by individual towns of one or more members of the House of Representatives with election of such members from representative districts established decennially by the General Court .
 Many smaller towns lost intimate contact with legislative developments . Legislators were encouraged to think of themselves more as state officials than municipal representatives .
 The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts repudiated local theories of inherent local rights . The court confined the activities of Massachusetts communities to those specifically authorized or reasonably implicit in statutory authorizations .
 In the first decade of the nineteenth century, the Court declared in Bangs Snow and Dillingham Snow that parish governments had no powers except those granted by the Legislature . The Legislature could not redraw parish boundaries without local consent .
 Continued claims by towns to ‘inherent rights’ compelled the Court to adjust judicial policy accordingly . Town claims to “inherent right’s’ have been upheld by the Court .
 The General Court rapidly extended its control over numerous details of local government, especially where Boston and other large communities were concerned . Fortified by these judicial decisions, the General Court expanded its control .
 In the present century, the general constitutional status of the municipalities has not changed fundamentally . In the past century, municipalities have not changed significantly .
 The State Constitutional Convention of 1917 rejected eight proposals for a constitutional municipal home rule amendment . The General Court in subsequent sittings as a constitutional convention has also rejected the proposals .
 A constitutional amendment adopted in 1926 authorized the General Court to establish “limited” or “representative” town meeting governments in towns exceeding 6,000 in population . A majority of the local voters in the town can petition the court for their approval, subject to their later
 The few local efforts made to overturn special statutes on the basis of ‘inherent rights” were systematically rejected by the Supreme Judicial Court . The few . efforts to overturn . special . statutes were systematically . rejected .
 New forms of town government have been authorized in extensive general and special legislation passed since 1914 .
 The development was most pronounced in 1914-1915 when statutes were passed authorizing town manager governments, representative town meetings, and other town provisions, as indicated below . The development most pronounced was the passage of laws authorizing the town manager government .
 Special legislation was enacted in 1914 which permitted the Town of Norwood to establish a town manager form of government . Norwood was the first town to have its own town manager .
 This statute provides for a town manager who is responsible to the board of selectmen for the administration of town departments . Some of the heads of such departments had previously been elected .
 The status of the town meeting and of the school committee were continued without substantial change . Town meeting and school committee meetings were continued .
 The General Court has enacted no standard official official town manager charter law . Mansfield Stoughton Middleborough Middleborough Saugus Ipswich Danvers Wilmington Arlington Holden Amherst Provincetown Shrewsbury Randolph Concord Williamstown Andover .
 Towns have drafted special legislative proposals which have varied from local conditions, needs and political viewpoints . Instead of legislative proposals, towns have drafted their own special proposals .
 The reluctance of growing towns to change to city status motivated the “limited” or “representative” town meeting system of 1915 . Town meeting system was created in 1915 .
 In contrast to traditional “open town meetings which include all registered voters, “limited” town meetings consist of town meeting representatives elected from districts or precincts, and certain general town officers elected at large . Selectmen, who serve as ex officiis members of the town meeting
 Between 1915 and 1960 a total of 41 towns obtained representative town meeting statutes . The statutes were passed between 1915 and 1959 .
 Legal doubts about this type of statute were removed by Constitutional Amendment in 1926 (Art. Constitution) in 1926 .
 In “The Cuban Story” Mr Matthew's repeats this statement and tells why he made it . Mr Matthew repeats it and explains why he said it .
 In reporting the Cuban Revolution, the former Havana correspondent writes, our press acted in ignorance of Cuban realities . In reporting, he writes, the Cuban revolution was a failure to anticipate the realities of the revolution .
 Extremists on both sides were utterly lacking objectivity and balance . Extremists are utterly lacking in objectivity, balance and objectivity .
 Matthews: It was not simply a question of U.S. reporting what their publishers wanted to print . Matthews says it was not just a matter of United States reporting what publishers wanted . Matthews: "It was not a question . It was a question that the United States had to report
 Cuba's poverty and political tyranny made Castro inevitable, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Castro's government failed to understand Latin America's temperament and poverty, he says .
 Our journalists acted and wrote as if Cuban history began when Castro first marched on Havana and reported new f s in the over-simplified terms of the cold war .
 Matthews: The American-hacked invasion of Cuba epitomized our utter lack of understanding of what is going on in Cuba . Matthews says the invasion epitomizes our utter ignorance of what's going on there .
 Matthews calls it “the most futile, stupid, and costly blunder ever made” in our relations with Latin America . Matthews: It was “most futile” and ‘costly blunder’ in relations with the Latin American community .
 Matthews: In supporting this invasion, we actually strengthened Castro, weakened the exiles, badly damaged our reputation, hurt our own economic interests . Matthews: We broke our solemn treaty promises not to intervene in other nations' affairs .
 Matthews is disturbed by Castro's Sino-Soviet connections . He is less interested in blaming President Kennedy than in determining what we can learn from our errors . Matthews is concerned about Castro's connections to China .
 To deal with Cuba effectively, therefore, is to deal effectively with all Latin Americans, our most valuable allies and our number one market, the US president says .
 Matthews says antiYankeeism existed long before either Castro or Communism . Matthews: We must realize that antiYankeesism existed before Castro and Communism . AntiYankees were anti-Yankees long before Castro, he says .
 Until Castro’s accession to power, Cuba owned 80 per cent of its utilities, 90 per cent . of its mines and cattle ranches, all of its oil refineries and refineries .
 Cuba restricted sugar production to freeze prices for its own producers, forcing Cubans into a one-crop economy and 8-month unemployment periods . Long before Castro, we restricted Cuban sugar production .
 Cubans also saw us sell arms to Spain during Cuba’s fight for independence, and suffered United States military occupation after it gained freedom in 1898 . Cuba also saw U.S. military occupation .
 They remember that we sent Marines in 1906, 1912, and 1917, and that we trained Batista’s troops . They remember us sending them in 1906 and 1912, 1912 and 1917 .
 Our success in Latin America depends not on frustrating or defeating Castro, Matthews says . It depends on whether we help Latin Americans in their efforts toward social justice, he says .
 If the Latins do not solve their problems under capitalism, they will rebel and adopt non-capitalist economies, he says . The Latins will rebel if they do not find solutions under capitalism .
 Matthews says if U.S. economic aid continues to assist only a tax-evading Latin oligarchy, we can never w r in in Latin America . Matthews says, if our economic aid is only a test of investment is whether it helps United States business, it can never be
 If Castro gives Cuba economic justice, the temptation to adopt his methods in other Latin nations will become irresistible . Castro, employing totalitarian methods, uses totalitarian methods to achieve economic justice in Cuba .
 The United States must answer many painful questions in the coming months, Matthews writes . Matthews: The U.S. must answer questions in coming months . He says the United States needs to answer painful questions .
 Mr Matthews’ hook, factual and dispassionate, should help us answer these questions . Mr Matthews' hook should help to answer those questions .
 Your fine editorial “Seek Parents Aid” suggests to me another cry for help from the Chief of Polici and yourself .
 The roots are in the homes where “cocktail parties” flourish . And I do not refer exclusively to the “secret clubs"" and other surreptitious opportunities for juvenile drinking .
 An attack of nostalgia might be fatal if one does not let off steam so let me add a few words for the record . An attack on nostalgia may be fatal, so let's not let's let's go, he says .
 He was great on the gymnasium apparatus and a grand basket ball player . He was also a great gymnastics champion and a great basket baller .
 A good shot putter and track man, he retained his interests in amateur sports for many years . He retained interest in amateur sport after retiring from sport .
 Hal McCall the younger son of Governor McCall played baseball four years for Harvard, one as a freshman and three years on the varsity . Gov. McCall's younger son played baseball for Harvard four years .
 I personally remember Hal visiting the Harvard cage to observe baseball practice the spring before he entered college . Hal often observed baseball practice at Harvard before entering college .
 The baseball coaches of that day in Harvard will still be remembered by many by many . “Happy” Jack Chesbro for the pitchers and “Wee” Willie Keeler for the batters .
 Ned Crawford's influence on the McCalls was far greater than his duties for he took keen interest in the welfare of all of the family . Ned Crawford was a keen advocate for the family's welfare . Crawford died at the age of 92 at the family home .
 Residents of Precinct 4 petitioned for a reduction in the maximum walking distance for junior high school stu dents from two miles to one and a half miles . After careful consideration the School Committee has decided to take no action on the petition .
 The School Department will continue to investigate with the Police Department traffic conditions at certain crossings traversed by junior high school pupils from the area west of Cambridge Street . Traffic conditions are being investigated .
 While sidewalk construction is not under the jurisdiction of the School Committee, the Committee will review requests submitted to the Board of Selectmen for sidewalks for school children .
 A Card from Ned The Star received in yesterday morning’s mail a postcard from Ned Dalton, well-known school traffic officer and custodian, who, with his daughter, Mary, is visiting relatives in Ireland .
 Ned made the trip across by plane in four hours and fifty minutes and reports that there has been lots of rain so far and little sunshine . Ned reports that the rain has so far been a washout .
 He finds Irish food and drink very good and the Irish people delightful . He finds the Irish food very good .
 W Butler, Treasurer of the above-named bank do hereby declare that this report of condition is true and correct to the best of my knowledge uud belief .
 We. Butler* attest to the correctness of this report of condition and declare that it hue been examined by us aad to the beat uf . Butler .
 Additional unemployment compensation for the jobless, including railroad workers, and assistance for their dependent children, would be required . Additional unemployment assistance for the unemployed, including rail workers .
 Application of Federal law to crimes on airplanes engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, making hijacking punishable by death or life imprisonment . $375 million for airport construction over the next five years. $375m for airport .
 Increase of minimum wage to $1.25 and extension of coverage to 3. million additional workers by gradual wage step-ups over the next five years . Minimum wage coverage will be expanded to 3 million more workers .
 Social Security increases in minimum old age payments, and in benefits to widows . Lower retirement age for male workers at reduced benefits; liberalized disability provisions . Social Security also liberalizes disability provisions for widows and men .
 Federal grants totaling $20 million for a four year program to fight juvenile delinquency . Federal grants to fund projects to fight delinquency will fund projects .
 Additional Assistant Secretary of Labor on problems of women in industry . Labor Secretary: Women in the industry should be given more opportunities to work .
 Extension of direct and guaranteed home loans for WWIl veterans to July 20, 19G7, and for Korean conflict veterans to February 1, 1975 . Home loans for WWII veterans were extended to February 2, 1975, and to February 3, 1975.
 Expansion of water pollution program . Increases grants to state and interstate agencies from $3 to $5 million annually . $50 million to $100 million annually for construction of treatment works . Raises former 30 per cent ceiling on Federal grants .
 Housing program for low and moderate income families on liber alized terms . Urban renewal; urban renewal; open space development; college dormitory construction; public housing, community facilities. Housing program .
 Creation of Area Redevelopment Administration in Department of Commerce, to make loans and grants for industrial plants in areas of economic distress .
 Many other measures which have attracted national interest, which were not acted upon finally this year, will be carried over to the second session of the year .
 Creation of a Department of Urban Affairs and Housing at cabinet level . Creation of department of Urban affairs and Housing .
 Congressional consent to the Northeastern Water and Related Land Resources Compact . The compact was approved by the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Three-year program of training youths, aged 10 to 21, in conservation projects . Training youths aged 10- to 21 in conservation .
 Two-year program of training unemployed in vocational schools, or on the job, to develop new skills . Training will take place at vocational schools or in the job .
 If by chance I have omitted mention of any legislation in which you are interested, or if you wish further particulars concerning the measures I have mentioned, I will be happy to hear from you . I will not reveal any further details of legislation I have .
 During adjournment I shall be home, ready to sit down with you personally to discuss any matters involving the Federal government or just to get better acquainted. I shall also be ready to talk to you personally about any matters .
 President Kennedy's Berlin Mes Heranti-Communist counterspy, bert A Philbrick . I ‘ ‘ President Kennedy’s Berlin Mes . Her anti-communist counter-terrorism counterspy . I ' ' ' I '
 Winchester Home And Garden Club will hold its first meeting of the year on Wednesday, October 18, at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church hall . The Winchester Home and Garden Club members will meet at the hall . Mr Philbrick’s talk will be “Techniques for Combatting
 Dursage is helping to man key positions in the Army’s Fortresses of Freedom, world wide . Joseph Vaeearo, President, will conduct the 2 o’clock business meeting .
 The Eighth United Kilpatrick ami Mrs. Granville vortising to join the anti-Communj maw *G , and the Eighth United . Kilpatrick . ami . Granville is vortiving to join an anti-communist . maw*G .
 The Justice Department revealed that for nine years he had posed as a Communist and had so gained first hand information concerning the operations techniques and objectives of the American Communist conspiracy . He shook the foun1 St. St. tes Army in Korea are stand dations of American Communism when,
 Mr Philbrick considers it his personal responsibility to warn anyone who could be victimized by Communist exploitation of otherwise worthy causes .
 He shows in lectures techniques whereby Communists infiltrate ‘worthy groups’ or fake organizations with high sounding names . Communists infiltrate groups with high-sounding names with their own purposes, he says .
 At the same time, Mr Philbrick warns against public hysteria that can develop in the face of this unseen menace .
 Even after Philbrick retired from his counterspy activities he still could not follow a normal life . Even after he retired he still couldn't follow a regular life, he still had trouble living a normal lifestyle .
 Even today the Philbricks are not entirely safe from the threat of reprisals by outraged Communists . The New Hampshire father of five revealed to a startled America .
 Also in the, pacific are the 25th Division in Hawaii, support commands in Japan, and the “guardians of the North”, the United States Army, Alaska .
 The U.S. Army Caribbean is guarding the vi tal Panama Canul Zone . Looking to the South is the US Army Caribbean Guard .
 Baystaters in Army green are stationed in France, Germany, Germany and Italy . They are part of NATO’s nuclear equipped Seventh Army . In Europe, they are members of the Communications Zone, and in Italy as the Southern European Task Force .
 Strategic Army Corps ready for rapid movement to any part of the world where trouble threatens . Strategic Army Corp. ready to move to any region where trouble is brewing .
 Massachusettsites are members of over 40 Army Military Advisory Groups helping to train the defense forces of our allies . The U.S. Army Air Defense Command is defending the nation .
 Report n* of September 27, 1961. of Hayitatc Corporation, Boston. of Boston . Report n*.
 Winchester, Massachusetts, is affiliated with Winchester Trust Company, Winchester. Massachusetts, which ia affiliated with . Winchester . Massachusetts .
 Baystate Corporation owns a majority of the Capital Stock of the Winchester Trust Company . Baystate owns a large stake in the Winchester trust company .
 Raymond F. lieislein, Treasurer jf Baystate Corporation, do solemnly swear that the above statement ia true, to the beat of my knowledge and belief . None 1, Raymond F lieisleins, Treasurer of Baystate . Corporation,  Raymond F lie
 RAYMOND F HE18LW1N Swum fco and subscribed before me this Oth day <>f October 31 .
 Notary Public. notary Public . hobbies of photography and his home workshop .
 Home Rule 1931 but 39 of the 41 towns listed below preferred to seek special legislation . Home Rule was abolished in 1931 but the majority of 41 towns preferred to be Home Rule .
 Brookline Watertown Winthrop Winthrop Arlington Greenfield Greenfield Weymouth Methuen W Springfield Belmont Dedham Dedham Dartmouth Milton Swampscott Saugus Winchester Lexington Fairhaven Ludlow Danvers Needham So.
 Hadley Easthampton Milford Adams Falmouth Wellesley Amherst Braintree Reading Norwood Randolph (1948 Framingham (1950 Framingham) Plymouth Shrewsbury Agawam Amesbury .
 Much other legislation has been enacted since 1900 enlarging town powers and improving organization of town government . Much of the town's powers have been enlarged since 1900 .
 When zoning laws were authorized by constitutional amendment in 1918 (Art. Art. Zoning Laws), zoning laws became law of lawmaking . Zoning laws were enacted in 1918 .
 In 1947-1954 municipalities were authorized to establish salary classification plans for their employees and create personnel agencies . The salary classification plan was established in 1947-54 . In 1954, municipalities were allowed to set up personnel agencies to establish salaries plans .
 A 1953 optional statute authorized towns to establish a board of public works to administer engineering activities . The board was created by a 1953 optional law .
 In 1955 optional legislation enabled municipalities to install improved methods of property assessment them . And in 1955 mandatory legislation provided municipalities with improved property assessment .
 The painting, “Bridge Nocturne,” is well composed and has all the freshness and feeling of the night . The painting is one of the favorites, with its cool dark greys and cool greys .
 In “San Malo Beach and “Marblehead Yacht Club” we see highly simplified sketches of figures placed in the landscape . Yet they are lifelike and seCm to move .
 These were drawn by a master craftsman, an expert in figure drawing, who could have put in as much detail as he wished .
 In these pictures Mr Oberteuffer has combined crayon or charcoal with watercolor for texture .
 While all the pictures are realistically painted, they are done in a simple, delicate style, yet are strong and well composed .
 "He puts on his strokes with sureness and leaves out details that clutter," he says . He puts on strokes with his strokes without clutter .
 If anyone wishes to >wn any of these paintings he ihould call the program chairman of the Winchester Art Association, Mrs. Mrs. Johnson. Johnson .
 Donald Van Roosen, PA 91074. pier, has considered a wide variety of gardening interests in selecting subject material for its programs during the coming months .
 Recognizing the talents of many members within the club several member-participation activities are also planned .
 There will, of course, be speakers who are outstanding authorities in the field of horticulture, including flower arranging .
 Mr Alexander I Heimlich, landscape designer and horticulturist of Woburn, will be the speaker of the afternoon .
 His designs and plantings of many private gardens around town are well known . He is also responsible for the splendid job of face-lifting on Winchester common .
 He is a perennial winner of top awards for excellence and artistry at flower shows throughout the country . For the past two years, he has won the Gold Medal award at the Washington, D.C., show .
 His talk on Wednesday will feature colored films of alpine plants and gardens . This will be followed by a general discussion period .
 Social hour from 1:30 to 2:00m. will he enjoyed by club members and guests . Prior to the meeting a social hour will be held by members of the club .
 Staff of the Winchester Civil Defense accepts your resignation . It’s With profound regret that the Staff of . Winchester Civil . Defense accepts the resignation of your . resignation .
 "You gave freely of your time and worldly goods in a most unselfish and patriotic manner," says the writer . He says he and his staff have felt that you gave freely .
 We should like to ask you to come to our meetings at any time your health permits in order that we may avail ourselves of your broad knowledge and experience . We would like to invite you to attend our meetings, our health permits .
 It’s a good game, and you can get it, and other new games, at the Winhester Star . You can get the game at the store .
 We wish to express our sincere thanks to our neighbors and friends for the beautiful flowers, piritual bouquets and other ex pressions of kindly sympathy that meant so much during the dark hours of grief .
 The newly completed Wedgewood Apartment is located on the shore of Wedge Pond in WinchcHter Center . The apartment is located at 4 Linden Street, 9-0568 novS-tf .
 Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or pluy area . Each apartment is located in a separate apartment .
 Ranch in I “like new” condition . Split-Entrance Ranch in California is in I "like new" condition . Ranch is on sale for $1 million .
 Seven large rooms in all, two and a half baths, two-car garage, beautiful grounds, and all-modern features . Beautiful grounds, two car garage, and beautiful grounds .
 Close to town, this well-constructed four-bedroom home offers a great deal to the young, growing family . MV ST 1C School is close to town and has a good school .
 Ruth C PORTER CO., Realtors SS THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers PA 9-4136, 9-196(1.1.2.4.6.7.9.5. The phone
 Living room with fireplace, dining room and large modern kitchen . Large modern kitchen with laundry area . Living room .
 We also have just listed two new split-entrance Ranches in the middle, thirties on large, level lots . We also also have listed two separate Ranches on large lots .
 Two new homes are located in excellent locations in West Chester, Pennsylvania .
 Three chambers, 2% ceramic-tile bathi, family room with fireplace, two car garage . Two car garage with two car .
 Four chambers, two full and two half ceramic-tile baths, den and den, den, 26-foot paneled family room with fireplace .
 Three bedrooms, 1½ baths, ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining loom, good living room with fireplace with fireplace .
 Four bedrooms, 2M> modern baths, family-size kitchen, large secluded yard . Secluded yard with secluded secluded pool .
 Features include fireplaced den, 2Y> baths, 3 bedrooms, screened porch, two-car garage . Features of this charming house include fireplaces, 2-Y-2 baths, three bedrooms and screened porch .
 Attractive firepluced living room, family dining room, large all-eleelric built-in kitchen, tiled bath, three twin bedrooms on one level .
 Lower level offers fircplaced family room, bedroom, lavatory, and garage . Lower level has family room and bedroom, bedroom .
 Four rooms and four rooms on first floor . Four bedrooms and four bathrooms . $19,900 — Four rooms .
 Centrally located in the Wyiuan School Section, a large older home in neat condition . Four bedrooms, 2'j baths, large yard, good kitchen and good kitchen .
 The two Winchester Catholic parishes, St. St. and St. Mary's, are located in Winchester, Winchester . The two parishes are located within Winchester .
 In the 7 drives conducted since 1946 more than 155,000 volunteers have gathered some 139,565 tons of scrap paper . The 7 drives have taken place since 1946 .
 Leo C Thibeault is the son of Mr and Mrs. Thibault . He was born in 2007 . He is a Canadian national born born in 2006 .
 Leo Thibeault of 4 Hollywood Road recently enrolled in the freshman class at Babson Institute of Business Administration in Wellesley, Mass. He recently was enrolled in a freshman class .
 Arthur W Pratt, who have been in England for several years, have returned to Winchester . They are back in their old home on Salisbury Street, Winchester . The Pratt family have been living in the UK for more than a decade .
 Anna L Doherty of Woburn, who died Tuesday, was the sister of Hugh O’Doherty of this town . For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. For more information, visit www.fithgeraldfuelco.com
 Patio Blocks, various sizes and colors, Pavement Sealer in 5 gal. cans, to give your driveway a new life . Patio blocks come in various sizes, colors and colors .
 “Camelot,” a collie, delivered a litter of 10 puppies, with the able assistance of her master and mistress, Ann and Lane McGovern . The puppies were born on July 6 at 7 a.m. ET .
 The ducks from Mill Pond have been returned to their off-season quarters at the School Street, Woburn home of Dorothy Lord of the Star .
 Babe Mullen and his men moved the ducks and geese unbeknownst to Dot some time in the dark hours over the weekend . The ducks, geese, ducks and ducks were moved by the men in the early hours .
 All requests for street acceptances to be acted upon at the Annual Town Meeting of March, 1962 must be filed at the Board of Selectmen on or before December 1, 1961 .
 Joseph M Puffer and his daughter Janet of 9 Ravine Road, and Gardner E Smith of 24 Calumet Road attended the annual homecoming celebration of the New Hampton School in New Hampton, New Hampshire last Saturday . Joseph M. Puffer, their daughter Janet, and their daughter
 John H Irish of 44 Johnson Road, is attending William Jewell College in Liberty, Missouri . He is majoring in political science at the college . Irish is a father of four .
 Frederick W Parsons of 25 Prince Avenue reported to police that his car had been struck by a hit and run motorist . Parsons was driving a 1953 Dodge south on Highland Avenue. Police say he was hit by a driver who drove south on the street .
 The report was immediately conveyed to Medford and M.D.C. police and put out on teletype . No trace of the hit and run driver has been found .
 Stanley H Withrow of 2 Dix Street will graduate from the Electrician's Mate’s School at the Navy training center at Great Lakes . Graduating Tuesday, October 17 f r o m . graduation will be Stanley Withrow .
 The Navy firemen apprentice has taken a course which included instruction in the repair, maintenance, and operation of all modern naval electrical equipment .
 Girl Scout Cabin on South Border Road was reported entered at 3:45 Saturday . The matter was immediately turned over to M.D.C. police .
 A large pheasant high-tailed it through a 10 by 12 foot bay window at the home of Mrs. Mrs. J. Smith . The window was a 10-by-12 foot window of a bay .
 Firefighters used a smoke ejector for 15 minutes to clear away smoke caused by a blow torch in a house at 8-10 Hillside Avenue, owned by R Joslin .
 Walter JoscpliHon, Bill Saiinnan, Peter Crawford, Bob Little, Ernie Covino, Mai Mnckay . Walter Scott was Walter Scott .
 Radio James von Rosenvinge Walter Scott William Wilson William Wilson The Channel-Masters Radio Network was on a 24-hour standby basis in the event of a hurricane .
 ’’ChannelMasters’ assisted Saugus authorities in ‘operation road watch’ by sending three mobile units equipped with two-way radio .
 Dean A Ricker State President of Congregational Women’s Fellowship on Tuesday October 17 in the Palmer Room, Parish House, First Congregualational Church . Dean A. Ricker is the state president of the congregation .
 Dessert and coffee will be served at 1m. with an inforfollowed by the program .
 Paul Walters First Congregational Men’s Club Meets Wednesday, October 25 . Club will inaugurate its 19611962 season, appropriately enough, with a review of the 1961 session of our Massachusetts Legislature .
 We can all stand some enlightenment, and they are admirably equipped to provide it . We can't wait to hear from them, but they're a good example of humanity .
 We anticipate a rousing evening and an in teresting question period, Wednesday evening, October 25 .
 Reservations may be made by phoning Philip D Cabot . Should you wish to come to the 6:30 supper, reservations can be made .
 Walter F Morgan, Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs. Ricker,’ p ort Dix , ast weeki was p,.jvate Walter . Morgan Jr. Jr. was p.Jvate . Ricker was a member of the Ricker family
 The U.S. Army Training Center, Infantry, is based at Fort Dix, New Jersey, for eight weeks of basic training . It's the first time the U.N. troops have been to Fort DIX .
 Rush will receive basic instruction in general military subjects, which will prepare him for more advanced specialized training . Rush will also be taught about basic military subjects .
 She was the eldest of six children in a minister’s family, born in Nova Scotia . She was born in Little Harbor, Nova Scotia, and later coming to Haverhill .
 She taught school, married, and she and Mr Ricker were keenly interested in Extension Service work of the Mass. Mass. Extension Service .
 Clifford Hummel, director of the Social Service Guild, presented Mrs. Mrs. Hummel with the award for her services .
 Morgan will undergo eight weeks of basic training in infantry, during which he will receive basic instruction in general military subjects . Morgan will then undergo more advanced specialized training .
 Playing For Tilton Floyd P Horn of Dunster Lane, who saw a lot of action as left i tackle on last year’s varsity footof 18, she loves gardening, Girl bull eleven at Winchester High, is Scouts, cooking, cooking and has traveled i playing at
 Edmund Blair Hawley of 25 Ledgewood Road and “Holly Acres,” Jennings Land, Smith’s Parish, Bermuda, is a sixth child and first daughter . Victoria Standish Hawley was born October 9 at the Waltham Hospital in Bermuda .
 David Hamblin was born at Winchester Hospital in October . He is the son of Kendall Wright and Kendall Wright of Lexington .
 We have found over two-thirds to be employable, and of this group, about 70 r / t have returned either to their former job or have obtained new employment . Of this group of people, 70 have returned to their jobs or obtained new jobs .
 Jobs obtained have ranged from light bench assembly or office work to strenuous physical labor . Jobs obtained include office work, bench assembly and office work .
 Under proper guidance, a patient with heart disease of any cause, with a reasonable cardiac reserve, can generally be placed in the regular labor market .
 Those who returned to gainful employment have included people with coronary heart disease, heart disease resulting from high blood pressure, rheumatic or congenital heart disease .
 Robert Holt Atkinson, Jr., was born on September 22nd, to Mr and Mrs. Atkinson .
 Milton L Brown, Jr. of Winchester, are the parents of a second child, Stephen Mark, on September 23 at Winchester Hospital . Stephen Mark was born to Milton Brown Jr. and his wife .
 Milton L Brown, Sr. of Winchester, and Mr dames Salter of Skibbcreen, County Cork, Ireland, were married . Mr Brown was awarded a posthumous sum of £1.2million to Mrs Salter .
 Robert W Hicks announce the birth of Kevin Lewis, their fourth child in Springfield on October 3 . Robert Hicks and Kevin Lewis were born in Springfield, Springfield, Missouri .
 Richard L Fales of Tewksbury are the parents of a fourth child, second daughter, Audrey Elizabeth . Audrey Elizabeth was born on Wednesday, October 4 at St. Mary's Hospital in New Haven .
 The Sodality held its first meeting of the year on Tuesday evening, October 4, at St. Mary's Sodality .
 Mary Harrington, prefect; Virginia Govoni, vice-prefect; Eleanor Reppucci, treasurer; Dorothy McCarthy, secretary . Dorothy McCarthy is secretary . Mary Harrington is prefect . Virginia Gov. Govoni is vice-presidential .
 Margaret Murray, cards and Masses for the sick; Elizabeth Iannacci, altar linens; Ruth Stevens, bulletin board; Helen Spaulding, book rack; Betty Kirk, flowers; Anna Cumming, publicity. Margaret Murray .
 Sodality Communion Day is the first Saturday of each month at the 9 o’clock Mass . Mass is held at 9 a.m.
 On October 7 there was an anniversary mass for Father Sennott, a former spiritual advisor . The mass was held for the anniversary of the death of the late priest .
 Second in series of Winchester Mornings, presented by Winchester Wellesley Club in Hadley Hall, Church of the Epiphany . Winchester M.Mornings will be held at the Church of The Epiphany, Winchester, on Friday night .
 College Club Art Group will meet at De Cordova Museum in Lincoln promptly nt 10:15m. October 20, Friday, Friday .
 Bay State Historical League Fall Meeting at State House, Massachusetts, October 21, Saturday, Saturday . Bay State historical League will meet at the State House in Massachusetts .
 Guest night of The Fortnightly at Crawford Memorial Methodist Methodist Hull .
 Winchester Mental Health Association meets in Winchester . Open meeting at 1 Yale Street, sponsored by Winchester mental health Association . Winchester MHS is a member of the Winchester MSA .
 From sizes 1.6"x2.6’ to 14.6'x30\ including a selection of new, used, antique and semi antique in all qualities and colors .
 Women today are desperately needed, as women, in the tremendous fields of service . Mon. through Fri., 8 A.M. — Sat., 8 p.m. — SAT., 8 noon + ■ women today are urgently needed .
 The Social Service Guild has members who work quietly in the Waltham Hospital, in Boston City Missionary, in visiting shut ins, nursing homes in bringing comfort to the elderly and the lonely .
 Dr. Lawrence E Heck ley are in charge of the dessert . Dr. Heck and Dr. Larry E Heck have been working on the dessert.
 C ALL-AMERAmerican ASSORTED COOKIES EDUCATOR BUTTER COOKIE EDUCator Butters BARS SUNSHINE CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKies . Veal Cutlets 99c lb.c Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday Special .
 The LWV Unit discussion groups on U.S. Relations with Latin America held October 17th through October 19th . Discusses Relations With Latin America .
 Two students from Latin America presented informal background material at the LWV General Meeting October 11 as an introduction to an intensive exploration of the subject at the Units .
 History of past relations of the U.S. with La.America . Present attempts to establish closer cooperation among the countries of this hemisphere .
 President Kennedy’s ‘Alliance for Progress’ plan will be explained and analyzed, as well as more general topics such as the interdependence of the countries involved . The present political climate of Latin America will be discussed .
 The format of this series of Units will be a panel of members of the Foreign Policy Committee, with emphasis upon audience-participation .
 To Address Winchester Mornings The Winchester Wellesley Club takes particular pride in presenting to Morning subscribers Miss Margaret Clapp, president of Wellesley College . Clapp is president of the Wellesley college .
 Rotary Club's April April Auction netted $7,503, the largest amount yet realized from this increasingly populkr event . April auction was the largest ever realized from the Club's annual auction .
 Work has already begun on next year’s auction, says chairman of the I Auction Committee . John Wilson was given a vote of thanks for his own and committee's efforts .
 Rotarians feel generally that it will take a bit of doing to equal or surpass the results of this year’s sale . Rotarians say it will be difficult to repeat the success of last year's sale. Rotarians are looking forward to next year's success .
 EatI >n’s Ko-Rec-Type enables you to correct mistakes in typing without erasing . Ko-rec-Type is a free typing tool that lets you correct mistakes without errowing .
 M Agnella Gunn talk on her professional hobby, the American Theatre, were indeed rewarded .
 Dr. Gunn is a person of exceptional charm and her presentation of her subject is enthusiastic and delightful to the point where one might say, “If you can’t go to the theatre, listen to Dr.”
 She spoke of the best plays of the season on Broadway, calling attention to the preponderance of musicals . She also called out the number of musical plays on Broadway .
 Of Elizabeth, the Queen, with Eva LeGallienne, she said that when one of the greatest actresses of our times portrays a great character in an important play, there is a combination which can hardly be surpassed by the combination of her and the Queen .
 Gunn gave more than passing attention to “The Blacks’s” non-objective play . The underlying meaning of the play is not too easily understood . Gunn gave a passing attention .
 It seems at times to be a jumble of unrelated things, but a closer look reveals layer upon layer of symbolism . A closer look at the book reveals layers of symbolism, including symbolism .
 It is a story not of the power of the Blacks, but of what power does to people . It's a story of what it is to people, not of power, but what it does to them, the author says .
 Whip-slim without an extra thread of hulk, this 6hcath has been designed, cut and darted for silhouette sublety . The 6Hcath is a 6hCath with a 6-inch waistline and a 5-inch body .
 A 24-inch hidden zipper down hack gives an able assist with the figure shaping . A hidden zipper is designed to help the figure shape .
 Uncollared neckline awaits that important jewel or scarf accent . 5 A sleeve. 5 A sleeves. 5 sleeves .
 Always VIRGIN WOOL Metis, Hoys’ and Ladies’ Shop 6 Mt. Mt. Mount Mt. Metis . Pendleton always has the best wool in the world .
 Gunn mentioned “Milk and Honey” as one of the most successful episodes of his show .
 She feels that such plays as these make up for many lacks in the season . She feels such plays make up some of the season's lacks .
 To the critics of Camelot who say that it is a love story without passion, Dr. Dr. Martin says, "Camelot" is not without passion . Dr Martin says that Camelot is a great love story and a great story .
 Gunn recommended unconditionally "The Miracle Worker" for its warm human appeal . Gunn recommends unconditionally “The Miracle Workers’s” The Miracle Worker . Gunn: "The miracle Worker" is a great human appeal.
 Her entry was selected from tens of thousands received in the contest which opened June 1 and closed August 5 .
 Herbert P Clark, Jr., of the Nordblom C o m p a n v Realtors of Boston ran the Grand Opening of the Cambridge House Motor Hotel . Governor John A Volpe was guest of honor at the opening ceremony .
 The construction cost of the Motor Hotel was $2,000,000 and is to be operated by the Cambridge Motor Inn Incorporated . The Motor Hotel will be located in Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 Herbert Clark attended Winchester High in 1959 and 1900 . He has been with the Nordblom Company for the past three years as head of the Motel-Hotel brokerage division . Clark attends 27 Cross Street .
 Mr Clark is one of the few brokers in the New England Area that has specialized in the sale of Motels and Hotels and in the selection of sites for new hotels .
 The drawing for a mink-colored, cashmere sweater will take place at this time . The sweater will be available for purchase .
 R 12, 1061 Opportunities To Be Aired A t Colleges . High school students in the Ros. ton suburbs will learn about opportunities at colleges outside the east .
 Twelve small, coeducational liberal arts colleges in six midwestem states are hiring the presidents and admissions directors of twelve small colleges . The colleges are located in six states .
 The colleges are seeking to broaden the geographic base of their enrollments . They are interested in well-qualified IochI students . The colleges, members of the Midwest College Council, are looking to broaden their geography .
 All presidents anti admissions officers wilt be available after each session for consultations with college-bound high school students and their parents . Parents and students are invited to the meetings from public and private schools throughout the area .
 The conferences will be conducted with the cooperation of local guidance counselors . Local guidance counselors will attend afternoon sessions planned for them at Lexington and Wellesley .
 Arrangements for the Wellesley session were made last spring at a meeting arranged by Samuel M Graves, principal of Wellesley Senior High .
 Mr Graves formerly taught and was interim principal at Winchester High School . Mr Graves has been at the school for more than 20 years .
 Lexington session arranged through Charles J Johnson principal of the school and Frederick Thurlow, assistant principal in charge of the guidance program . The Lexington session was arranged by Charles J. Johnson principal .
 Lexington High expects to draw its largest audience from schools in Concord, Winchester, Reading, Bedford, Bedford and Woburn . Lexington High also expects to attract students from other schools .
 Schools farther to the north are also counted on to send a number of their children . Schools farther north also count on sending children to schools .
 The theme for the conference, “New Horizons in College Selection” reflects its purpose of the conference . The conference is to have secondary school students and their parents take a fresh look at college options .
 Council says students can learn about colleges they now know little about but which may offer more than some familiar to them . This they can do, the Council points out, by learning about colleges that may be less familiar with them .
 The conference idea has been welcomed enthusiastically by many New England school officials . New England schools are coping with an unprecendented demand for admission by college .
 Many colleges have found their past efforts to interest students in western and southern colleges meeting with little success because there is little appreciation here of the excellence of many colleges in other parts of the country .
 The counselors are supporting the Council’s program in the hope of helping even their top-grade students avoid the disappointment many are likely to suffer by applying only to oversubscribed eastern colleges .
 Eastern colleges and universities actively recruit students in many states, including those in the midwest . Ripon College president: Eastern colleges actively recruit .
 The Council is coordinating the efforts of its members to bring about a better balance, he said .
 We feel the conferences also perform a useful service for the schools and school families’s families”, he said .
 This week in first-place team standings are the Emeralds, captained by Ginger Maggio, and supported by Eleanor Russo, Rose Fiore, Sue Barbnro and Jeanne Di Donato . The Emeralds are the first-placed team standings .
 The Diamonds once again won by virtue of pinfalls . The team is in second place in the standings .
 The Diamonds are captained by Louise Vigorita, and supported by Cert Fiore, Emma Provinzano, Angie Dattilo, and Phil Marrone .
 Captain Louise Vigorita is leaving for the dreamland of California . This will be the last week of bowling for Captain Louise, as she leaves for California .
 Louise was the winner of the special improvement award her first year . Louise has been in the league for three years and won the league three .
 On behalf of the bowling league and your many friends we wish you every happiness .
 There was much spontaneous cheering and applause for the skilled bowlers who came through with a multitude of spares and strikes . There were many spontaneous cheering for the bowlers .
 Ginger's high average of 87.3, high single string of 110, and high three-string total of ‘287.3 . Ginger retains the top honors thus far with her team in first place .
 Our worthy brothers bowl on the following evening, and many of the husbands participate . Many of the men bowl in the evening .
 John Maguire tied for high single honors with a 133 . John's 133 is a change in the standings . Top Ten bowling is ranked at 10th .
 Strike Lanes are making their bid to regain that first place spot they held so strongly the last couple of years . As of now the two American Legion teams are fighting it out for first place in the American Legion .
 Legion 2 24 8 6934 Strike Lanes 24 8 5511 Rrother-in-Laws 24 8 5335 Post Office 2 22 10 5543 49er’s 20 12 5578 Atlantic Gelatin 18 14 5626 K of C 18 14 5330 St.
 B Kelley R Russo A Anderson F Kimball B Nash R Tofuri O McClay J Cassidy J Cassidy L Landry A Griswold 109. B Kelley . A. Russo A. Anderson F. Kimball F. McClay F. Anderson . B Kelley F.
 Charles Watson successfully defended his W inchester Town • tennis tille last week end as he downed Shop Holt in the singles linaT 6-3, 6-2, 8-6 ai William Packer Courts . Watson also defeated Shop Holt at the same venue .
 Josiah Bacon and Bob Horne edged 'Pony Apsey and Jim Moulton in a five set marathon 3-6 6-1, 6-4, 2-6 12in marathon .
 Shop Holt and Phillipa N oting defeated t’andv McConnell and Bill Macneil in mixed doubles final . Holt and N.Oting defeated McConnell and Macneill in a close final .
 Bill is a member of the Bear Hill Golf Club in Wakefield . Bill is an insurance broker, Bill is also a golfer .
 He shot ace at Wianno with eight iron while playing with Cliff Smith, Don Morse and Jim Edgar . He shot his ace with an eight iron .
 The Winchester Star looks at Eaton's many styles . Right now our own colleges are styles at the Winchester Star . See our book of Eaton's designs .
 Coaches Don MacElwee, Bill Sipp, and Ed Gravalese are working hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needham . Needham is the first major tournament held at Woburn in the UK .
 Don expects to field one of the beet teams in the league . With the return of a dozen veterans from last year’s team, Don expects the team to be the best of the season .
 The Noonan School rummage sale will be held on Tuesday, October 17, from 10:00 m. to 12:00 p.m. The school will also hold a sale at noon on October 17 .
 Outgrown clothing, household items, gifts, jewelry, sports equipment, books, games, puzzles, skates, and overshoes are just a few of the items to be found there .
 Come early for coffee and doughnuts with friends at the Stage Shop . Come early, and plan for a relaxed moment at the stage .
 Noonan School is easy to find — just one block west of Main Street between Hemingway and Canal . Noonan school is located one block from Main Street .
 PAULINE WHEELOCK PA 9-1304 octtf-4t stop for 1 PAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE on all CHRYSLER BUILT CARS .
 William Finlay had a distinguished business career before he joined the faculty in 1952 . Finlay was director of industrial relations for the Wright Aeronuu tic Corporation when it employed 72,000 persons .
 Antioch is known for its cooperative plan of education under which all students, regardless of field of interest, regularly supplement on-campus study with offcampus job experiences . Antioch students are required to take part in off-campus work experiences .
 Half of Antioch’s 1500 students are attending classes on the Ohio Campus . Other half are on jobs in more than 30 states and a dozen foreign countries . Half of the students are currently attending classes in Ohio .
 A Winchester student now enrolled at Antioch is Miss Patty M Griesemer of 2 Ravenscroft Road . Miss Patty is now a Winchester student . She is a junior at Antioch .
 Seventeen Boy Scouts and two “mascots” of Troop 507, sponsored by the First Baptist Church, enjoyed an all-day outing at Plum Island last Saturday .
 The “Warm-up Cook-out’s’ first of a series of events marking Troop's 30th Scouting season . The Troop is celebrating its 30th season .
 Jim and John Bates, John Buzzotta, Frank Carlson, Les Stokes, Chris Halverson, Dale Abrahamson, Lee Hillman, David Joiner, Bud Marvel, Steve New, Peter Merrow, Bob Charles, Arthur Hayford, Andy Skodowski and Dan Mears
 Scoutmaster Paul Butterworth is Scoutmaster . The Scoutmaster is pictured with Tom Bates, Tom Bates Jr., Don Marchant, and Paul Bates Jr. Frank Carlson is Scout leader .
 An overnight camping trip to Grotonwood in Groton on November 3rd and 4th. A on Friday evening, October 20th and October 3rd. A night of camping is also planned .
 The singles final was a well played match which demonstrated once again the old tennis adage that tennis matches are won on errors, not on placements . The match was well played and showed that tennis is won on error, not placements.
 Watson, throughout the match, made few unworthy errors . Watson was clearly in command in the first two sets . Watson won the first three sets in straight sets .
 His looping forehand, if not scoring outright winners, was well placed and gave Holt little opportunity to gain the net .
 On the backhand, Charlie left little to be desired as he hit a flat ball »lown the line or cross court with good depth and pace . Charlie left his backhand with little to to be left disappointed .
 Mixed in judiciously was an occasional top spin backhand backhand or slice of uniformly good depth . Mixed in with judicious use of top spin, backhand and slice of consistently good depth in the match .
 Check -mated in every quarter, Holt found himself down two sets against an opponent who refused to err off the ground and displayed a seemingly infallible choice of shot . Holt was down to two sets at the hands of his opponent .
 At this point, Shep showed what a fine player he can he, as he stepped up the pace and attacked behind his heavily topped forehand and undercut backhand .
 Winners flowed off his racket as he volleyed and smashed with abandon at the net to earn a 4-1 advantage with his own serve to follow . The win over the world No. 1 was the first time the Australian Open champion had a winning streak of four sets .
 Holt surged to a 30-0 lead, needing two points for a 5-1 lead, but could not hold serve as Watson scored with two well stroked passing shots to regain the initiative .
 Shep stayed in the fight, but met his fate in the fourteenth game after Watson had evened matters at 4-all and held serve for a 5-4 lead . Watson held serve in the fourth game after Shep held serve to win the match for a 4-4
 Watson engineered a break through in the fianl game to guin a well-earned win . It was nip and tuck after that until Watson engineered the break through to win . Watson was the star of the match for Watson .
 Tony Apsey all alone with three south paws, one being his partner, Don Moulton . The doubles final was held in front of a crowd of just three people .
 Bacon and Horne came out on top against their younger opponents . The two lefty team won the match in two hours and 14 minutes . The pair are both lefty .
 Bacon gave a good demonstration of the use of the lob in doubles . Horne was well supported by the clever ripostes of Horne . Bacon gave an excellent performance .
 Apsey and Moulton, although tormented by the delicate touch and accurate fire of their oppon ents, lashed the hall without let up and were very much in contention until the final point .
 In the mixed, Holt and Young had a slight edge all the way and won the G-4, 6-4 victory over McConnell and Macneil . In the more experi enced team of Holt, Young and Young, the more experienced team won the mixed .
 Don Puffer was tournament chairman and presented trophies to the finalists to conclude a busy two weeks of tournament play . The final round of the tournament was held in New Zealand .
 Team Teaching is the topic of an address to be presented at the first Fall meeting of the Parkhurst Parents’ Association . The meeting will be held Wednesday, October 18 at 7:45m. in the school auditorium .
 Snipe and Turnabout fleet officers are planning their joint awards' banquet which will take place this coming week end, Saturday, October 14 . The joint awards banquet will be held at Snipe & Turnabout's joint awards ceremony .
 Skippers and crews got together to receive the fruits of their labor and congratulate each other, while recalling ninny moments of anxiety, victory, and humor .
 Snipe Fleet has just begun a new “Frostbite’ series that will keep the red-nosed sailors on the lake until November .
 Other clubs have come to join them on just about the only body of water where such a series is possible . It is the only place in the world to hold a series of games in the water .
 The game you have been asking for, the perfect bridge teacher that enables you to play by yourself, anywhere, with World Champions as partners . World champions as partners. The game .
 Three models, plus duplicate bridge boards and advanced course in contract bridge . Three models of bridge boards .
 Anderson is also director of the team teaching project of the Franklin Elementary School in Lexington . Franklin is one of the first schools in the country to undertake team teaching in all of its grades .
 Team teaching was introduced in Winchester in 1959 at the Mystic School . The Mystic School introduced team teaching to students in 1959 .
 Parkhurst School has adopted the program in grades 4 through 6 . It has been adopted at Parkhurst school this year in grade 4-6 .
 Parkhurst Parents’ Association meeting has been opened to all who wish to come . Because of the general interest in this new teaching technique, the Parkhurst parents’ association has opened the meeting .
 Winchester’s Opponents Lexington, 14; Stoneham, 8 Reading, 32; Concord, 12 Melrose, 30; Belmont, 8 Wakefield, 12; Wakefield 12; Newton, South, 6 Woburn, 20; Natick, 20 . Winchester�
 A checking account means you can pay all your bills by mail, with checks . A check account is a way to pay by mail and not by bill mail . Checking accounts are a way of paying by mail .
 Open your checking account here now and begin to enjoy the convenience it offers . Open your account at the start of the new year with a new account .
 Last week every team but Notre Dame changed positions in the standing’s . Notre Dame is ranked No. 1 in Bowling League .
 Both Harvard and Army are tied with 14 wins and losses . Harvard drops from first to second on pin falls . Army drops four points from Harvard to second .
 Next week’s matches will have first-place California competing against fifth-place Navy, and second-place Harvard taking on third-place Notre Dame .
 “Hokie” Procopio won both attendance prizes last week . Two attendance prizes were drawn last week, and two were prizes .
 The meeting will be preceded by a Mass for the Missions to be offered at St. Francis' Missionary Mass to be held on Sunday .
 Winchester starters for Lexington game included Coaeh Henry Knowlton, Jim Menueei, Richie Rowe and Richie Rowe . Winchester won the Lexington game 2-1 at Lexington, Lexington .
 Boh DonIon, George Nowell, Dan Mahoney, Tom Mooney, Ned Nihlork, Joe Dattilo, Al Kimball, Lcnnie Timpone . Kneeling, Boh Don’tIon and Dan Nowell. Kne
 "Tom" is missing his work with the harriers this fall even more than he thought possible . It was with real regret that popular ‘Tom’ handed in his cross country portfolio, for he has always loved the sport .
 A graduate of Medford High School, ‘Tom’ participated in track and cross country at high school . “Tom” participated in cross country and track and track .
 He went to Norwich, which at that time had no cross country team, and participated in wrestling and football at the Northfield military college . He also played football and wrestled at the college .
 He had to leave college and go to work, later enrolling at Burdett College . He was forced to quit college and enroll in college at the age of 18 .
 After his graduation from Burdett he worked as an accountant for Lever Brothers . He decided he wanted to teach and left business to accept a teaching position at Suffield Academy .
 At Suffield he coached varsity track, wrestling and golf and also coached football in the junior school . He also coached high school football .
 He left to accept a position as principal of Plainville Junior-Senior High School . He coached basketball and cross country, introducing the latter sport to school .
 From Plainville, he went to Bryant & Stratton and from that post, to Winchester . Winchester, Connecticut, was the last place he was at .
 For a time “Tom” assisted Coach Henry Knowlton in track, and for two years was head coach of the sport at high school . For two years, ‘Tom’ was also head coach for high school track in high school, and was coach for two
 Winchester High School cross country star has made his greatest contribution to school athletics . He did well with track, but it has been in cross country that he has made greatest contribution .
 Morse coached varsity cross country teams have won 73 meets and lost eight . Morse has won 73 of his team's 73 meets, losing eight of them . Morse's team has won more than 80 meets .
 His Jay Vees have won 74 of 75 matches . Our New Teachers have done even better, winning 74 of 74 .
 The varsity harriers have won seven divisional championships, two Middlesex League championships, seven state championships and two New England championships .
 Middlesex League cross country titles are hard to come by in Middlesex . The team won seven state titles, but only won two league crowns .
 Morse coaching regime at high school no team has won more than the two Winchester annexed . Winchester annexed annexed . Morse has coached no team to win more than two Winchester teams .
 Girls with outstanding Gibbs secretarial training . SfB&s Gettop jobs . Responsible jpbs— and important promotions — go to girls with outstanding secretarial skills .
 Winchester Jay Vee teams won 11 divisional meets and five league titles . Winchester Jay team won 11 divisions, five league championships . Winchester team won six league meets and won 11 league meets . Winchester 6-2475 tl .
 “Tom” coached at high school, 13 years, in only two years did his teams lose two meets . During the time ‘Tom’s 13 years in high school coaching, only two teams lost two meets that year .
 Sport has built up from a squad of 16 in 1948 to one of 45 this year . The sport has built-up from one of 16 squad of 45 in 1948 in 1948 .
 This group won divisional, league, state and New England crowns and was undefeated . This group was undefeated in the New England division .
 Allan Osborne and Robert Becker captained the team, other members of which were Paul Franson, Paul Donlon, Ken Brown, Quent Roberts, Ron Roberts, Harry Ekstrom, Robin Carlson and Bill Emerson . Allan Osborne was the captain, with Robert Becker .
 Miss Bellows instructs at the kindergarten level and also in grades one, two and three . She also instructs in kindergarten and grades one and two .
 She actually does most of the teaching, visiting each of her classes once a week . She actually visits each of the students at her home in New Jersey .
 She got her Master of Arts from Tufts in 1961 . She did practice teaching in Winchester while working for her degree . She also taught in Winchester .
 Miss Bellows lists music as a hobby as a vocation and also likes sports, especially tennis . She also likes to play tennis and loves music and tennis .
 Winchester High School's football Sachems bounced back to beat Cambridge, SO -6 . Winchester High school's football team beat the inept Cambridge l^itin School eleven, 80-6 .
 Both teams played ragged football, but though the issue was never in dou&b Cambridge kept trying . Both teams play raggedly football, though the match was ragged .
 Neither team could sustain a drive during the first quarter with the defenses dominating play . Neither team was able to sustain a single drive during first quarter .
 Winchester broke the scoring ice when John Colliander passed from his 29 to Lennie Timpone at the 47th line . Winchester broke scoring ice in the second period . Winchester won the game 2-1 in the first period .
 Bellino swept left end for nine and then on trap play from the Cambridge 44, broke through cleanly to outleg the Cambridge secondaries into the end zone . Bellino won the game for the first time in his career .
 Winchester's try for the conversion points was no good and the half ended with Winchester on top, 6-0 . Winchester scored a try in the first half, but the conversion was unsuccessful . Winchester's first try was scored by the conversion point, but it was no more successful .
 Bellino ran the kickoff hack 16 yards to the Winchester 39 in the first half . Bellino also ran 16 yards for the Winchester-Winchester 39 .
 Benineasa picked up five and a Colliander pass to Timpone reached the Cambridge 46 . Benineas picked up another five points for Cambridge .
 An illegal procedure penalty set the Sachems back five yards to the 27, hut Bellino got away for 16 yards . Benineasa drove through for the score, also adding two points for the conversion by rushing . The Cantabs’ 12-yard drive ended in a penalty
 Winchester was twice held for less than a yard advance . After forcing a Cambridge punt, Winchester was forced to punt again . Winchester forced Cambridge to punt twice for a touchdown .
 On third down, Colliander hit Rich Rowe with a pass at midfield and Rowe galloped 50 yards to score . The score came down on a third down play from the field .
 Cambridge Latin coach Knowlton sent in his reserves in the first half . Cambridge Latin scored quickly in the second half of the game .
 With action still in the third quarter Winchester kicked off after Rowe’s touchdown . Winchester kicked the kick after Rowe's touchdown .
 Latin’s only score came from an 85 yard run by the Cantabs’ Purcell . The Cantabs' Purcell ran 85 yards along the sidelines with a great individual effort for Latin .
 The Sachems scored their fourth and final touchdown in the final stanza . Captain Bellino got away on a twisting, dodging, faking run, 43 long yards for the score . The score was 43 yards .
 Captain Bellino scored 16 points on two touchdowns and two conversions to lead the Sachem scorers . The Sachem coach led the team to victory .
 Purcell played both quarter and halfback for Cambridge . Purcell did the bulk of the Cambridge carrying .
 Two passes dropped in the end zone didn’t help Winchester’s offensive record any more . Winchester's offensive record is 0-0 . Winchester has a record of 1-0 in the season .
 It, Covcll : le, Phillips; qb, Reveira : rhb, Coleman ; lhb, Purcell ; fb, Cellineri . Reveira, Coleman and Purcell are featured in this article .
 Winchester defeats Cambridge Latin 30-0 . Bellino 2, Benineasa 2, Rowe, Purcell 2 and Rowe 2 .
 Red and Black Harriers won their second straight on riday, October 6, by defeating Revere, 16 to 44 . Field Judge, Spellman Sachem Harriers Outleg Revere .
 Farrell, Brown, Osborne, Becker, Ekstrom, Bird and Reuter are especially outstanding, he says .
 It is both an individual and a team sport, calling for courage, stamina and intelligence, but no outstanding physique . The sport is both individual and team sport .
 Any boy who wants to work it it can do well over the hills ind dales, even though he may never he a champion . Any boy with a good work ethic can work it, even if he wants to be a champion, he says .
 When you see l group of boys running cross ountry, doff your hat to them . Doff Your hat to the boys who are running cross-country .
 During the first half of the race Dee and Anderson were battling for the lead with Johnson following close on their heels . Anderson and Dee were leading the race for the first time in a row .
 Bucky Johnson soon proved himself the master of the course as he overtook Dee and Anderson and went on to win the race in 17m 12s. 12 .
 This proved to be the fastest time on the home course in the past two years . It is the fastest run on the course in two years, according to the team .
 Steve Dee running his best race since joining the club was a close second to Steve Dee . Steve Dee's best race was his best ever since joining from the club .
 The Harriers had excellent grouping with Johnson, Dee, Scherban and Anderson, all coming in within 15 seconds of each other .
 Bird, Gallagher and Guiliani took 6th, 7th, and 11th places for the home team . Bird and Gallagher were in 3rd, 4th, 5th and 7th place for the team .
 The ruggedness of the course which runs up South Border Road and through the Fells proved to be too much for the hoys from Revere who could only place one man in the first seven .
 Gerry Hills was the top scorer for the Sachems and was followed to the finish line by Harrington, Kirkpatrick, Goethals and Callahan . Gerry Hills scored the top score for the team .
 Winchester High faces a crucial football game in its Middlesex League series Saturday afternoon . Lexington 1 1 igh School football team riding the crest of an undefeated season thus far, with three wins in three games . Winchester High will face Lexington in the game at Manchester Field at I :30.
 Lexington has a new coach this year, Johnny Janusas, an old Lexington football and Boston College luminary, who until this fall coached Saugus . He is a former coach at Boston College and now coaches Lexington .
 The old Lexington “blue,” has the Minuteboys up and rarin’ to go . The Minuteboys have a record to date, and their record is impressive .
 The Blue and Gold opened well in the Middlesex League Bay State League jamboree . They beat Framingham and Natick 6-0 in their opening game .
 Stoneham is the team that clobbered Winchester 22-8 two weeks ago . Winchester won the game 22-7 . Stoneham has won the last two weeks . Winchester beat Stoneham 22-9 .
 The whole town is talking football over in Lexington and there will probably be a big crowd of rooters following the team to Winchester Saturday . The team will play the University of Lexington at Winchester on Saturday .
 Lexington and Winchester meet Winchester in football competition . The Minuteboys feel this is their year against the Sachems . Lexington has won the last two years of the competition .
 Not a few local fans are picking the visitors Saturday . The Sachems came back last Saturday to outclass Cambridge Latin, 306, last Saturday .
 Winchester has a two and one record, beating Concord and Cambridge Latin and losing to Stoneham . Winchester also has a record of two-and-one against Lexington .
 Coach Knowlton was far from pleased with his charges showing at Cambridge last Saturday . The dropping of two touchdown passes in the end zone by no means adding to his pleasure .
 Winchester will play Lexington at Lexington on Saturday . Winchester has been working hard this week in anticipation of a tough game .
 A couple of breaks or so could have made a different ball game out of that Stoneham thing . Stoneham was beaten 3-1 in the first half of the game .
 Nites to 9 PJi. aprl3-tf Student notebooks, paper and dividers at the Star office, 3 Church Street .
 Builtin “equalizing” factor — gives slower or younger players same opportunity as experienced players . Builtin "equalizing" factor gives younger or older players same chance as experienced .
 All letters and word points rated according to usage from a standard dictionary . Standard dictionary which means over 20,000 usable words . All letters, words, letters and words rated for usage .
 Play tested, evaluated, evaluated . helps develop competitive instinct, manual dexterity . Full-play test helps develop your competitive instinct .
 All parts of Hi-impaet plastic and metal are constructed with long-lasting quality . The Hi-Impaet is a Hi-impet plastic .
 Holy Name Society of the Immaculate Conception Church held its first meeting of the season . Rev. Erskine N White Holy Name’s first meeting was held on Sunday, October 8, in honor of Mass .
 The members of the Society gathered in the school hall for an enthusiastic group discussion of the interests of the society .
 The guest speaker was Father O’Hara, a Maryknoll missionary, who gave a very enlightening talk on the Catholic Church in Bolivia and Peru .
 Stove Kimball loads the group as president, with Joan Zrodowski, Don McClellan, treasurer, Kearln Richmond., recording secretary; Rebecca Fitts, recording secretary . Don McCallan is treasurer; Kearl Richmond is recording secretary.
 Deborah Price and Lyndy Lyndy a r ) are helping to make this year's best year ever .
 The new seminarian advisor, Robert Winter, and the Parents’ Advisory Board have provided the Y.P.F. with an exciting and enjoyable program . Robert Winter and the parents' advisory board have provided an exciting program for the students .
 Next Sunday, October 15, will be a Corporate Communion at 8:00m. in the church, followed by a delicious breakfast in Hadley Hall .
 The series will feature speakers from an alcoholics’ group and should prove to be quite interesting . The series of speakers will be from a group of alcoholics .
 The pad will be open like from 8:00-11:30 m.m. with beat-eats furnished and cokes for sale . The pad is open from 8 to 11:30 a.m., with Beat-Eats furnished .
 Helen Miller Swift, known to her intimates as “Bunny” Swift, is known in Winchester, as Mrs. Swift . "Second Semester” is another story of girls’ college life by the author .
 Wyman School’s auditorium transformed into a sidewalk cafe . The cafe is decorated with flowers, travel posters, and travel posters .
 Music by Roger Ca rpenter and the popular Meltones will start your toes tapping as soon as you enter the door .
 Winchester merchants will again provide exciting door prizes with an added prize for the purchaser of a lucky corsage . The event will take place in Winchester, Winchester, on Saturday, August 31 .
 Rob ert Tesar, is enthusiastically plan ning an evening of fun for all with her committee . The event will be held at the end of October 31 at 7pm .
 Robert West water; refreshments, refreshment, Mrs John Shanahan; and publicity, Mrs Russell Zimmer . Robert West was awarded water by Mrs West water .
 These tillers can help turn a sparse stand of grass into a nicely filled-out turf . If plants have the nutrition they need for proper growth, they will need to be nourished .
 A feeding of protein-building turf builder® can do more for your lawn at this time than at almost any other season . That’s why a feeding of grass grass is more important than at any other time .
 Those who read her previous book, "First Semester," might believe ‘Second Semester’ is a sequal . “Second Semency’s” is a sequel to her first book, “The First Semester,” she says .
 It would have been nice to follow the principal characters of that first tale of freshman college life, Betsy Dal rymple and Jan Cornwall, a bit further to see if their friendship really jelled .
 Principal characters in “Second Semester’s” are “Ginny” Newhall and Carrie Ford, an oddly assorted pair who are thrown together as roommates just before midyears .
 She had left that college badly mixed up, with poor marks and unhappy memories, largely due to the fact Beck of Winchester was there . She had also left the school with unhappy memories of her time there .
 She is shown with her daughter Pamela, who is proudly holding her very own hank book, a gift from the popular supermarket .
 Converse opened the account for Pamela at the Winchester Savings Bank, with an initial $3 interest-earning deposit . The account is free as a bonus for $99 worth of green tapes . Pamela's account includes a $99 green tape .
 Beck now plans to deposit all her $2 Converse bonuses in Pam’s account, using bank-by-mail envelopes . Beck says she plans to use the envelopes to deposit the bonuses .
 The new Converse gift accounts are already being used by many women in the U.S. and beyond .
 Junior Florence Crittenton Circle has already signed some top talent for its big charity entertainment to be held Friday evening, October 27, in the High School Auditorium commencing at 9:00 o'clock .
 The ‘Show Toppers” and the ‘Four Rascals” will be featured . A delightful party and reception was given to Mrs. Mrs. Barbara Jones .
 Doris Wiklund, retiring Visiting Nursing Association director, is retiring Thursday evening . Wiklund is retiring at the end of her career in nursing circles .
 William Spaulding opened her home on Main Street for this very pleasant party sponsored by the present W.V.N.A. board, and and since both are talented and exmany of Mrs. Spauldings .
 Wiklund’s friends perienced groups their efforts are and co-workers came to wish her 3ure to please. well as she takes up her new life j The ‘Show Toppers’ are an excitin Peterboro, N.H., where she will
 W.V.N.A. has become a generPoHshed well-balanced program ents . She was trying to live up to alized public health agency work .
 Wiklund’s experienced of the founder of U.S.C.C., get her guidance and understanding for into that college and give her the this improved public health service chance to be herself and stand on .
 Her hosts of friends wish her Godspeed and she will be glad to see or hear from them at her new address, East Sullivan, N.H. her own feet . Her new address will be East Sullivan .
 Carrie, her roommate, comes from a farming family, is earning her way at college and is there to get an education . Carrie, a student at the University of North Carolina, is also a student in the U.S. State of Columbia .
 To her college is a privilege and she has no time for fun on campus or in the dorms, she says . She says she has 'no time' for fun in college or dorms .
 She has actually so dedicated herself to work and study that she thinks any sort of good time is not for her . She has been dedicated to her studies and her studies .
 We 3-1720 27 Luke Avenue, Woburn janl2-tf make a sorority and to enter into help given us . Conlon Conlon FUEL SERVICE Oil Burner Installations All Work Guur an teed Time Puymentg WE 3-
 A station wagon the social swing of things. loaded with flowers, vegetables loaded with vegetables. loaded up with flowers and vegetables . The station wagon is the perfect vehicle for a station wagon .
 Chester each gets something Chester every Tuesday morning for from the other . The girls work out their own salcooked and canned goods left Winvation .
 Carrie’s example various settlement houses in Bosprompts ‘Ginny’ to really study ton. and watch her diet . Special thanks are due the womis able to make her sober, self conon who represented each church scious roommate realize that there and
 Aided by a book on psychology, ey’s “Rocky Ledge Farm,” and the written by a friend of ‘Ginny’�s” Winchester Conservatory, it was written by “Ginney’’
 Both learn from ‘Uncle Mai's’s’ book that the only real happiness comes with giving something of yourselves to others . Both learn that the best happiness comes from giving something to others.
 Swift’s latest book will bring back to college people pleasant memories of their undergraduate days . Swift's latest book is expected to bring back memories of the college days .
 Some pros and cons of joining sororities, how the girls feel about the good night kiss and “pawing,” especially on the first date . There is a difference between the “townies” at the college and the other students, the author says
 There is some good practical psychology running through “Second Semester’s” Though primarily for teen agers, many adults will enjoy the book .
 Gordon Bennett Tickle-Um Theatre Marionettes to be presented in the McCall Junior High School Auditorium . The Fortnightly Presents Children’s Event will be on October 28 .
 The College Club Art Group will hold its first Museum meeting at the He Cordova Museum of Art in Lincoln, on Friday morning, October 20 .
 Those who have visited this unique museum in previous years will )ook forward to this trip . For those who have never been there, a rich experience is in store for those .
 There is no museum more beautifully located high on a hill, overlooking the lake, and surrounded by autumn foliage at the time of year .
 Inside there is also an exciting feast for the eyes; for the large exhibition of paintings owned by Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Artworks .
 Those are paintings of real significance, which have been ac claimed by all reviewers as one of the outstanding exhibitions of the season .
 The pictures represent the steady stream of art from the early Impressionists, such as Mo net and Renior, down through the European Abstract Expressionists .
 Members of the College Club Art Group can't afford to miss this opportunity of seeing these paintings and hearing Miss Jane Miller of the De Cordova staff talk about them . Miss Miller will talk about the paintings .
 There are several ways to get to Bedford Road from Arlington to Lincoln . Follow Pleasant Street in Arlington to Route 2; on Route 2, go toward Lincoln for about 7 miles . Bedford Road is about seven miles from Lincoln .
 At another sign turn right on Sandy Pond Road and go a short distance to the Museum . Go to the museum at the end of this article .
 After the meeting many may wish to have luncheon at Hartwell Farm or at the 1775 House, both of which e near .
 Ronold King, this year’s chairman, outlined a most interesting program for the coming season . King: "Ronold King is a very interesting chairman of the board"
 King's enthusiasm for the year’s program was contagious, and all present are looking forward eagerly to these Museum trips . All present were looking forward to the trips .
 The plans include the Addison Gallery in Andover on Nov. and the Boston Museum of Fine Arts on Dec. Dec. and equally interesting trips each month through April .
 One week before each trip, those who have enrolled as members will receive notices . There will also be articles in The Star with information about the exhibitions .
 First meeting of Antiques Study Group will be held on Tuesj day, October 17, at 7:45m., at 7.45m. Monday morning, October 16, police will patrol every highway and hook drivers .
 Charles Greene will i amuse us with a review of a hook ! — -Treasures and Trash. Charles Greene . Charles Greene review of the hook ! Charles Greene reviews of a new book .
 If memvehicles without green inspection * H>rs have a special fan or fans, do stickers. j bring them. H>r have special fans or special fans, j bring stickers. J>rs need stickers.
 The program planned for prospective student nurses will include a guided tour of the Hospital and a panel discussion on the life of a student nurse at Beth Israel Hospital . The program is planned for the prospective student nurse .
 A Companion to Murder, by Edward Shew Dinosaurs, by Edwin Colbert Education and Income, by Patricia Sexton Folklore a n d Symbolism of lants uikl Trees .
 The Preparation of Art For Reproduction, by S Ralph Maurello Introducing Seashells, by Robert Abbott Letters Letters, by Henry Mencken Minerals for Atomic Energy, by . Henry Mencksen . Minerals For Atomic Energy was by Robert Nininger,
 WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH is located on Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev. Rev. David Wright will lead the charge at the Winchester Union Church .
 A Male Choir will sing and the Deacons and other men will participate in the service . 5:00m.
 The Senior High P.F. will go to Lynnflold Center for u Woburn Ansocintion Rally . Senior High will be taking part in the rally . The rally will be held at the Lynn Flold Center .
 Pharmacy has made contributions to the liberation of mankind from pain and illness . The pages of recorded history are replete with the contributions of Pharmacy . Pharmacy is a vital part of the healing process of life and medicine .
 Open daily except Sundays and holidays from 11.m. to 4m Sunday, October 15 . Open at 11:46m. Sunday, 11:45m. 9.46m Sunday .
 Junior High Fellowship, About Myself,” worship, refreshments, unRonald Ondrejka and Miss Mary A Skruta. 6:30 a.m.
 Adult Discussion Group on Testa of a Living (Church) at home of Mr and Mrs. Testa .
 Women’s Fellowship, all CirOne of the correlative citations to bfl c leH, dessert and coffee, play ""Wing My" Women's Fellowship .
 This is the ‘beauty of Friday, October 20. holiness’ that when Truth heals the sick, 8:00m. 8:30m.
 EMBASSY Laundry & Dry Cleaning 5 Park Street, Winchester, Mass. Shirts Laundered in 24 Hours Same-Day Dry cleaning Service on most Garments . Two-Day Tailoring Service on Most Garments on most .
 NEW HOPE BAPTIST CHURCH. Church is located on Cross Street near Washington Street . Rev. Roy W Horn, Prop. Roy Horn is a member of the New Hope Baptist Church .
 Carlton Helgerson, Pastor Baptist Baptist Baptist Evangelistic Evangelistic Non Denominational 9:30 a.m. ET. ET .
 Miss Dotli VonVelson, an exchange student from Germany, will be the speaker . She will speak at Melrose High School and the Melrose Methodist Church .
 Important business including the proposed Church Budget for 1961 . very member of the Board ahould be present .
 Autobridge lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners . Autobridge is a game that lets players play bridge anywhere by themselves and have partners . The game is now available in the U.S.
 Winchester Star features the official aluminum duplicate bridge boards and the advanced course in contract bridge . See this fascinating game at the Winchester Star, also the official duplicate bridge board .
 This week’s picture is of the old Hawes Brothers livery stable that stood years ago on what later was a part of old Manchester Field after the cleanup and improvement campaign instituted by the late Forrest C Manchester . This week's picture in the Star's Remember When series is of
 The stable stood beside the Al>erjona River adjacent to what is now Waterfield Road, roughly across the street from the present Post Office . It was located across the riverbank across the road from the post office .
 The P Waldmyer Tannery was built in the 1930s . The tall chimney of the chimney shows in the picture . Sharing the lot with it with it was the P WaldMYER Tannery .
 The tannery was situated beside the old Boston and Lowell, later the Boston & Maine Railroad . A spur track led from the main line to service the tannery . It was used to run a tannery in the area .
 Cutting Street was running beside the water down toward the present Cutting Street which leads off Manchester Road . The other side of the river from the stable was Cutting Street, running along the river . Cutting Street is now Cutting Street .
 A railroad freight yard was located beyond the Blanchard yard . Still later a railroad freight railyard was located .
 The balustrade showing in the picture is on the bridge over the river, which branched at Waterfield Road and went around the stable before rejoining the main stream south of the building .
 The owners of the livery stable, Ilawes Brothers, were Reuben C Hawes and Daniel Webster Hawes . The owners are Reuben and Daniel . Webster .
 The latter was for many years in the express business in Winches ter and the small building to the light of the stable was his express office . The former express office was the office of his express business .
 Reuben moved over to Glen Road to the big house on the left hand side of the Road at the bend, near Glen Green . The two brothers finally dissolv ed their partnership and moved over . Reuben's house is now on Glen Road, near the bend of Glen Green
 At the rear of his house he built another livery stable which he ran for a time . He also ran a stable at the back of his home .
 Webster, or “Web,” as he was familiarly known, joined with Dan iel Kelley in the firm of Kelley and Hawes . Webster was known for many years undertak ers and operators of a livery and express business .
 The two partners, both bearded, were familiar figures on the streets of Winchester for many years . They were both tall and spare and the other short and sturdy . The two men were known for their bearded, spare and sturdy figures .
 1962 “calendar towels” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 The marriage of Miss Mary Jane Elmore, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Elmore . The marriage was held in 1961 in New York City .
 Frank R Elmore of 18 FVeeman Street, Arlington, to Ensign Richard Francis Gibbons, USNR, son of Mr and Mrs. Elmore . Ensign Gibbons was son of Frank Elmore and Richard Elmore.
 John F Gibbons of 6 Worthon Road, took place Saturday morning, October 7, at St. Mary's Chapel .
 Miss Elmore wore a full length gown of white satin embroidered with Alencon lace and tiny seed pearls . She wore the gown .
 Her elbow length veil of silk illusion fell from a tiara of orange blossoms . She carried a cascade bouquet of white chrysanthemums, stephanotis and orchids .
 Miss Mary Elizabeth Buckley of Arlington was maid of honor . Miss Cornelia Curtin, also of Arlington, was bridesmaid . Miss Mary-Elizabeth Buckley was maid-of-honour .
 Both attendants wore sheaths of indigo blue taffeta with overskirts and carried cascade bouquets of chrysanthemums .
 John T Gibbons of Winchester was best man for his brother and ushering were Richard F Elmore of Arlington, brother of the bride . Ensign Terrance S McCormack, USNR, of Malden, was also a best man .
 The bride graduated from Matignon High School and State College in Boston in the class of 1960 . The bride, a teacher in the Medford school system, graduated from State College .
 Ensign Gibbons graduated from Winchester High School and Holy Cross College in the class of 1960 . Gibbons was a member of the class that he graduated from Holy Cross .
 The opening meeting of the Matignon Guild will be held Thursday, October 19, at 2:30m. in the school auditorium . The opening of the Guild is expected to be held in the School Auditorium .
 John H Flynn, spiritual advisor, and Sister M Lumena, C.S.J., supervisor of the school, will greet the members . Sister Lumena will be the school's supervisor .
 Clement F Mackey of Somerville, guild president, will present the officers and board of directors to the members . Clement F. Mackey will give a speech to members .
 Parents may visit the members of the faculty in their rooms at the school .
 Glamour Tips Fashionable Hair Colors for fall run lln* range from baby beige to deep black . Fashionable hair colors for fall season are available in beige, black and white .
 The ceremony was officiated at the 10 o’clock 1 ceremony . A reception followed at Hayes Steak House in Billerica .
 At the Immaculate Conception Church on Sunday afternoon October 1, Miss Nancy DeMinico, daughter of Mrs. Mrs. Caci-XcWi pi*'* ,v,\ AC ' w ' in ico . Miss Nancy is a member of the congregation .
 Frederico DeMinico of 56 Water Street, became the bride of Benjamin Anthony Caci, I son of Mr and Mrs. Caci . Frederico deMinico was married to Benjamin Anthony . Benjamin Anthony is the son of Benjamin Caci of Mr. and Mrs . Caci
 Herbert K A Driscoll, performed the marriage ceremony at 3:30 o’clock in a setI ting of large and small white pomJ pons . Herbert K. A. Driscolls performed the ceremony .
 A reception was held at Loban Post, Veterans of Foreign Wars Hall in Somerville . The event was held in honor of veterans .
 Given in marriage by her godfather, Philip Savage, Miss Bresnahan wore a white taffeta gown with a cathedral train .
 Her fingertip veil was caught to a Camelot style headpiece . She carried a bouquet of white carnations, chrysanthemums and stephanotis .
 Miss Mary Doherty of Winchester was maid of honor and the bridesmaids were Miss Esther Guidi of Chelsea, Miss Sandra Humphrey of Woburn, Miss Joanne Cuffre of Winchester and Miss Patricia McEnery of Medford, cousin of the bridegroom
 Miss Linda Allen of Woburn, sister of the bridegroom, was junior bridesmaid . She was the bride's sister to the newlyweds .
 The honor maid wore a red taffeta dress with a white cummerbund and full length sleeves . She was the honor maid at the ceremony .
 Her matching crown was adorned with pearls and she carried a bouquet of red and white carnations and chrysanthemums . She also carried a matching crown adorned by pearls .
 The bridesmaids wore dresses having white bodices and red skirts with white cummerbunds . Bridesmaid's wore dresses with white cami-bundeds .
 They also wore red crowns decorated with pearls and carried white carnations . Red crowns also wore pearls, and carried red carnations with them .
 Bresnahan, mother of the bride, wore royal blue with matching accessories and a white orchid .
 Allen, wore a pink orchid with her cocoa brown dress and matching accessories . Allen wore the orchid dress to celebrate her birthday .
 After a wedding journey to Williamsburg, Va. and Montreal Canada, Mr and Mrs. Canada, the newlyweds are now married .
 C A. fashion show bv Monet planned to benefit the many animals less fortunate that t hem two pedigreed prize winners . Monet was inspired by Monet's work on the Monet collection .
 Studio Guild assembled for their first meeting w r ith their director, Robert E Grady of Concord, Concord .
 The walls of the studio were hung with i fine collection of oils, watercolors, wood block prints, pastels and other media, making a colorful background .
 Each and every picture received a careful and interesting evaluation, helpful for all the members of the group .
 Especial attention was given to the dissimilarity of the pictures, not only in techniques, but in composition and color, and most of all, in ideas .
 There is Winchester interest in the marriage which took place re cently at the Nevvtonville Methodist Church . Miss Alison Gifford, daughter of the Rev. and Mrs. Giffords, was married to Mrs. Alison in a ceremony held at the Methodist Church in Nevv
 Hamilton Miller Gifford of West Newton, formerly of Winchester, became the bride of James Moffatt Larden, son of Mr and Mrs. Larden . Mr Moffatt was born in Winchester, Winchester .
 Gifford, former pastor of Crawford Memorial Church, officiated at the two o’clock cere mony . Ceremony followed by a reception at the church .
 The bride wore a Chantilly lace gown over peau de soie with a scalloped neckline, three-quarter sleeves and chapel train .
 She wore a fingertip veil and carried a cascading bouquet of stephanotis, valley lilies and white roses .
 Miss Gail Atwood of Waban was maid of honor and the bridesmaids were Miss Dianne Gifford of Stratham, Miss Sheri Blair and Mrs. Blair . Mrs. Atwood, Miss Gafford and Mrs Blair were bridesidesmaid and brides
 The honor maid wore a dress of blue chiffon with a velvet hat and carried pink carnations and snapdragons . She was the honor maid at the ceremony .
 The bridesmaids were similarly gowned and carried cascade bouquets of pink carnations . The bride and her sister were dressed in similar outfits .
 Donald Ford of Lexington was Mr Larden’s best man, and ushers were James and Peter Gifford of West Newton, brothers of the bride Richard Hussey of Reading and Arthur Glass of Newton . Donald Ford, Donald Ford and Peter Foggord of Lexington, were
 After a wedding journey to Bermuda Mr Larden and his bride will make their home in Waltham . The couple will move to the city from Bermuda .
 The Parish of the Epiphany promises a jovial feast or festival on Wednesday, October 25 . The dictionary says “Carousal” — the dictionary . – the dictionary says . “A Carousal.” - the dictionary. says ‘a j
 A buffet-style, home-cooked dinner will be served from six to seven thirty . The event will be held at 6 to 7:30 a.m.
 Ton Harner, PA 9-3561; or stop by the church office to pick up a ticket .
 A “merry-go-round’s bazaar, with food, fun and frolic for old and young, is a bazaar . A ‘merry go-round,’ with food and fun for old, young and old . A "mer
 Booths will display and sell aprons, books, gift wrappings, knit articles, plants, stamps and toys . Not to forget a white elephant table .
 There will be two settings for luncheon, one at 12:00 o’clock and one 12:45 . The luncheon will be held at 12-00 o'clock and 12-45 .
 pony rides for pie-school children will be in order from 2:00 to 3:30 Thursday afternoon .
 Everyone, residing in or out of Winchester, is invited to come and make merry . Winchester residents are invited to make merry. Winchester residents will be invited to join in .
 J, swor on as £ ncjacjecl lh, ll/iss *1 1 j onto nefaejee ddnsig^n EccLr Mr and Mrs. J, Swor .
 Miss Suzanne Grace Wadsworth is engaged to Mr Victor Havelock Jonas, son of Mr and Mrs. Herbert Todd Wadsworth of Winchester, and Duxbury .
 Mrs. Frederick William Aseltine of 7 Cabot Street and the late Mr. Frederick William Aselstine, also Mrs. Mrs. Aselteine, were both deceased . Mrs. Freda Aseline was married to Mr. William William . Frederick William
 Miss Ann Monro is engaged to Ensign Robert Addison Becker, U.S.N.R., son of Mr and Mrs. John U Monro of Cambridge, formerly of Winchester . The engagement is announced by Miss Monro's parents, Mrs. Monro and Mr Becker
 She is a member of the Greater Boston Lasell Club, which she is secretary . She is secretary of the club .
 They are both graduates of Winchester High School, class of 1956 . Miss Ann and Miss Ann have been married for more than 60 years .
 Miss Monro was graduated from Colby College in 1960, and from Katharine Gibbs School in 1961 .
 Ensign Becker was graduated from Dartmouth College in 1960 . Becker graduated from the Amos Tuck School of Business Administration in 1961 . Becker was a member of the Dartmouth College class .
 Winchester's 8-year-old male singing group announces plans to organize a new male quartet . The Two By Fours is a double quartet that has proven so popular in the area . The group is eight years old .
 The new group will be made up of four singers not now in the organization . The group will include four singers from the organization not now .
 Two By Four arrangements will be available to the quartet . The quartet will plan its own appearances .
 Buffet I bis will be served on riiursduy and Saturday evenings in our Dining Room . Auditions will be held October 23 at 8:30m., at 11 Wildwood Street .
 Quality Footwear for men, women and children since 1 II 6 B Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15 in. to 5:30m. Quality footwear for men and women .
 Infant Saviour Guild Guild Plans Tea at Gore Place in Waltham on Wednesday, October 18, at 1:30m. The Guild of the Infant .
 Anyone desiring reservations should communicate with a member of the committee . Anyone with reservations should contact a committee member .
 She was given in marriage by her brother, John F DeMinico . She was married to a man she married to .
 She wore a gown of white peau de soie with a re-embroidered lace bodice fashioned with a scoop neckline and three-quarter sleeves .
 Her draped skirt terminated in a court train and she wore a threetiered veil of French illusion caught to a crown of pearls . The Duchess of Cambridge wore a court-length dress .
 She wore a dress of pink taffeta with a Sabrine neckline, scoop back and an inset waist having two bows at the back .
 William Doherty of Stoneham, sister of the bridegroom; and Miss Charlotte De Rosa of Somerville, cousin of bride, were bridesmaids . Miss Charlotte and Miss William De Rosa, cousin-of-the-bridegroom, were also bridemaid
 They wore royal blue taffeta dresses like that of the honor attendant and carried cascades of yellow pompons . The honor attendants wore the same dress as the honor attendants .
 DeMinico, mother of the bride, wore black chiffon with blending accessories and a corsage of fall flowers .
 Caci, also wore fall flowers with her mink brown peau de soie gown and flowered hat .
 William Caci of Winchester was his brother’s best man, and ushering were Michael DeMinico of Winchester, brother of the bride, and Frank Rallo of Winchester . William Doherty of Stoneham, brother in law of bridegroom, was best man .
 John G Lindsey announces the engagement of her daughter Elinor to Joseph Neville of Roxbury, son of Mr and Mrs. Neville . The engagement is announced by Mrs. Lindsey . Joseph Neville is the son of John Lindsey and Joseph Lindsey .
 Christopher A Powers of 37 Pond Street announce the engagement of their daughter . The Powers are engaged to Christopher A. Powers . The couple have been married for more than 20 years .
 Arthur Hydren of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Laconia N.H., formerly of Belmont, N.Y., was awarded the title of best man of all time . He was married to Robert Hydren, who was in Belmont .
 Miss Lindsey is a graduate of Winchester High School class of 1960 and at present is a secretary at John Hancock M utua l Life Insurance Company . Miss Lindsey was a member of the Winchester School Class of 1960 .
 Charles R Fish of 20 Myrtle Street announces the engagement of her daughter, Martha Louise Fish, to Jack Everett Moore, son of Mr and Mrs. Moore . Charles Fish is the father of Martha Louise and Martha Louise . Martha Louise is engaged to Jack . Everett Moore .
 Miss Fish was graduated from Becker Junior College in 1960 and is presently employed at the Lahey Clinic in Boston . Miss Fish, also the daughter of the late Mr Charles R Fish, was graduated in 1960 . She is currently employed in Boston, Massachusetts .
 Her fiance, a corpsman in the U.S. Navy, is stationed in Bermuda . Her fiance is now stationed in the United States .
 Friday and Saturday evenings will emanate from the “Castle on Mt. Mt. Waltz Evening Tomorrow And Saturday . Waltz evening tomorrow and Saturday nights will be Saturday nights .
 The Friends of the Winchester Hospital and their friends will enjoy the long-awaited Waltz Evening . The event will take place at the hospital in Vernon, Vermont .
 The Winchester Hospital dance will be one of the most beautiful of the entire social season . The event will benefit the Winchester Hospital .
 At this printing, there may still be a few reservations available by calling Mrs. Mrs. Johnson at this printing .
 A list of patrons and patronesses and of dinner parties being given before Waltz Evening may be found elsewhere .
 Miss Powers is employed by Goodrich-High Voltage Astronautics, Inc., of Burlington, Vermont . Miss Powers works in Burlington .
 Fall meeting of the Friends of the Winchester Hospital will be held at Crawford Memorial Methodist Church in Winchester on Thursday, October 26th .
 The meeting commencing at 3:00m., will be dedicated to the “Candy Stripers” The junior volunteers who worked so faithfully at the hospital during the past year will be honored .
 Harry P Hood, Jr., Jr., Progam Chairman, has planned a most interesting meeting . Progam chairman: "Harry P Hood Jr. has planned an interesting meeting"
 There will be a brief program including slides on PDo’s and Donts” for volunteers, after which a special social hour will be held for the young people . Awards will be presented to these volunteers .
 Some “bargain’s” sheets are treated with an exeessive amount of sizing to give them bod\ and crispness . Some ‘bargains’ sheets are often treated with a large amount of size .
 When they are laundered, ihi* filler goes down the drain and you re in for a sad awakening . When they're laundered they're going to be washed out .
 17-day Thrift Tours to Europe, including the round-trip air fare, begin as low as S439.00.00 .
 HERBERT PHILBRICK LED THREE LIVES, Counterspy, Citizen. iiikI Pseudo-Communist. Will be in Winchester next Thursday, October 19th . Herbert . PHIL BRICK LED three lives, including three lives of Herbert .
 ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 deel 5~tf FLOORS CARPENTERS Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry .
 FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS have been working together since 1914 . Landscaping and trucking are the company's first major contractors .
 PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 augl2-tf DRESSMAKING ALTERATIONS See this number jotting it down .
 WILLIAM BUTTS 10 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 *t5-4t ELECTRICIAN ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. We are happy to provide an easy-to-be-easy job .
 Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Rugs, also Rubbish Removal . Metal Furnace removed, Iron removed, and Rugs removed from homes .
 Free ESTIMATES we 3-6069 BR 2-3437 auyrlt-tf PAINTING — PAPERING James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage . PIANOS PIANO Care Tuning — Reconditioning
 1960 Ford Galnxi*. 4-door hardtop, powor st*M*ring, now tiri*s and battery F.xrMlont condition . Gall a 3-4 PA 9FOR SALE FOR SALE .
 1953 DeSoto nedan. good engine. goo. Call PA 9-341 R FOR SALE — 1953 De-Soto .
 Call PA 9-1299, WANTED— Ride to ~r 7 Rillerle* for 7 :3<)m.m. Call 9-28H0 after 5:39. Call Pennsylvania 9-129, WANTed to ride to 7:
 Former Winchester resident returning to Winchester wishes to buy . Winchester resident wants to buy a home for a family with 3 children . Do you hnv a ln'ii to uiit a . family with three children? Call the Winchester Police Department on 1-800-273-8
 Owner please Call PA 9-0141 HELP WANTED . Woman to rk> afternoon and evening habyaitting. Owner please call Pennsylvania 9-141 .
 High school girl to do baby sitting afternoons and evemings, Call PA 9-1292. Call 9- 1292. Want a baby sit? Call Pennsylvania 9/1292 .
 Hus pushbutton control, automatic clock timer, oven door and storage drawer . nt. console light, glass oven door, storage drawer and oven door are available .
 Dental as slstant-secretary, part-time, Wincheate Mature Mature |K»rson preferred . FEMALE HELP WANTED Dental .
 FEMALE HELP WANTED - A vary in tereating opening for a good nocrvtary who likes a variety of duties and meeting the public . FEMEMALE HELTER WANTED . A good female who likes to meet the public is needed .
 F’or interview will EX 6-&054. oct5-2t FEMALE HELP WANTED— Office position in executive office of the Corporation . Candidate must be excellent typiBt and like detailed record keeping, 35 hour work week, 3 weeks paid vacation
 Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, gravel, sand and brick, all types, flue liners, drain pipe, cesspool o overs, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heatilators .
 WEUs 50570. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants . We use remnants to make things feel more like dirt .
 Experienced woman would like part-time office position or typing at home and call for and deliver work . Work WANTED WANTED: Experienced female would like office position .
 Christmas display, all colaatlc. life size reindeer, large Santa and sleigh, large manger and nativity scene Gothic window and angels, organ and choir boy’s with stand, . stand, bulbs, strings ant) star .
 Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location . Call PA 9-6285. octl2-4t .
 Work doing cooking and cleaning for 3 or 4 days it week . Call WElls 3-2334 . For Trumpet or Cornet lessons, contact Bob Mingolelli, PA 9-1625 .
 Eleotric Sewing Machine Repair Service. SEWING MACHINE SERVICE. Sewing Machine Service . SEWing MACHine Service.
 All makus including Japanese manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service . 35 years . of prompt and reliable service .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United Status and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by your Authorized Travel Agent .
 I<et uh know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you . I <et uh, know your plans and will be working with you. I <ET uh know .
 Our professional aervices discourage burglark's as well as maintaining neat and proper care of your property . We are happy to provide a service to the public .
 Travelers Home Service. aug3-tf commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . Middlesex is the most populous state of Massachusetts .
 CHARLES W KELLEY late of Winchester in Mid County, d<*ceasod. To all persona interested in the estate of Charles W. Kelley, d**ceaseod.
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a eortain instrument purporting to be the last will of naid deceased by LOUIL C KELLEY of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that ahe be uppointo«l executrix
 Witness: John C Leggat, Baquire, First Judge of sold Court, this seventh day of September 1961 . Witness: The Judge of Sale Court, John C. Legga .
 John V Harvey, Register. Register. Middlesex, as well as the Massachusetts County of Middlesex .
 A petition has been presented to aaid Court, for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said d«*ceus««»d by ALICE E YOUNG of Winchester .
 To all persons interested in the estate of MABEL L VINTON late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . The deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ROLAND R CARTER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex . A petition was presented to said .
 Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use . Oct. 5-3t Do It Youself lampbed and hardware .
 WeUs 8-0052. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS READING IMPROVEMENT. Classes— 6th through 12th grade students, Saturday mornings. Saturday mornings .
 For further information call Medford Reading Center EX 6-6321 or WA 3-0332 . For further support call Medford Reading Center at 6-6421 or EX 6 -6321 .
 Octl2-3t UPRIGHT PIANO, fair condition, anti stool may be hud for the moving . Call PA i 3132.
 For sale: Furnished apartment, fireplaced living room, bedroom, kitchen, full bath, and garage . For sale in the U.S. call the Salvation Army at 1-800-273-8255 .
 2nd floor.-rm. apt., flrepluced living room, screened poroh and sun porch . Call Ml 6-6250.
 WEUs 3 1947. aug7-tf . There is a way out. We are looking for a solution to the problem .
 The administratrix of said estate htfiH presented to said Court her first account for allowance and a petition for distribution of the balance in her hands .
 WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK is located in Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . The bank is the largest in the state .
 James S. KENNEDY, also known as JAMES S Kennedy and J SHERMAN KENNedy, late of Winchester in Winchester in said County. To all persons . interested in the estate of JAMES SHERman KennEDy, also
 A petition has been presented to the Court for prolxate of a certain instrument purporting to he the last will of said desi-sed by LOTTIE G KENNEDY of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a
 John V Harvey, Register.com: "Middlesex Middlesex" Middlesex. Middlesex, as well as Massachusetts, as. Massachusetts .
 Northwesterly by Englewood Road, sixty-eight and 50/100 feet: Southeasterly by Lot B on said plan, ninetyfour and 66-100 feet . Southwestersly by land <xf Franklin Pynn and land of Theresa C Me
 The premises will be subject to all unpaid taxes, tax titles, assessments, assessments and other municipal liens . The said premises will also be the subject of all unpaid tax titles .
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts is located in Middlesex, Middlesex .
 To all t>erson* interested in the estate of JAMES SIDNEY ALLEN, also known as James S ALLEN late of W i n Chester in Chester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the will of : BRADLEE K GAGE of Amherst in the County of Hampshire and SANEORI) T ABKLK of <Slou.-r.
 Esquire, First Judge, was Esquire and First Judge of 1901 .
 The undersigned owner of a single family residence building and store numbered 60 Harvard Street, located in a general residence district established by the Zoning By-Laws, hereby makes application for permission to alter the house for two-family use .
 That a public hearing be held thereon in the ottice of the Building Commissioner, 9 Mt. Mt. 9 . The hearing will be held at the building commissioner's building .
 Board of Appeal Gilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V French Daniel T Chane . COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, bs. Middlesex . Middlesex was a member of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts . The case was brought before the Board of Appeals .
 The estate of GRACE S BANCROFT, deceased of Winchester In . Aid County, deceased. Probate Court, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to aaid Court for probate of u certain Instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARION BANCROFT and VINCENT P CLARKE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex .
 Esquire John C Leggat was Esquire, Firat Judge of 9aid Court, this twentieth day of September 1961 .
 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add a room to existing dwelling numbered 66 Grove Street . The room is located less than fifteen feet from the lot line .
 Today's fees plus associated bills could upset even a foresighted family’s budget . But, where prolonged and/or special treatment is necessary, the fees are necessary, say experts .
 There’s where banks, such as ours, come in— with Personal Loans to meet medical costs . Banks, such a bank, can help meet the medical costs of a patient .
 The American Petroleum Institute has a new publication called "IIow To Keep Ahead of Your Kids" Learn By Looking .
 Free Guide to the Zoos, Museums and Aquariums within easy driving distance of your home . It's a free guide to the zoos, museums and aquariums .
 One of the best ways to satisfy youngsters’ thirst for new knowledge is to visit museums, zoos and aquariums . Make frequent trips to the nearby museums and zoos .
 There’s a wealth of zoological, archaeological and historical lore, as well as just plain fun, right within automobile reach of your home .
 Guide to Zoos, Museums and Aquariums in your locality . A key to these fascinating and rewarding sources of knowledge for your children, and you .
 After you watch the crowd at a hockey game when the referee makes a close decision against the home team, you have some idea of the problem of world peace . The crowd at the hockey game has an idea of how to deal with the problem .
 "What this country needs is a man who can be right and President at the same time," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "This country needs a leader who can't be both right and be right"
 Shelters are a pitiful token of our optimism that We might be able to survive another war, and at the same time of our pessimism that we cannot prevent war . We must therefore prepare for it, and therefore preparing for it .
 Annual Meeting of Winchester Co-operative Bank for the election of Directors anti Clerk will be held in the banking rooms November 6, 1961 at 2:00 P.M. An amendment to the by-laws relative to the signing of checks will be voted upon .
 1 Mt. Morris B Kerr, Clerk John B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED”
 Spring Lane took its name from a spring from which Spring Lane was named . Unless it rains there is little water on Water Street, there will be little on the street .
 The beacon that named Beacon Street has vanished into the misty past . There is neither fort nor hill at Fort Hill Square no dock at Dock Square, no corn on Cornhill, no school on School Street .
 It is said that cities are remembered by their streets, and if a street is known far and wide then the city is the city . It is also said that if a city is remembered by its streets, it is the best city .
 Streets are famous for other reasons, too, too; sometimes it is an individual . Sometimes it is a character of fiction. Sometimes it's an individual; in one case, at least, a character .
 Baker Street is synonymous with Sherlock Holmes and his garrulous companion, Dr. Dr. Sherlock Holmes . Baker Street was synonymous with Holmes and Dr. Holmes .
 As Downing Street holds the future of England, so Wall Street symbolizes the wealth of America . Wall St symbolizes wealth of the U.S.
 Tremont Street stands for Boston Common, the bright lights of the theatres, and the long array of shops . Tremont St. stands for the Boston Common .
 Harrison Avenue to the initiated means Chinatown and its restaurants, where almond-eyed Orientals serve chop suey and other supposedly Chinese dishes never heard of in their native land . Harrison Avenue is one of the streets of New York's Chinatown .
 Cornhill still remains the center of the secondand book trade . Charming old Cornhill is still a popular destination for second and third world literature .
 Bromfield Street was called Rawson’s Lane in 1701 but it didn’t take . Rawson's Lane is now Bromfield Park, London, on the footpath .
 The authorities tried Cushing’s Lane, then Hoar Lane and finally named it Bromfield . Bromfield was named after Edward Bromfield who lived there .
 Mr Bromfield, it seems, was a most devout man who, in order to worship in private, built an ora tory or small chapel there . He would retire there several times .
 Harry V Gilson, superintendent, and Richard Desjarlais, assistant superintendent, among the first to arrive early in the morning . Harry V. Gilson was superintendent. Richard DesJarlais was assistant superintendent . Richard Gilson is superintendent .
 By the end of the day the whole stair and many loads of files and materials had made the change. day. day . The whole stair was filled with people and materials .
 Today, grove, pasture, oratory and owner are gone, but his name seems destined to live . The name of the grove and oratory will live on the ground in his memory .
 Its old name of Savage’s Court failed to survive, but it onee gloried under the cognomen of Pie Alley .
 Henry’s Hole in the Wall featured a savory meat pie 50 years ago . Henry's Hole In the Wall is now located in downtown Chicago .
 Gridley’s Restaurant was succeeded by Thompson's Spa, both of whom served luscious pie .
 For many years there was in this little alley a pleasant tavern called the Bell-in-Hand . It was a favorite of printers and typesetters who worked nearby .
 In printing plants a considerable amount of loose type, often of different styles and sizes, will become thoroughly mixed up . Different types of type are often mixed up in printing plants .
 John Savage Shaghellion used to hide behind the newspaper with one eye on the bartender and the other on the door, hoping against hope that someone would come in and buy him a drink . The amazing raconteur, who used to live in the old ale house, used to
 When his thirst was assuaged, he would comb the cheese out of his whiskers, order another half mug of ale, and spin yarn af ter yarn in true sailor fashion .
 Robert W Reynolds, formerly of Winchester, announces the formation of Reynolds and Foster, Inc., a new agency specializing in advertising, sales promotion and related communications activities .
 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Rea. PA.9-0654 INStl. Rea .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . PArkriew 9-1062 FREE DELIVERSING ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 O'BRIEN'S LIquor MART 2153 Mystic Valley Parkway Medford, Mass. Ex 5-1317 is located in Medford . Ex-O'Brien's LIQUOR MART is located on the Mystic Valley Peninsula .
 A hospital superintendent had cautioned the nurses against discussing the merits of staff doctors in the presence of others .
 A nurse answered a phone call from a man whose wife needed hospital care . Soon after the lecture, he heard one of the nurses answering a hospital call from the man .
 The man evidently asked if there were doctors connected with the hospital . The man apparently asked if they were connected to the hospital.
 A man was carrying a grandfather’s clock down a crowded main street to a repair shop . A grandfather's clock was carried down the busy main street .
 As the clock limited his vision, he unintentionally collided with a woman, knocking her down . The woman was knocked down by the collision .
 The agency, located at 8 Newbury Street, Boston, is organized on a functional basis .
 Both Mr Reynolds and Mr Foster were recently with the Sutherland Abbott Agency in Boston .
 He is past president of the New England Chapter of the American Marketing Association . He served as Director of the local chapter of the Association of Industrial Advertisers .
 Inipalus, Bel Airs and Biscaynes . . . rieli new styling with jet-smooth ride . New styling .
 Every sale is hacked by Mirak’s 28-year reputation for honest dealing and quality service . Mirak's reputation is protected by the company's Ol R R protection .
 Meet the entire Chevy family for 1962 al Mirak's hliowrooms in 1 1 ic* heart of Arlington Center . The rooms are located in the heart of the Arlington Center in Arlington .
 Mr Ralph H Pingree attended the monthly meeting of the National Office Management Association held at the Boston Club, Beacon Hill, Boston on Thursday evening, September 28 . Mr Pingree of 50 Allen Road. Ave., Arlington Center Mission 3-8000 Pingree Attended .
 The guest speaker was Mr William McCarthy of Associated Industries of Massachusetts . McCarthy spoke to the chapter members on the New Wage and Hour Law .
 Mr Pingree is budget director for the Boston Insurance Company in Boston . He is active in the Institute of Internal Auditors and the National Society for Business Auditing .
 A special Volunteer Training I^*o gram for hospital volunteers, sponsored by Friends of the Winchester Hospital, will he held at the Wyman School in Winchester on October 24th .
 Richard J Clark, president of I the hospital staff, Miss Mar Marjorie j Snyder, director of r*irses, and Mr Reese James, hospita 1 administrator . Miss Marjory j Snyder is director of the r*IRses .
 This meeting is most highly recommended, and 10O per cent attendance is sincerely hoped for . Winchester Hospital volunteers should attend the meeting at Winchester Hospital, Winchester .
 Josephine La wore of Nigeria will speak to the families of the First Congregational Church on Sunday, October 15 at 4:30m. The event will be held at the church's First Congregation Church in Nairobi .
 They're available in the 3 styles shown here ... in a wide choice of colors . They’re available in a range of colors.
 Herbert Philbrick will speak at Winchester High School auditorium at 8:15m. tonight . Tickets will be available at the door of the auditorium for the talk here .
 Mr Philbrick’s talk, “Techniques for Combatting Communism,” will be presented under the auspices of the Women's Republican Club . The talk will take place at 8:30 p.m.
 Mr Philbrick gave up his family life and a promising career in advertising to join the anti-Communism movement . He shook the founCommunism nathe Justice nine eport .
 The report is expected to be made public within approximately ten days .
 At the meeting were Chairman of the Committee Rae D Anderson, Mr Arthur R Hills, and Mr R Ashley Lewis, members .
 The committee and Mr Sinclair went upstairs to the Selectmen’s chamber to discuss it with the board . Shortly after they concluded their East Room meeting, the committee went upstairs .
 Herman E Soule of Lexington, lacked up to put down his auto n an attempt to avoid hitting d by the Highway Department lie ear to extricate him . Mr Sinclair was toppled over on its side .
 Soule was rescuer ew, one of whom smashed the windshield of tl inchester Hospital by a passing motorist . The pol X-rayed for possible rib fracture, $500. Soule is a rescuer .
 Eleven Winchester High School seniors have been honored for high performance in the National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test given in Winchester last Spring . Winchester students were honored for their high performance . Winchester seniors were recognized for their efforts in the test .
 William Gordon, formerly of Ardley Place, now moved to Rockville, Maryland . William Gordon now lives in Rockville . Gordon was moved to the Rockville suburb of Rockville in 2009 .
 No Decision commissioned was by the Methods and Procedures Committee to study Winchester Town Hall office and clerical procedures in the summer of 1961 . The town meeting of March 1961 appropriated $2,000 for the study .
 Methods and Procedures Committee was authorized by the regular town meeting of March, 1960, to serve in an advisory capacity on procedures at town hall both to town meeting and to various town departments .
 The Methods and Procedures Committee received the report from Mr Sinclair and discussed it for the first time on Monday night . The report was described as 70 pages long and highly technical . It was described by the committee as a 'highly technical' report .
 Communists infiltrate ‘worthy groups’ or fake organizations with high sounding names for their own purposes . It is reported that the Methods of the Methods •unmittee hopes to meet with the Financ . He shows in his lectures techniques whereby Communists infiltrate 'worthy groups'
 Philbrick now operates a country store in New Hampshire, where he lives with his wife and five daughters .
 He now has time to indulge in his hobbies of photography and his home workshop and to play Hammond organ .
 November 20 is the probable date for the Special Town Meeting that will ask for $11,000 to complete the furnishing of the new Lynch Junior High School on Brantv Road . The meeting is expected to take place on November 20 .
 Lynch Junior High School Building Committee has a balance of $9,000 left in its accc . Some $20,000 is needed for the Lynch Jr. high school building committee .
 S Building Comm had not presented its list of iinal and specific expenses to the Selectmen . The Board of Sel< need High School Changes System Of Warning About Grades . Committee to discuss the report on November 6 .
 The report itself is divided into two parts, one describing existing procedures . The other is recommending various changes in procedure .
 The Star will report in greater detail on its contents when they are made available by the Methods Committee . The Methods Committee will report on the contents of the report .
 High School is experimenting with a new academic grade warning system . Principal \\ Howard Niblock announces the system .
 The Charles Playhouse opened its fifth season this week . Eugene O’Neill’s “The Great God Brown” lost to the Charles playhouse .
 The Charles had the talent, but O’Neill had obscurity, and in the theater the first inevitably bows to the last . "The Charles" is a classic classic, but the last will be a classic .
 Young actors like Dora Landey, Mitch Ryan, and Bronia Stefan are unable to provide first-rate theater . If you are hard put to determine why competent young actors like Landey and Mitch Ryan are unable, you’ve forgotten your early O’Neill .
 Young people staging one of O'Neill's most tiresome and heavy-handed plays, awash in a sea of contrived symbolism, pseudo-classicism, and one-a-minute messages . But these bright young people are staging .
 Students whose midterm grades were below passing or unsatisfactory have been sent home with cards to be signed by their parents and returned . Heretofore, students whose grades had been below passing were sent home .
 Students in this category will be given a sheet which advises them of their poor work in a given subject . The sheet includes a description of the teacher's assessment of the problem .
 It requests the students’ signature only but does suggest that parent-teacher conferences “often” are helpful in this situation . The letter is requested by students' signature only .
 List of additional expenses from the Lynch building committee some time this week . WARNING: GRAPHIC IMAGES .
 List will include expenditures for building fences around the well sites on school property and various hooks and furnishings . It is understood that the list will also include expenditures to build fences around well sites .
 A dinner was given last Friday evening for one of this town’s most civic-minded citizens . The dinner was held in honor of one of the town's citizens .
 Joe Moffett retired as active chief of the Winchester Auxiliary Police . The occasion was in recognition of his retirement from active chief . Moffett is a retired police officer .
 He has been actively connected with this organization since the critical days before World War II . He has given unstintingly of his time and money to make it the finest unit of its type in the state .
 When Joe took the office of auxiliary chief back in ’58 his steps made a more positive stride in the direction of fulfilling his fondest dream, that the auxiliary force would be second to none . The auxiliary force is now a strength force in the United States .
 At this time Joe can sit back and watch with pride and confidence as the unit progresses in the capable hands of our new auxiliary chief, Fred Wier .
 To you, Joe Moffett, every man extends his heartfelt thanks and will strive to earn your future respect and guidance . "To you, I will always be proud of you," Moffett said .
 Richard Snell and his four children recently returned to the States after spending two years in Taranto, Italy . Richard G Snell recently spent two years with his wife and four children living in Italy .
 The variance is necessary because the site on which it is proposed to build comprises land in the heavy and light industrial districts and in the general residence district . The variance was necessary because of the land on which the site is proposed, it is located in the industrial districts .
 Zoning regulations forbid the erection of convalescent or nursing homes in light industrial and general residence districts . Convalescent and nursing homes are banned from light industrial areas .
 There is a question whether in this instance the zoning restriction would apply to the land in the heavy industrial district . There is also a question if the restriction would be applied to the site .
 John S Morgan, Jr., of Church Street, is acting as attorney for Mr Carver and told the Star that his client is now operating nursing homes elsewhere . Mr Morgan is planning a chain of such establishments to include the one he hopes to build in Winchester .
 This is to he an attractive two and one-half story brick brick building of 82 bed capacity . The 82-bed building has 82 beds capacity . This is a two and a half story brick building .
 There is in Winchester no social organization devoted to the general interests of the men in this town . Winchester, Winchester, has a population of 6,000 people .
 The Men's Club organized at the First Congregational Church has been functioning for many years with programs of this character . The Men’s Club is now a permanent fixture in the community .
 Several years ago this club adopted the Hancock plan so successful in Lexington, Kentucky . A single fee covers the expense of meals served at the seven scheduled meetings and the dues necessary .
 Master of C eremonies ( a the affair and immediately cal let in vocal ion ion. The affair was an affair and the affair .
 Frongillo explained the meaning of Columbus Day and the experiences met by Christopher Columbus in discovering the New World . He also explained the experiences he had with Columbus .
 Sherman W Saltmarsh was the chairman of the tin* Board of Selectmen, Sherman W.Saltmarsh . First to be called upon by the M.C. was the former chairman of tin* board of selectmen .
 Mr Saltmarsh extended the best wishes of the Town to Winchester’s Sons of Italy Organization . He congratulated it on its wonderful home and worthwhile undertakings . Winchester's Sons of Italian Organization .
 Meeting At Vinson-Owen School On Shelters for Nuclear Attack held at the school .
 Chairman Robert Fiore expressed that he* was happy to make arrangements and thanked the entire Sons of Italy membership for the tine cooperation and support . Chairman Fiore said that he was happy with the arrangements and that the organization was happy .
 Chairman Fiore then thanked the members of the committee which worked diligently for the banquet . Carmine Frongillo, William Fiore, Joseph Paonessa, Richard Penta, Randolph Kazazian, Frank Dattilo and Pat Bruno were also recognized .
 Meeting designed to better inform Winchester residents on civil defense problems will be held at the Vinson-Owen School, Johnson Road, on Thursday evening, October 26 .
 Civil Defense Agency, Natick will present the Shelter and Home Preparedness Course . The course includes films, models of shelters, samples of foods, and other articles necessary for survival .
 Mias Lanigun has been asked to discuss school safety in the event of a nuclear attack . Lanigun was asked to talk about how to deal with a nuclear strike .
 It is felt that this program will answer questions in the minds of all of us as to how wc can best protect our families in an emergency . The program will be shown how to protect your family in a disaster .
 Mr Theodore Boecker, director of Civil Defense for Winchester, and Mrs. Mrs. Boecker are pictured in Winchester, Winchester . Mr Boecker and Mrs Boecker attended the ceremony .
 Philip Woodward of the federal Civil Defense Headquarters in Harvard, Mass, also plan to attend . Philip Woodward plans to attend the event .
 WHSR Presents WHSR-FM, Winchester High School Educational Radio, at 91. megacycles on the FM band, begins its sixth year of broadcasting on October 23 . Winchester High school Educational Radio will be broadcasting on 91.2 FM .
 WHSR is able to provide its listening audience with many interesting and informative discussions by well-known specialists on our government, science, and schools . Due to a lack of commercial advertising, WHSR has been able to continue its discussions .
 WHSR presents good music, the latest news — campus, local, and worldwide, plus unique and informative special events, plus a complete and exciting coverage of all home sports games . WHSR also presents music, news and special events .
 On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings “Wake Up Winchester” is on hand at seven to begin the day right . "Wake up Winchester" is on at 7 a.m. on Tuesday and Wednesday mornings .
 Monday and Thursday afternoons at three bring you “Tops in Tunes” the best semiclassical, jazz, and even folk music highlighted by news .
 Two hours of classical classical “Music from the Masters’s” makes Wednesday afternoons at four times a week .
 WHSR becomes alive on your dial at four with a host of the latest news to keep Winchester well informed . WHSR also features fine music from Album Showcase .
 At five the National Educational Association presents “Parents Ask About Schools” at five a.m. ET . The group highlights vital questions on timely school subjects . At five, parents will be asked about school topics .
 The Reader’s Digest Freedom Foundation “All America Wants To Know” presents, at 5:35, Air Force Chief of Start 1 , General Curtis LeMay, discussing Is America Safe From Surprise Attack . Senator Barry Goldwater, Arthur Godfrey and Marguerite
 After the latest news, as dinner begins at 0:15, so does relaxing music fit for the hour . Relaxing music is the perfect music for dinner .
 At seven, “Men and Molecules” is presented by the American Chemical Society and highlights towards the conquest of Cancer and Heart Disease by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter is featured in the show .
 WHSR will provide play-by-play coverage of the home football games . If you are unable to attend any of the games, tune in WHSR for an accurate play by play account beginning at 1:25 m.m.
 There is the new r WHSR for 1961 -(12 with a larger and more varied program ready to serve you entertainingly and educationally always always . There is a new program for 1961-(12)
 Diegelman gave a summary of the business discussed at the New Bedford meeting . The meeting was adjourned in New Bedford, Bedford, on October 1 .
 The next meeting of Mu Chapter will be held on December 6 at the Country Club . Mu Chapter Mu Chapter meets at the country club .
 Delia Mares is author of the recently published book, “Know Your Enemy,” an historical analysis of communism . Mares says communism was a communist state of Soviet Union in Russia .
 Knights and their beautiful ladies, fair damsels selling flowers, gallant page boys, not-so-wander[ ing minstrels, all enlivened a glittering scene last week end at The Camelot Ball . Knights and ladies were fair damsel selling flowers
 The tenth annual Waltz Evening sponsored by the Friends of the Winchester Hospital was held at the Winchester Town Hall on Friday and Saturday evenings, October 13 and 14 .
 Waltz Evening proved to be a tremendous success . Manning C Morrill, this year’s chairman, said the event was a huge success . Waltz evening was held in New York City, New York .
 Proceeds from the dance are always Used by the Friends for gifts to the Winchester Hospital . Proceeds are always used to give gifts to Winchester Hospital.
 Town Hall was transformed by a hardworking committee into a scene of medieval beauty . The Town Hall is transformed into a medieval beauty by a committee .
 Flags with heraldic crests lined the balconies of the hotel . Every wall depicted parapets and battlements of ancient castles . The hotel was built in the 1930s .
 Sammy Eisen's orchestra provided music throughout the evening for the dancers . One wall contained a mural of knights jousting in tournament, and the stage was flanked by twin figure* of heralds blowing beautiful trumpets .
 Special lighting fixtures of gold which reproduced those found in King Arthur's court added a final footnote of beauty .
 On each table, the name of host and hostess were indicated by placards with Old English let tering .
 Attractive flower girls wearing tall wimpled hats mingled with the guests during the evening selling corsages with lucky num hers attached . Attractive flowers were selling lucky nums at the event .
 Serving as judges were Mr Richard Champagne of the Champagne School of Dancing . Mr and Mrs. Champagne were also judges .
 Mr Russell Curry and his charming mother, Mrs. Curry, were the judges . The judges were Mr and Mrs Curry and Mr Curry .
 Edwin Nelson Jr., Jr. substituted at the eleventh hour for last year’s winner who was ill . Edwin Nelson, Jr., was the third place Friday winner, who graciously substituted . Last year's winner was ill.
 Horley each received as their prizes silver Paul Revere bowls suitably inscribed . The bowls were donated both nights by Mouradian Rug Galleries .
 Each lady also received bouquets of two dozen long-stemmed roses, given again this year by Forester Flower Shops . Each lady was also given two dozen roses .
 Horley and Mrs. Horley were presented with sterling silver key chains, also inscribed, compliments of Winchester Jewelers . Horley was presented with the key chains .
 The gentlemen also received as gifts from Chitel's Men’s, Boys’ and Ladies’* Shops, wool plaid sport hats . The gentlemen were also given as gifts as gifts by the shop .
 Mr Birchall and Mr Pywell received a bottle of rare imported French armagnac from the Kirsten Travel Agency and i ‘Camelot’ album from Winchester Appliance .
 Mr. and Mrs. Sheppard Holt were third place winners on Friday night . The Holt family won on Saturday night .
 Mr Holt won a $5 gift certificate from Winchester Hardware and Paint, and Mr Nigro was presented a gift certificate . Mr Holt and Nigro were presented with gift certificates from Keenan's Service Station .
 Winchester Sport Shop sends packages of golf balls to golfers . Both men received golf balls from the Winchester Sport shop .
 The Friends wish to thank the above merchants for their generous contributions . The Friends will also thank the merchants who made the donations .
 They also wish to express their appreciation to the Arnold Fisher Rose Growers of Woburn, who contributed flowers for the many beautiful corsages .
 Cigarettes were donated by the Atlantic Food Mart and Willis Pharmacy, both of Reading .
 Charles Company, also of Reading, donated number tags for the corsages . Charles Company also donated tags for number tags . The corsage was donated by the Reading company .
 The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very grateful to the many generous individuals and concerns who helped make Waltz Evening a success . The Winchester Hospital is very grateful .
 Lists of Waltz Evening committees and also of Patrons and Patronesses not yet printed may be found elsewhere in this issue of the Star . Waltz evening committees are also included in the Star's list .
 Winchester Homefronters wish to thank everyone who helped make our Tag Day such a sue-, cess. Day . Winchester homefronter thanks everyone for helping make Tag Day a great day . Winchester Winchester home fronters celebrate their Tag Day .
 Many thanks to Chief Derro for the use of the Police Station as our headquarters . Many thanks for the police station as a police station .
 Roger F McTighe, Alan McLatchy, Harry Pierce, David Schmink, and Mrs. Harry Pierce are among the winners of the award .
 Tricia Buros, president; Joanne Hess, Jane Hess, Martha Dodge, Jackie Cartier, Nancy O’Neil, Linda Carter, Linda Amieo, Natalie Palmer, Judy Belliveau, Diana Kittridge, Chris Wilaghn, Ginny Scaturro
 Emmons S Ellis | F Rogers of New Bern, South Carolina. Emmons Ellis . F Rogers . Emmons . Ellis . Rogers . Rogers. Rogers . Ellis: "I am happy to have a happy ending"
 The birth of Emmons Stearns Ellis, Jr. on October 13th at the Winchester ,, 1 / 1 , Hospital .
 September 2b at the Winchester 1 ’ _ Jj^endon — <L~achcud (^Ldtrom — ^J^loJadon dison Avenue, Winchester and Mr and Mrs. Zachary . Sept. 2b is Miss Barbara Jane Zachary
 Carolyn Joan was born at the Orange Memorial Hospital in Orlando, Florida . Her third daughter, Carolyn Joan, was born September 10 at the hospital .
 Morris Kwnounce announces the birth of a son, Russell . Russell. alt of Carlsbad, California .
 Richard Coakley announce the birth of a dauphter, Laura Jeanne, on October 5 at the Winchester Hospital . Laura Jeanne was born at the hospital in Winchester, Winchester .
 W Prescott Keyes of 5 Governors Avenue announce the birth of a son, John Prescott, on Thursday October 12 . John Prescott was born at 5 Governors Ave. Keyes' home .
 Charles R Klemetsen of Cutler Ridpe, Florida, announce the birth of a dauphter, Deborah Elizabeth, at the South Miami Hospital on October 3 . Deborah Elizabeth was born at the hospital in Miami .
 James Noble Clark, formerly of Winchester, now of Coral Gables, Florida . Clark was born in Winchester, Winchester, and now lives in Coral Gable . Clark: "I'm not afraid to die"
 The paternal preat-prandmother is Mrs. Russell E Davis of Phoenix, Arizona, and the paternal . Mrs. Davis is married to Russell Davis, who is also married to Mr. Davis' mother, and she is a mother of three .
 Dickie-Raymond, Inc. plans to build a $1,000,000 mailinp plant and office on Morrissey Boulevard . Two Winchester residents had a lead role in the recently announced plans of the project .
 Robert W Raymond is treasurer and buildinp committee chairman of the direct advertisinp and sales promotion firm . The firm will move into its new buildinginp next fall . Raymond: "It's a great place to work"
 Announcement of the project was made in the office of Boston Mayor John F Collins . Announcement coincided with DickieRaymond's 40th anniversary .
 Others present included Georpe J Zahka, DickieRaymond’s executive vice president, and Vincent Vappi of the Vappo Development Company .
 Raymond described as the country’s most modern mailinp facilities . Raymond described the two-story buildinp as ‘the most modern’ in the world . The firm will house offices for creative and sales staffs .
 Fred R Zachcus of 15 Lockcland Road, became the bride of Neil Gunnar Benson, son of Gunnar S Benson of Attleboro . The bride is the daughter of Mr and Mrs Gunnar .
 Miss Mildred Katherine Hodgson was dauphter of the late Mr and Mrs. Hodgson . Whiteand pold flowers decorated the Andover-Newton Chapel in Newton, Newton, Aupust 26 .
 William B Hodpson of Malden, and James Verner Ekstrom, son of Mr and Mrs. Ekstrom . William Hodpson and James Ekstrom were born in Malden . Mr Hodpson was married to Mr Ekstrom and Mrs Hodpson from Malden.
 The eandlelipht ceremony was followed by a reception at the bride’s home . The bride and groom were married at a private ceremony .
 The four o’clock eandlelipht ceremony was performed by the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Neil G. Benson .
 Given in mar'riape by her father, the bride wore a princess pown of ivory brocade, fashioned with circlet neckline, elbow lenpth sleeves, a fitted bodice with small bows at the back and a sweepinp chapel train .
 The bridal attendants were identically powned in pold taffeta dresses with square necklines, fitted bodice and sliphtly flared skirts .
 Their hats were matchinp pillboxes and they carried semicascade bouquets of pold flowers . The hats were matched with pillboxes .
 The bridesmaids were Miss Joan Benson, sister of the brideproom; Miss Betty Jane Kittredpe of Lonpmeadow, Mrs. Mrs. Betty J. Kittredp, Miss Joan Boulden, Miss Betty J., Miss Joan J. Benson, Miss
 William Morrison of Sprinpfield and Miss Marcia Zacheus of Belmont, cousin of the bride . William Morrison and Marcia . Marcia's cousin of bride. Marcia is cousin of William Morrison .
 She wore a pold taffeta frock with an overlay of pold orpanza and carried a miniature colonial bouquet like those of the bridesmaids .
 For her dauphter’s weddinp, Mrs Zacheus wore an emerald preen satin satin sheath with matchinp hat and a corsape of white orchids .
 Benson, the brideproom’s mother, was powned in an aqua satin sheath with matchinp pillbox hat . Benson wore a corsape of bronze cymbidium orchids .
 Rolf Benson of Attleboro was his brother’s best man and the ushers were John Richard Zacheus of Winchester, brother of the bride . Bruce Johnson, Robert Johnson, Daniel Larson and Dale Worrell, all of Attelboro, were ushers . R
 NEW STERLING PATTERN ""VESPERA" AND REGISTER FOR TOWLE’s ""BRIDE OF the YEAR” CONTENT TODAY I 1,025 PRIZES including $12,000 worth of HONEYMOON . $12K worth
 The lovely new a contemporary sterling pattern ^5] in enduring solid silver by CC^r**^* Towle. Just come in end see ""Vesper***. Just see "VesPer"
 Given in mar riape by Mr Lloyd Skiffinphton of Boston . Bride wore a princess pown of white taffeta re-embroidered with Alencon lace and a full skirt .
 Her finpertip veil of French silk illusion was eaupht to a circlet of oranpe blossoms . She carried an allwhite bouquet of roses, carnations and baby's, breath .
 Miss July Barrett of East Lynn wore a fulllength pown of turquoise silk with a matchinp headpiece . The maid of honor wore a matching headpiece to the event .
 Miss Linda Evans of South Boston and Miss Jo-Ann Farrell of Greenfield, the bridesmaids, wore identical rose-silk powns . Miss Jo Ann Farrell wore identical identical rose silks .
 Mr Ekstrom is a teacher in the Stratford school system in Connecticut . The newlyweds were married in Nova Scotia .
 Announcement of the marriapo on Saturday, October 7, of Miss Fontaine Deanna Dean, dauphter of Mr. and Mrs. Dean .
 A W inchester man has been unusually busy, the past few weeks, purchasing furniture, selecting clrajxvs and choosing the overall decor for the Lord Wakefield Motel . The hotel will open in December .
 Idd jMJen clnaaaed So W, St Whss Waiter, W, Drictell C^ntjaijejeJ Mr and Mrs. Idd . JaijeJ .
 Miss Carole W’alker, of Wallingford, Penna., is engaged to Georpe A Trickett, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs. Frederick Walker . The engagement of their dauphter is announced at the age of 18 .
 Mr Trickett is a graduate of the Fay School of Southboro, and the Holderness School, Plymouth, New Hampshire .
 A spring weddinp is planned. A spring wedding is planned .
 Miss Scott is a praduate of the Winchester High School and the Chandler School for Women in Boston . She is a member of both Winchester High and Chandler School .
 SAI.K National (i«*njrra|>hicH.H. 1940 lltHO. incluaivc anti complete complete. TOO LATE TO CLASSIFY FOR SAIK National .
 The late Chester Whitcomb Alden of Portland, Maine and the late Mr Alden were among those to be buried in Maine . The late Mr and Mrs. Alden are also survived by the late Chester Alden .
 Miss Alden attended the Columbia and Harley Schools in Rochester and the Villa Mercede in Florence, Italy . She was born in New York City .
 Mrs. Roderick Fisher and her husband spent a week of their honeymoon in Winchester, N.S. The Fishers were married on October 7 in Oxford, N S.
 She is a praduate of the Sprinphill Hospital Training School for Nurses . She is also a graduate of the hospital training school for nurses .
 Winchester parents and members of the community concerned about recent trends in college placement will want to attend the meeting of the ParentFaculty Advisory Council on Wednesday, October 25, at 7:45 in the music room of the senior high school . Winchester parents may be particularly concerned about trends in recent
 The theme for this important meeting is “A Progress Report on Collepe Placement” The meeting comes at a time when the increasing demands for higher education make early decisions more necessary .
 Miss M Constance Trickett and Mr Bernard J Silva, supervisors of guidance at the high school, will also participate in this discussion .
 The Parent-Faculty Advisory Council invites the public to consider answers to such questions at the October 25 meeting . The meeting will be held at the University of Columbia University .
 After the formal presentations, the entire gathering will be divided into groups to give further specific direction to the topic under consideration . The meeting will be held in New York City .
 The Winchester High School Parent-Faculty Association is an organization through which parents have been able to express their support of the Winchester schools . The organization has provided opportunities for members of the community to meet with representatives from the faculty .
 Firefighters responded to a fire at 54 Canal Street, it the home of the Conlons . Firemen responded Thursday afternoon to the fire . Firefighters say it was a house fire .
 A livnp room sofa was afire, local firefighters had under control in short order . Local firefighters were able to extinguish the flames in a matter of minutes .
 Paragon Candles, an unusual assortment of Bin. twists in attractive colors; also color-flow Fiesta candles that change color as they burn . Bin. twist Candles .
 Oftier Amico extinguished a fire on the awning of Renton’s Market . Firefighters extinguished the blaze at 10:18m. last Friday .
 Jack Seherban came within 34 seconds of the 15:01 course record . The 15-minute course record was also set in 2009 at 15.01 seconds .
 Frank Johnson, the second Sachem runner, posted an identical time of identical time . Right on his heels was the second runner, Frank Johnson . Frank Johnson was also on the course of the race .
 Winchester again showed team strength by keeping top runner, John Hill, out of first five places . Winchester kept top Woburn runner John Hill out of the top five places in the first five . Winchester again kept top runner out of fifth place .
 The fleet-footed Red and Black placed four runners under sixteen minutes under 16 minutes . The team won’t run for 16 minutes.
 Steve Dee and Dean Anderson continued their fine performances by placing third and fourth . Dean Anderson and Steve Dee placed in fourth place .
 Dave Bird and Phil Gallagher held sixth and seventh spots for the Sachems . Phil Gallagher and Dave Bird were also in the top two spots .
 Sophomore Gerry Hills, continuing his fine performance, outran Larry Harrington for top JV position . Gerry Hills continues his fine run, continuing to win the JV title .
 Owner of the Ocean Point Hotel in Boothbay Harbor, Me., is a former manager and manager of hotels in Boston and Philadelphia .
 Mr Barnes currently is a commander in the Coast Guard Reserve, attached to a Boston unit .
 Mr Barnes is a member of the American Hotel Association, New England Hotel Association and the First Congregational Church of Winchester . He is also a New England Council member .
 Rezoning was necessary to accommodate the Lord Wakefield hotel . Wakefield Chamber of Commerce and Junior Chamber of commerce spearheaded the initiative . Town officials said the hotel will fill a hip pap in Wakefield’s physical needs .
 The hotel has 64 rooms and is electrically heated and air-conditioned . Offering two public restaurants, the hotel has a 64-room space .
 The two-story building is of colonial design with a brick face and constructed of steel and aluminum . The building was built in colonial design and is of a colonial design .
 The first of the two office buildings is now underway, with the pouring of the foundations, this week . The first office buildings are now underway .
 Georpe and Charles Whitten, who with a third brother, Bradford resident of Weston, are Winches ter residents of the family . The two brothers, who live in Weston, West Yorkshire, have three brothers .
 The first office building is expect ed to be ready for occupancy in the spring of 1962 . It is expected to be open to the public for the first time .
 Leon D Hughes held a surprise birthday party for his 71st birthday on October 8 . Mr Hughes Feted feted at 10A Winthrop Street in New York .
 Lincoln Grindle of Laguna Beach, California, made a flying visit to his parents, Mr and Mrs. Grindle . He was attending medical meetings in Chicago when he was visiting his parents .
 BILLIE BAZAAR says "WE'VE MADE a special PURCHASE HALLOWE EN GOODS over the head COSTUMES" Coats 13.00 Value $1.58 GIant MASKS 38c G9c Value .
 Cuhmaster Sam Putnam outlined the 1961-1962 program for hoys and their parents . Ten boys received awards at, the year’s first pack meeting .
 Sam Putnam, cuhmaster; Paul Donahue nnd Joseph Maspero, co-chairmen of the pack committee; George Blair and Lindsay Caldwell, assistant cuhmasters; John Laursen, treasurer; Edward Crabtree, publicity; Windsor Carpenter, rifle assist
 Charles Papadinis, assistant den mother; Ernest Crabtree, William Everett, Peter Knight, Wayne Padula, Jack Papadini, John U. U.C. Papadisis is the den mother .
 Kim Putnam, assistant den mother; Philip Maloney, Jeffrey Armstrong, Grant Nowell, Andrew Porter, John Laui*sen, Daniel Strout, Gerald Ulm. Putnam is the den mother .
 James Sullivan, co-den mothers; Guy Randlett, Richard Chandler, Richard Smethurst, John McGuigan, Ted Shasta . Guy Randlet, James Sullivan and Richard Chandler: Co-den moms; Guy . Randlett and James Sullivan: "It's a good time
 Keith Doty, assistant den mothers; . Andrew Ficherher, James Ulwick, Stephen Everett and Stephen Everett . Stephen Everett, Joey Julian and Joey Julian, James Mullare, Stephen LaPointe.
 Windsor Carpenter, den mothers; Peter Wardwell, David M Carpenter, Craig Stockwell, Joseph Maspero, Jr., Edward Byers, Timmy Donahue . Edward Byer, Edward M Carpenter and David M. Carpenter were den mothers .
 J Paul Marcous, assistant den mother; John Sawyer, Forrest Rivinius, Andy Marcous and Geoffrey Blair, David White . John Sawyer was the first den mother to join the den mother in the film .
 Donald Puffer, assistant den mother; David Hillman, Jeffrey Charles, . Stephen Caldwell, Stephen Caldwell and Mark Holland . Mark Holland, John Puffer and Allan Eyden Stoeckle .
 Ten boys who received awards at the October pack meeting were Ernest Crabtree, Billy Everett, Peter Knight and Wayne Padula, Lions; Jack Papadinis, Lion with one Gold Arrow; Jeff Blair, John Sawyer and David White, Wolf; Jeff Charles, Wolf with one Silver Arrow
 Fifth graders who have achieved Lions awards at the time of the Blua and Gold Banquet will participate in rifle range activities beginning in February .
 There will be a giant auction, part of the 1961 Fiesta Fair, in Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church . The auction will take place on October 30 .
 Ted Langdell, a live-wire auctioneer, will preside at the auction . There will be many excellent antiques, household items, appliances, bric-a-brac, etc., on the auction block .
 Doors open at 7 for public inspection of the items, with bidding starting promptly at 7:30. Doors open for bidding at 7.30 .
 All are welcome — mark the date on your Red Letter Calendar — October 30. All are invited to celebrate October 30 .
 On the basis of some figuring done by the Tnx Foundation, the cost locally is $1315,700 .
 The 34th season of the Winches ter College Club got under way last Monday evening . Fa'll Guest Night was the 34th annual event of the club's annual season .
 Coffee and mints were served by that must he met sooner or later by the town’s 5,900 families . That is tfie estimated amount of coffee, mints and cookies .
 The Government may get this money through direct or indirect taxation, or by going into debt . It may reduce the value of the dollar by reducing its value, or a combination of these .
 Each billion dollars of increase in Federal spending represents $19 to the average American family of four . The Tax Foundation finds that each billion dollar increase in federal spending is $19 .
 It ranges above and below that amount in individual communities, in relation to income levels .
 A $1 billion spending increase takes money that each family could have used to buy an electric toaster or five LP records, report says .
 A $2 billion increase would take the amount that they might have used to purchase clock radios or power tools sets . A $1 billion increase could take that amount away from what they might use to buy clocks radios or tools .
 If a firm went into business at the time Christ was bom and proceeded to lose $1,000 every day from that time on, it would not yet have lost a billion dollars . The firm would not have gone into business in Christ's time if it lost $1k a day
 The Administration has stated that it expects to spend $88 billion in the current fiscal year, a record peacetime amount . The Administration is spending a record amount of money in peacetime .
 In terms of the average family in Winchester, based on the Tax Foundation’s estimates, this is equivalent to $2,024 . The average Winchester family is estimated to be worth $2.024 .
 For the entire population locally, the bill comes to more than $11,941,000 . The entire population is estimated to be at least 11,000,000 people .
 The biggest part of the $88 bil lion lion spending program is for national defense . The $88 bilion is the largest part of this $88 billion spending program .
 Democratic Town Committee will hold op en meeting at Muzzey Junior High School, 1557 Massachusetts Avenue, in Lexington, on October 25 .
 Invitations have been sent out by the hosts of next week’s meeting . Lexington Democratic Town Committee chairman and president of Lexington Democratic club .
 This will be the first of four important meetings to be held in this series, all to take place in the same locale and under the same auspices . The meetings will be held under the auspices of the U.S. government .
 Attorney General Edward McCormack, Lieutenant Governor Edward McLaughlin and State Treasurer John Driscoll will be speakers . The speakers will be at the State Treasurer's annual State of the Union meeting .
 Mrs. McDonald and Mrs. Hogan have been in contact with each other for more than a year .
 Mary Serieka 3 Middlesex Street, PA 9-4153, David Saliba 14 Oxford Street I A 9-0808, and Mrs. Mrs. Saliba . Mrs. Serieka and Mr Saliba live in New York City .
 Marcia E Ayer of 70 Hemingway Street was among the 18 Massachusetts winners in the recently concluded nationwide Vaseline Hair Tonic “Flip Tulk” Contest . Marcia Ayer is one of the winners of the nationwide contest .
 Contestants had to describe in 25 words or less “What Vaseline Hair Tonic Means to Me” in teen jargon . Contestants were required to describe the product in a 25 word or less .
 A typical entry read, “Since tuning in on this Vaseline bit, raunchy, goopy, wrong-o hair did a fade-out.” “Raunchy” hair did “a fade out”
 Guild of the Infant Saviour Rummage Sale Postponed at K of C Hall . Sale will take place on a future dale at a future date . Guild of Infant Saviour's sale postponed .
 Mrs. Donald J Friteh and her com mittee for a pleasant social inter ludo, following which Mrs. Mrs. Fiteh was joined by her husband for the social inter-ludo .
 Speaking on the topic “Broadcasting 1961 he made his listeners aware of the problem faced by a broadcaster in trying to satisfy the broadest pos sible segment of the listening public .
 In the early days, his own station was run by the plant manager and the office boy in their after-work hours . Mr O’Friel amused his audience by relating to the fact that in the early . days, he said .
 As the popularity of ra dio grew, the necessity for assigned broadcasting frequencies became more and more evident . Ra dio has been assigned frequencies for more than 30 years .
 The pro blem was how to make best use of the new medium and still not al low it to be completely under gov ernment cotrol .
 In the best American democratic tradition, the answer evolved was freedom under licensing . "Freedom under licensing" was the answer to the question .
 Broadcasting reaches more people, at their own invitation, than has any other means of communication in history . This solution has worked so well that today broadcasting reaches more than any other method of communication . Today broadcasting is the only way to reach more people than other methods of communication.
 The speaker went on to say that the public must exercise its right of choice in order to make this mass medium effective . The speaker said that the people must exercise their right to choose the mass medium .
 It is not necessary to qtrengtben gov. eminent control to achieve desired programming . The competitive ele ment of the industry works toward the same end .
 The broadcaster must learn to know and trust the public, reach a rapport with it, then give it a good blend of the type of programs it wants even if this includes rock and roll .
 Radio has a unique role to fill in the instantaneous report ing of ""local news" Apart from its entertainment function, radio has a role in filling in the instantaneously report ing .
 Lightweight portable, electronic equipment to day makes timely presentation of the news a fact of life . Lightweight . equipment makes timely . presentation of . the . news a . fact of . life .
 Mr O’Friel touched on the com plex problems that need to be translated in order that the public may see, hear, and understand .
 He stressed that radio and television must be put into proper perspective as mirrors of our present day society . He said radio and TV must be placed in proper perspective .
 Mr O’Friel concluded by emphasizing that the viewer is needed by the broadcaster to bring in the new era which can come . The new era of public enlightenment, education, and improvement can come, he said .
 Parents’ Association hopes the enthusiastic support given the dance in the past will be equalled or even surpassed this year . Since this is the only money making project of the year spoil sored by the Parents' Association .
 Robert Tesar, dance chairman, and her committee are completing plans for a gala evening complete with a European cafe atmosphere, door prizes, corsages for the ladies, and door prizes . Roger Carpenter and the favorite Meltones will perform .
 Get your ticket now from the ticket mother of your child's class, or phone Mrs. Mrs. Smith at the ticket .
 Frongillo presented the Venerable of the Men’s Lodge, Frank “Boss” Dattilo who congratulated chairman Robert Fiore and his committee for such a successful banquet . The Men's Lodge held a banquet at the end of the evening .
 He was also happy to see ho many of his members supporting this function and others held throughout the year . He said he was proud of the success of the event .
 He continued to congratulate the Sons of Italy championship team in the Town Softball League . He also congratulated his sons of Italy team .
 The newlyformed golf teams were also congratulated for the fine start they had in its initial year of play with no less than twenty participants teeing off each week .
 Aberjona Civic Organization president Michael D Saraco congratulated the Columbus Day banquet committee for a job well done . Saraco expressed his keen interest in being a part of an organization showing varied interests .
 The A.C.A. has the responsibilities of setting up the rules and regulations of the Sons of Italy organization . The Sons have urged members to continue their loyal support in all activities undertaken by the club .
 Nicholas DiZio was the Exalted Ruler of Winchester’s Lodge of Elks, 1445, Nicholas . He was asked to take a bow by Winchester Elks Lodge Elks .
 Frongillo called the attention of those in attendance to bow their heads for a moment of silence in memory of those deceased members of the Winchester Sons of Italy . Frongillillo called for the moment of remembrance . The event was held in honor of those who died in service .
 Joe is a member of the champion Softball team . Joe is one of the high bowlers in the S.O.I.I., and a true member of that organization .
 Joe, we will miss you and wish you loads of luck and happiness and want you to know that your membership card will be awaiting you upon your return to civilian life . Joe .
 Maietta expressed his sincere congratulations to the committee and S.O.I. for the wonderful way they have succeeded in their undertaking . Maieta expressed his admiration for the committee .
 He encouraged all to continue to support the S.O.I. and all that it plans . He encouraged everyone to continue supporting the organization .
 Maietta wrote the Sons of Italy song about thirty years ago and it is sung at each meeting of the organization . Maieta wrote the song about 30 years ago .
 He is also the originator of the degree team, which performs a very interesting and impressive ceremony for the installation of officers in the Winchester Lodges and organizations .
 Last to be introduced in the program was past venerable and chairman of the Sports Committee, Anthony “Chick” Vespucci . The committee was introduced in a special edition of the program .
 Chairman Vespucci expressed his best wishes to the champion Softball Team and members of the Golf League for their fine efforts in the first year of organization . The winner Softball League will hold a softball championship in 2015 .
 He then presented sweaters to the softball champions and encouraged manager Frank Procopio to make plans for another team next summer .
 Frongillo thanked all for coming, hoped all enjoyed the wonderful dinner served by Shaw Catering Co. of Lynn and invited all to remain and enjoy the facilities of the organization .
 The Winchester Public Library staff attended meetings of the New England Library Association at the New Ocean House in Swampscott during the four day convention . Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club members attended the convention .
 She spoke most informatively about the development of New England folklore through the blending of Indian legends with the stories brought by the colonists from their homelands .
 In these days we must have inspired leadership respect for law, and the power of self-restraint, if our constitutional democracy is to survive . We must have respect for the law and self restraint if our democracy survives .
 Ralph E Lapp spoke most entertainingly at the second general session and opened awe-inspiring horizons of future scientific developments in the space age . Ralph E. Lapp was the most entertaining speaker of the second session .
 Louise Hall Tharpe charmed her audience at the final luncheon . She thanked librarians for their assistance in the research she does .
 Miss Mallery, Miss Elva Nelson, Miss Suzanne Nicot, Miss Elizabeth Russell, Mrs. Helen Mallery and Mrs. Elizabeth Russell . Miss Nicot and Miss Russell are pictured at the end of the year .
 Theodore von Rosenvinge, president, presided over the business meeting . Attention was directed to the Musi cal Moods evening October 27 .
 Miss Zeta Jayal enlightened us to the social, economic, legal, and moral problems dealt with . James W Blackham Jr., program chairman, introduced the director of Crittenton-Hastings House . Miss Jayal was introduced to the audience .
 Questions and informal discussions followed, while cider and doughnuts were served by Mrs. Smith .
 Connor will show how stained glass medallions are made . He will also explain the tools and materials used .
 Other members that day will demonstrate weaving, rug making, painting, tole ware, leather, woodworking, jewelry, needlework, and many others .
 The Noonan School Chapter of the Community Schools of Winchester met on Tuesday, October 10 for their first business meeting and for the reception for teachers .
 He spoke very informally about the schools of Winchester in helping the child achieve his educational goals . He also spoke about the role of Winchester schools in helping him achieve his goals .
 The parent motivated child has serious repercussions, which is less serious than the child who has ability but does not use it . He pointed out that j there were two types of problem students, the parent motivated .
 As teachers entered the auditorium after school, each was presented with a beautiful corsage of Autumn flowers .
 Dr. John J Sullivan, secretary, poured at an attractive table set with flowers and refreshments by Mrs. Mrs. Sullivan .
 Charles Watson were third with 84, and Carl Sit tinger paired with Darrell Root’s son Steve at 80 . Charles Watson and Darrell Root's son Steve were also in the top three with 84 .
 Mr and Mrs Darrell Root with 82, Dr. and Mrs Robert Blaekler with 79, and Dr. James Byrne and Gerald Barrett with 86% .
 Section B played 20 boards for 90 points for a 90 point average . Guy Mingolelli with 76 points for Section B . Also above average were the Wheelocks at 74 and the Smiths at 73 .
 Darrell Roots and Richard Smiths finished one-two to capture top lau rels. Arnold Kleinbecker, 94, Ann Dean and Kay Dunn, 89% . Ann Dean, 89, Kay Dunn and Darrell Roots won the tournament .
 At the first session, WDBC pairs held six of the twelve win nimr positions, which is indicative or the caliber of our players a gainst outside competition . At the start of the session, the pairs held six .
 Gerry Lawrence calls on Gerry Lawrence for this week’s bridge faturette . Gerry Lawrence: It's a pleasure to call on Gerry .
 She is not only an as tute and well disciplined tournament player, but has the enviable facility of scoring well with a number of different partners . She is also an as well disciplined player, and has the ability to score well with multiple partners .
 North A A V 6 ♦ A Q 10 9 3 2 * A K Q 10 4 West East A J 8 5 4 3 3 A Q Q 10 2 VK74 V Q J 10 9 ♦ 74 ♦ KJ8 6 5 * 9 6 6 * South *
 Saucy little shell, pointing the way to fashion v r ia newly needled toes, is the perfect shoe for fashion .
 With a double wishbone strap to bring a girl good fortune wherever she goes . Double wishbone straps to bring good fortune .
 NS pair were lucky enough to get a double on a 6 cold contract to earn them a next-to-top or the board . N— 2D, Rdble, 3C, 6C E— Dbl, P, 2H, 4C, P W—P
 As I said before, unusual distribution and interference bidding made for interesting results . As a result of the bidding process, the results were interesting .
 A new male quartet is being formed in Winchester, Winchester . A number of singers have applied for tryouts for the new group . Winchester will be the first of its kind .
 The quartet is sponsored by Winchester’s male double quartet, The Two By Fours . Winchester's male double quadruple quartet are being sponsored by The Two by Fours.
 Try-outs are scheduled for 8:30 Monday evening, October 23, 11 Wildwood Street . Try-out will be held on October 23 .
 Tom Worthen, The Two By Fours leader, points out that the new quartet will not affect the activities of the original double quartet . New men will be coached in many of the popular Two By Four arrangements as well as new numbers .
 Members of The Fortnightly are looking forward to Guest Night on Monday, October 23 at Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall, beginning with dessert at 7:30m.
 Salvy and Dan Cavicchio will give an extensive repertoire of popular, classical and semi-classical music . There will be very fine musical program featuring the popular and talented duo .
 They have been on radio frequently and played in Hotel Statler Terrace room and Cafe Rouge regularly on marimba and accordion .
 Joseph H MacMillan, with their two children, Stephen and Debra, have returned home after spending two years in Formosa . Joseph and Stephen have returned to Formosa after two years away .
 Winchester Girl Chosen Mis; Gail Si grid Nickerson, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Nickerson . Winchester Girl chosen for Winchester Girl of the Year . Winchester Schoolgirl chosen for the honor of her parents .
 23 freshmen selected to take part in a Special Studies Program at Elmira Collge on ‘The Impact of Science on Society’ which was organized this fall .
 Special Studies students attend seminars three hours a week throughout their four college years if they choose to remain with the group . Special Studies Students must attend three hours of seminars a week .
 The students attend other classes in accordance with the regular currifields of study each semester . They attend other subjects at the University of Cambridge .
 A new ; four-year program is started from I incoming freshmen each fall . The program is a four year program .
 The ride to the aristocrat of nursing homes * is certainly justifiable . JFW VWWVW WW W VVVVW W V VVW - for ladies and gentlemen .
 To Attend Council Luncheon Mrs. Mrs. Smith to attend council luncheon . Stock Up Nowt. Stock up Nowt .
 McDonald is a member of the Council on the Em* ployment of the Aging, under the State Department of Labor and Industries . He will attend a luncheon meeting of that committee tomorrow, Friday, October 20 .
 Refreshments will be served after the social . Have an evening of fun. j Refreshments are served .
 The Ladies’ Auxiliary to Aherjona Post 3719, V.F.W. will bold a dance at the Bedford Veterans Hospital on Thursday evening, October 26 .
 Anyone interested in dancing please meet at the Post Home, 16 White Street, at 7:00 a.m., where a bus will pick us up and take us to the Hospital .
 Arlington Storage Warehouse 20 MILL STREET, ARLINGTON Mission 8-060S On Sunday, October 22, at 7:00 m.m. The mission will be held in Arlington, Texas, on October 22 .
 All interested high school students invited to attend this lecture, and participate in the discussion following it . All interested students invited .
 Mo Reynolds is the field secretary of the War Resistor’s League and the editor of Liberation Maguzine .
 Mr Me Reynold’s analysis of current events do much to explain the reasons for his active participation in the peace movement . Mr Reynold: ‘Mr Reynold is a member of the Peace Movement. He is committed to the cause of peace in peace .
 He often has access to information not included in most newspaper ac| counts of controversial issues . CNN's John Sutter is a frequent contributor to the Washington Post .
 Mr McReynolds presents his facts and ideas in an interesting manner, too, so that j students need not he afraid of being bored .
 We hope that many stuI dents will take this opportunity to (come and listen) and to air their views on topics of current interest .
 H Newton Clay, Pastor of Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, will be the guest speaker this Sunday at 9:15m. in Ripley Chapel at the First Congregational Church . Clay is Pastor of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church .
 Mr Clay is one of Forum’s most popular guests . With his warm personal interest in young people Mr Clay has a warm interest in youth .
 Harold M Twombly entertained the Committee of Safety Chapter, D.A.R. at her home on Lawson Road . Harold's visit to the home of the committee was a surprise visit .
 Forum members will he engaged in ‘Work Days for Christ’ a national project for young people in the United Church of Christ . During the remainder of October Forum members are engaged in 'Work Days'
 This year Congregational young people in Massachusetts aim to raise between $9,000 and $10,000 for the building of a community library at Mt. Mt. Johnstone .
 Members of Forum will find jobs and turn their earnings in at the October 29 supper meeting . Forum members will turn in their earnings at the meeting of October 29 .
 Everett Kidder reminded members that Hillside School in Marlborough would be our guests and give a program for our November meeting . Hillside school will be our guest at the November meeting.
 At that time gifts of clothing, games, and money for their Christmas should be brought to the meeting . The meeting should be held at the end of the year .
 William W Goodhue gave an interesting report on the Fall State Meeting in Chicopee, October 3 and 4, and of the wonderful speakers and program . William W.
 St. Mary’s School in Springfield, S.D. is for girls, training them for homemakers and nurses especially . The school trains girls to be a homemaker and nurses .
 The Indians are restor ing their old church at Mashpee by their own labor and through do nations . They are restoring the old church by the own labor .
 The Hours Together, by Clara Winston and The Long Gainer, by William Raymond Manchester Night, by Francis Pollini The Old Woman, the Wife and the Archer .
 Point of Impact, by Robert Franklin Mirvish Soul Clap Hands and Sing, by Paule Marshall Stephen Morris, by Nevil Shute, pseud. Stephen Morris . Soul Claps and Sing is a musical adaptation of the same book .
 Three Cases for Mr Campion, by Margery Allingham . Twelve Short Novels, by Thomas B Costain, comp. Twelve Short Novels by Thomas A Costain .
 Community Children To Present Dramas . Old friends from the book shelv es will come to life this season . The Community School As sociation has chosen to work close ly with Mrs. Community Children to present the plays .
 Community School Asso ciation has long believed that theatre for children fills a definite need in their lives . Theatre for children filled a need for children in the Community School .
 Mrs Samoiloff proves her versatility as a teacher since her pupils not only act but create the scenery which is used in their productions .
 They design the sets after judging the best art work from among their own painting impressions . The sets are designed by the set designer after judging their own impressions .
 They vote on the cast of characters after watching each other, and rehearse during a ten-to-twelve week period .
 The Boston Arts Festival invited this Children's Theatre Group to per form their “Noah’s Ark” which was so successful here in town last season . The results are so amazing that it is no wonder that it was invited to the Boston Arts .
 Community School Association has selected December 1 as the date to present these stories . December 1 will be the date for the program . The Community School . Association will present the stories .
 The monthly meeting of the Republican Town Committee will be held in the East Room of the Town Hall on October 26 .
 Phillip Woodward, Director of Continuity of Government, Office of Emergency Planning, Area 1 . Phillip Woodward: Emergency planning is essential to the U.S. National Security Council .
 Her subject “Hope of Survival” will cover civilian survival in nuclear war . Her subject will be a book on how to survive in a nuclear war.
 The Ascent of Gasherbrum IV, by Fosco Maria ni Last Things First, by Sydney J Harris, by Virgilia Peterson . Nobody Knows My Name, by James Baldwin, by One Night in July, by Jonathan Root . Poems of Solitude,
 Mother's Association of the Lincoln School held its Fall meeting in the school auditorium on October 10th . Lincoln School Notes: The Mother’s Association held a beautiful spring-like meeting in October .
 Richard Preston, president gave a welcoming speech to the parents and faculty, then introduced her board for the coming year . Richard Preston also gave a welcome speech .
 A brief business meeting followed and the meeting was turned over to Mrs. Smith . The meeting was held in front of the public .
 Mr Richard Desjarlais, Asst. George Goethals, program chairman, introduced the guest speaker . Mr Goethalals was the program chairman .
 Miss Martha Cunningham, Prinipal, introduced staff of teachers with a quip about each one which brought many smiles from the mothers .
 In conclusion mothers and faculty met for tea •md delicious refreshments served by Social Chairman Mrs. Mrs. Smith of the University of Cambridge .
 Mary Sullivan, teacher of Grade 1 at Lincoln School, was missed at the meeting but due to illness was unable to attend . Mary Sullivan was sincerely missed from the meeting .
 Il gives you the kind of heat you like - long binning, even, economical . The heat is long-lasting and economical .
 Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore PWilson, Sr. The Winchester Star was established in 1880 . Winchester Star is located in Winchester, Ohio .
 It has asked nothing' in particular of any one, hut before we dismiss it completely . It might lx well to think a hit about the part your newspaper plays in your life .
 Town meeting to decide issue that can add a dollar to your tax rate is a special session of town meeting . Town meeting will be held in town meeting on a dollar tax hike .
 You learn the reasons for the meeting and the pros and cons of the issue to be decided . You learn why the meeting was held and what the decision was made .
 You learn that the home town high school won a glorious football victory over a hated rival . You also learn that a home town school won an important football game over a rival .
 An account of the game is before you, with a description of play and the lineups of the teams . The game will be shown below to give you an insight into the game .
 An account, with pictures, of a fatal automobile accident at a bad intersection in town is reported and on the editorial page is jx'rhaps an editorial reiterating the feeling that more effective safety precautions should be taken .
 Elsewhere in the issue is the church page with its schedule of church services and events, at another place, is an advertisement of a sale at a local store . Elsewhere is the page with the schedule of services, events, and a sale of a local shop .
 A notice of the death of a neighbor’s mother, or the marriage of a girl you used to know when she was in town . Still further on the list is a notice of a neighbors' mother's death, or a marriage .
 Home town news for home town folks is the province of the home town paper . Home town paper is the main source of home town news .
 Its columns are always o|>en to those who wish to express themselves, on town affairs, or for officials of the town .
 On the pages of your newspaper are plans for drives and announcements of meetings, social, educational or civic events . Use this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on the pages .
 We are not attempting to convey the impression that a newspaper exists solely for the altruistic purpose of serving the public . We're not trying to convey that a paper exists solely to serve the public, we say .
 It does serve the public, well for the most part, or not so well, according to its abilities and according to what the community it serves asks of it . The public is served well, well or not well .
 Hut your worth while publisher, your publisher who turns out a paper worthy of the name is primarily concerned with truth, both in his news ami his advertising . Hut .
 I le demands objectivity in reporting, honesty in his advertising. lie has his problems. I le demand objectivity and honesty in reporting. lie. lie .
 The hours that go into reporting, editing and the mechanical end of publication are part of the reason this bit of news or a certain advertisement gets in and others do not .
 Often with the best will in the world the publisher is unable to do either what he, or his correspondent or advertiser wishes .
 Ask yourself the next time you are riled with the editor or publisher of your home town paper what it would be like without one . Ask yourself: What would it be like to be without one?
 Stop and think what no newspapers would mean to the country, what it would be like if the newspapers were controlled by the government and there was no free press . The government should not be controlled by newspapers, the government says .
 Publishers of papers print what they want consistent with the laws of libel . Here publishers of papers are not obliged to comply with libel laws .
 The Star is proud to be a part, if just a small part, of that free press . The Star will continue to support the free press.
 "It appreciates the support that has enabled us to come out each week for that length of time," says the team . It appreciates "the support" that has allowed them to come back each week .
 The Star salutes its surrounding contemporaries during Newspaper Week . The Star asks readers, advertisers and friends especially to remember us, kindly if they can .
 We're trying to give you all the town news possible as fairly and accurately as we can . And believe us when we say we are trying to .
 Minister Storer in a recent sermon dealing with the threat of nuclear war made a statement it seems to the Star to be worth emphasizing . Storer, minister of the Unitarian Church, made the statement .
 Instead of accepting the belief that war and human destruction are inevitable, we should devote our minds and energies toward the building of a world in which there is no need to hide from the holocaust we should build places to hide .
 In this thought lies the only hope for a continuation of the civilization man has built for himself. In this hope, he says, "In this thought, we have a chance to continue our civilization"
 If he as master of so much can not master himself can not outlaw the mass murder that goes under the name of war, then everything he has accomplished through the ages is as nothing and man will end as he began .
 We shudder as we look back on the excesses of the barbarians, on the scourge of Attila and his Huns and the conquests of Alexander . We shudder when we recall Attila's excesses .
 Nearer home we recall the Nazis of Hitler, the war into which they plunged the world 'and the gas chamber murders, concentration camps, woe and destruction they worked upon mankind. Nearer . mankind'
 The worst of the horrors of all time would pale into insignificance in the face of the total destruction that will come to 11 s all in an atomic war . If man forgets he has risen above the beasts and is a rational human being, he will be destroyed .
 The time is at hand when we must not forget what nuclear warfare means, says David Cameron . "If we do, we will have nothing left to remember," he says .
 One thousand angry Nigerian students rallied this week to protest a postcard written by a Foxboro Peace Corps girl to her boy friend in America .
 Everyone except us lives in the streets, cooks in the street, and even goes to bathrooms in the middle of the street . We live in the same way as everyone else in the world .
 Only lack of thought could have obscured from Miss Michelmore the devastating effect such a postcard would have on the minds of Nigerian youth who are only too painfully aware of the gap between their nation and America .
 It would seem to the Star that anyone even fairly well-read in world affairs should have known about these conditions before accepting an assignment to work amidst them .
 Nor should our concern be merely to justify her error, nr to save face. Nor should we merely be merely justified her error. We should be concerned that she is not trying to save her face. We are concerned that her error is not being justified .
 The damage has been done, and will be exploited by our opponents from the Near East to the Fur Fast, from Stockholm to Capetown . The damage will be done, says the South African ambassador .
 The non-white people of the world will be assured by our enemies that Margery’s unfortunate postal reveals at once our materialistic smugness and our true racial feeling toward them . Margery's unfortunate postal post reveals at one .
 Richard Nixon’s visit to Latin I America, and blame this anti -American feeling on the Communists . Richard Nixon's visit to South America was the result of his visit to the region .
 The Communists will surely exploit this incident for their purposes, but the mistake was Margery’s, and ours, just begging for exploitation . Margery's mistake, Margery, and hers, just beg for exploitation, she says .
 We can sit up and take notice of just how |>oor most of the world’s people are, and lend them a more generous hand than we have so far . Well, number one, we can . sit up to take notice and take a look at just how generous
 We're not talking about financial aid to the self-serving ruling elites that govern so much of the world . And we’re not talking . We’ve not seen financial aid from the self serving ruling elites .
 We’re talking about .making sure that our money reaches the people Margery wrote about, people who have to sleep in the streets . We're talking about making sure that .our money reaches those who need it, Margery said .
 Some of our money, now geared to making bombs, could be spent on helping Mexico cover its sewers, or putting clothes on Iranians so poor that they’ve been reduced to nakedness .
 We might also have given some thought to the children of Cuba under Batista who regularly choked to death with five foot worms at the age of five .
 We might extend a Christian band to the world’s countless women for whom prostitution is the only guarantee of one meal a day . We might now extend a . Christian band .
 It’s a bitter world beyond the Golden Cate and the Statue of of Liberty, a world that unlike America, was not spared the bombs of war . Unlike America, the world looks with increasing wrath at growing prosperity .
 Unless our objective is morally higher than protecting our economic interests abroad, we are at risk of defeat in the cold war . Unless we take seriously the teaching of Him who urged us to give to those who are sick and hungry, we bad better prepare ourselves, for defeat in this war .
 M e should share what we have with humility not merely to win this cold war, as such, but because all men, under the one Father, are brothers, he says .
 It is sometimes said that the world is more critical of America’s errors than those of the Soviets . The world is sometimes critical of the U.S. errors, but not of the Soviet errors .
 We are judged more rigidly because of the ideals we have set before ourselves. We're judged by our ideals rather than our own . We have to accept that we are judged by the ideals set before us. We need to live up to our own ideals. We must accept that,
 "The distance between these ideals and what we do is sometimes inexcusably great," he says . The distance between idealism and reality is often too much, he adds .
 Auxiliary Police Chief Fred Wicr, left, pins poM chief’s hatke on retiring Auxiliary Chief M Moffett . Police Chief Joseph J Derro smiles approval .
 The petition asks that the people of Plymouth be given the right to vote at the .next state election on whether to continue with the limited town meeting form of government, or return to the old open form .
 Selectman who voted against the proposal says there should be some assurance of public support of a town wide vote, such as a petition, before asking legislative action . Selectman says he does not oppose the people's right to say what sort of government they want .
 Plymouth has had the limited town meeting form of government for nine years . Plymouth has been limited to limited town meetings for 9 years . Town meeting form has been used in the past nine years in Plymouth .
 Town did not adopt it because of a lack of room for all citizens to attend, but because of voter apathy . Voter apathy resulted in limited town meetings that were not representative of the entire town . It did not. like most towns, adopt it .
 Two recent referenda set aside precinct delegates’ votes on a school bond issue and the proposal to build a parking lot . pponents of limited town meeting claim that the precinct delegate’s decisions do not represent the feeling of the entire town on vital matters .
 The petition to the General Court is being vigorously opposed by the Plymouth League of W omen Voters, an organization the local branch of which has strongly supported the limited form of town meeting in Winchester .
 Winchester precinct delegates don't always reflect the thinking of the precincts they represent at town meetings, says Winchester resident . "There are those in this town who have never felt that the Winchester delegates truly reflect the thoughts of our precincts," she says .
 Town-wide votes have set aside those of the limited town meeting . This is especially true of controversial matters, and they can point to referenda, in which referenda have been held .
 Changes have been made in our town meeting referenda clause that will make it more difficult for dissenters to set aside limited town meeting votes . Changes have made it much more difficult .
 Three per cent of the electorates now required to invoke referendum . Only a majority vote of those casting ballots is necessary to sustain a town meeting vote . Unless the total vote in a referendum equals 20 per cent, no action may be set aside .
 Only 30 per cent of the electorate took the trouble to vote for changes to the town meeting act . These changes were sustained in a townwide referendum in which only 30 per per cent voted .
 To be sure there were very few times when there were not room for all to get in who wanted to, but there were a few such times . There were few times there were such times. To be .
 Limited town meeting votes may not be representative of the entire town, opponents say . But they probably are no less so than those of the old open form when it was possible to pack a meeting to put over a given project .
 It's done now, under the representative town meeting form, but in a different way . It is done now . It will be done now under the . representative town meetings form, . But in a . different way, it will be a different . way .
 Only a drastic reduction in town meeting members at large and an unusually fortunate selection of precinct delegates can obviate votes arranged in advance of meetings . Town meeting members are at large .
 After all it is the same procedure as that under which our state and national governments function. After all, the same procedures are used by the same government as those of the UK .
 The trouble, if there is one, lies with us, the voters, who often do not know for whom we are to vote as precinct members until we enter the voting booths, and then know them only as names on the ballot .
 W e e do not go to town meeting or inform ourselves on important issues to be decided there. We do not attend town meetings, we inform ourselves about important issues,’s author says . We are not going to town meetings. We are going to inform ourselves of important issues
 We do not inform our precinct representatives how we feel on controversial questions in which we have a vital interest, and finally we do not raise our voices in town meeting against proposals we believe not in the town’s interest . We also don't raise our voice in town meetings against proposals
 Special privilege is not so much the result of conniving as of voter apathy, it's a result of apathy . Voter apathy is a problem, not conniving or conniving, as well as conniving . The U.S. House of Representatives has a history of
 The Legislature would have to approve the vote and pass enabling legislation . The Legislature has been reluctant to permit a return to the old open form of town meeting .
 Winchester has been told that if we do not like the limited town meeting form, our next move is to the city form with a mayor and aldermen . Winchester voters have been told if they like the current limited town meetings form, their next move will be to a city form .
 This form has failed to win favor in the past, but it lias a lot more advocates than the city form . The city form is a form of form that has been used in the U.S. for decades .
 There have also been moves tending toward the manager form such as consolidating the offices of collector of taxes and treasurer, and central purchasing .
 It is proitd of the town’s heritage of devoted service by dedicated citizens . The town is known for its dedication to the community .
 As long as we can continue to get such service let us avail oursleves of it. Let us avail ourselves of it, we said .
 Plymouth's decision to question tin* limited town meeting form is interesting . Let us make sure that the trouble with our present form of government does not lie with us . It is interesting to hear of Plymouth's .
 The town has an opportunity to appraise the structure in the light of its general appearance and effect ujkui the neighborhood .
 Old timers may regret the razing of the historic old Admiral 'Thatcher house to make room for the apartments . We believe that the new look is a distinct improvement .
 New buildings are undeniably attractive, and may easily result in further improvement in the district . The new buildings were undeniably attractive .
 None of the apartments in Winchester have in appearance or 'operation proved objectionable, though there were people when each was built who sincerely believed that they would he. As a matter of fact none of the . apartments in . Winchester have never proved objectionable .
 Zoning regulations require larger and larger lots for private homes . Many believe that for economic reasons more and more apartment or group houses will be built .
 There is in some quarters in Winchester strong opposition to apartment houses of any kind and in any dumber . Winchester residents are opposed to apartments being built .
 The Star is sure no one wants to see Winchester even approach the status of an apartment house town . But there are also those who would like to six mure apartment or group house facilities here .
 The I 'landing Board' made an unsuccessful attempt recently to open the way for apartment houses under townwide control . They proposed the establishment of apartment house zones at the pleasure of the town meeting .
 Under this plan any one wanting to build an apartment or group house outside the business district must first get the town to change the zoning map to establish the proposed site of the building as an apartment bouse zone .
 Under the present zoning a prospective builder of an apartment house outside the business zone must have the site changed to a business district . The site must be changed to the business district in order to be built .
 The land remains zoned for business and open to the owner or other purchaser for business use . The land will remain open to business use, but the construction of apartment houses will increase .
 I hose we have now in \\ inchester have, the Star believes, proved to he assets. ur care now should he that any further construction of this sort is in the public in Iciest .
 These errors have their source in our subconscious and are induced by repressed memory, feeling, and intention, he says . These errors are caused by repress memories, feeling and intention .
 A A Brill, this paperback deals brilliantly with such widespread ‘errors’ as forgetting to mail letters, to losing one’s wedding hand . The paperback is published by A. A Brill .
 Freud tells us that people forget names because they are associated, however indirectly, with an unpleasant experience or fear . Freud says names are associated with unpleasant experiences .
 You might forget the name of a man named “Carroll,” because a girl named ‘Carol’ once did you dirt . For example, a man called Carroll once called a woman named "Carol" because she was a girl called Carol .
 You may forget the name of a man bearing the same name as your potential rival . Similarly, you may “forget’t the name’s” of a potential rival. You may also forget the names of a rival in the same way .
 The act of “forgetting’s” prevents the awakening of pain through memory or anticipation . “Forgetting” is a form of avoiding pain through anticipation or memory .
 Freud: Mistakes in speech, or “slips of the tongue,” are not accidental . They are unintended confessions of our inner thoughts and attitudes, Freud says .
 Freud reveals his subconscious wish that he were Dr. Virchow . “I wish that I could be Dr. Virchow,” he says .
 In each case the so-called “error” reveals the person’s true concern or intention . The error reveals the true intentions of the person involved in each case .
 We were giving a dinner party for two very dear friends who were about to leave for Mexico . We were hosting a dinner for friends about to go to Mexico .
 After dinner the conversation got around to the comparative quality of American and Mexican fabrics . After dinner, the conversation was about the quality of fabrics in both countries .
 Wife asked her friend to pick up a certain amount of fabric in Mexico City or Guatemala . She was impressed by the fabric .
 Our friend, who is a psychologist, burst into a gorgeous laughter in which all of us joined . Our friend burst into laughter, which all joined .
 We prefer the conservative and she the more vivid patterns and hues . We recognized immediately that the “slip of the tongue” revealed a wide difference in taste .
 We also make mistakes in reading and writing that reveal our motives and concerns, such as our own motives .
 A woman desperate to have children will read storks for stocks in her financial column . She'll read stork for stocks as she tries to get pregnant .
 Freud says the fact that such errors are not accidental is not the special discovery of the psychologist . Freud says such errors not accidental, Freud says, is not a special discovery he made .
 People in general realize full well that when a man is late for an appointment he doesn’t think too much of the person he’s meeting . Quite the contrary, he writes, he says .
 A man who forgets to return books may merely he revealing an unconscious desire to possess more . Similarly a man who “forgets” to pay for his cigarettes at the drug store may, unknown to himself, have a larcenous corner in his soul .
 Freud says we may leave an expensive item on a streetcar because we want to punish ourselves for our extravagance . Freud: We may leave something expensive on the street because we are punishing ourselves for being extravagant .
 We fail to mail a letter continually because for some reason we don’t want to send it . We often fail to send a letter because we don't want to mail it .
 If the law of cause and effect governs all aspects of life, then surely Freud’s theory is incontestable . Freud's theory is in doubt, but surely he's proved it to be true? Freud says .
 A very exciting concept, which could free us of many of the false excuses we now give for irrational behavior, could be used to free us from irrational behavior . The concept is a very exciting idea, and it could be very useful for people to think about their behavior .
 The Winchester Star, left at your Kesidenca for one year, $4.00 in Advancs Single Copies, was left at the end of the 1950s .
 The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements but will publish without charge in the next issue, or republish that portiou oi the advertisement which is incorrect .
 OLDest NEWSPAPER PRINTED r N WINCHESTER serving the Community 81 years . Largest Sworn Circulation .
 Where this co-operation is not forth-coming sterner measures are needed, i say . We are desirnoticing more and more elderly able, and are indeed desir noticing more than more .
 California gives their aged, one hundred dollars monthly and a decent self respecting place to live such as units on the first floor . I heard on my radic that California gives them aged one hundred dollar monthly .
 This is a selfish attitude as they would have to make new friends and upset all their lives. This is the selfish attitude . This is not the best way to deal with the problems of the young people. It would be a waste of time and money.
 I read with interest your editorial “Why We are Concerned” in the October 12 issue of the Star, and would like to congratulate you on it . I would also congratulate you for your success in your editorial .
 Winchester, Massachusetts, has no reason to expect a series of riots akin to those which occurred Columbus Day in Boston . Winchester, however, has a problem, which, though smaller is quite serious . Winchester is not likely to see a repeat of Columbus Day riots in the city .
 This revolves around the small group of youngsters you spoke of, and the example they set their contemporaries . This revolves basically around the young people they set themselves as a role model .
 It would seem that leniency on the part of the police, and remonstrations by parents have not been enough for at least some of these youngsters . It would be the first time the police have been allowed to take part in this type of crime .
 Some will say it is unfair to saddle youngsters with a court record, and in many cases this is true . But I am sure Chief Derro and his men would have no trouble identifying habitual offenders . Some say it's unfair to sadden youngsters with court records .
 Once an example is made of these cases others will quickly take heed and mend their ways . The case will be an example of how people are willing to change their ways.
 The young have always spoken a language mystifying, maddening and untranslatable to adults . The young speak a language that is mystifying to adults, says Simon Cowan .
 Sociologists confuse things further by saying that this form of selfexpression fulfills a need for individual self-expression in an adult society, while at the same time giving youth a sense of belonging to a group . Sociologists say it fulfills the need to individual self expression in adult society
 Not too many years ago “Pig Latin,” in which words were pronounced backwards, was all the rage . “The Pig Latin” is a Latin Latin form of Latin Latin, which is pronounced backwards .
 Adults might sneer that such a code as “Arp” is beyond present day youth who have been accused of not knowing a vowel from a consonant . Adults, on the other hand, may sneer .
 Today’s ‘Flip Talk’ is colorful, often highly descriptive and though they might cringe at the thought, much of it was being spoken by adults at least twenty years ago . The flip talk is colorful and highly descriptive .
 Today’s ‘Cats’ are speaking a language that has been in common usage among jazz musicians and in other entertainment fields for many years . Today's "Cats" are speaking in a language used by jazz musicians, other musicians .
 Words like ‘Square,’ ‘Cool,” ‘Cat’ and ‘Hip’ have taken nearly two decades to trickle down to common usage among teenagers . “Fake it” and “Daddy-O” are among the
 The evidence may be dis illusioning to teenagers who thought they were speaking a new language . It will probably be a relief to parents to find they can blame someone besides their offspring for the puzzling jargon they hear at the dinner table .
 Priced from SI 2.08 to $10.95 RonePs CHILDRENS SHOP Open Friday Evening 23 .
 The first dinner committee and the waiters will select from the officers and directors* of the club . The waiters and the committee will be selected from the committee and waiters . The committee will then select the first dinner dinner committee members .
 Lexington has a list of interesting speakers which the program committee has prepared . Town-wide participation in this club could not paral lei the results obtained in Lexington .
 Winchester's representatives. Winchester’s. Congregational Men’�s Club Program for 1961-1962 . Our season will get under way on October 26, when Winchester.s representatives. will return to Winchester . Winchester .
 The Massachusetts 1961 Massachusetts Legislature was created in 1961 . Harrison Chadwick discusses the pros and cons of the Massachusetts Legislature . Chadwick talks about the state legislature .
 Tuesday, November 28, 1961 — Forum Night, a special program catering to the high school group and their fathers . Wednesday, January 17, 1962 — “The Athletic Program — Winchester Style,” a discussion of the responsibilities and activities of the Winchester school system in the field of
 Tuesday, March 27, 1962 — “Manned Space Flight’s” A discussion of the accomplishments and potentialities of the Space Age, by Dr. Dr. Richard S. Johnson .
 AVCO Research and Advanced Development Division director Mac Adams talks about AVCO . He says AVCO is committed to the world's leading technology firm . Adams: "AVCO is a great place to work"
 Tuesday, April 24, 1962 — Ladies’ Night, “The Population Explosion,” a discussion of mounting urban and suburban problems as a result of rapidly shifting populations in and around our metropolitan cities, by Dr. Dr. David Perry .
 Prof. Prof. Haile Selassie was a consultant to Emperor Haile . He was a former consultant to the Emperor of Ethiopia . He called Africa A Lightening Continent .
 If you live in Winchester, and are interested, come and bring your friends . The Winchester, Winchester, area will be open for the first time .
 Dinner arrangements may be made by calling Philip Cabot, dinner chairman, PA 9-5135, at least three days in advance . The highlight of the evening was the sincere address and presentation of a gold badge to Joe by our auxiliary chief, Fred Wier .
 PraiBe must be given to the men of the banquet committee, who provided us was a splendid dinner and dance band . PraiB must also give to the people of the . committee .
 If a prize had been awarded for the most talented feet, John Collins would have nailed it . Collins' feet would have been the star of the show .
 John William Thornton of 1 Indian Hill Road, for thirty-five years a resident of Winchester, died Sunday afternoon, October 15, at the Winchester Hospital where he had been readmitted, recently . He had been at the end of more than twelve years of heart disease .
 Mr Thornton was the son of William N and Annie Thornton, both natives of Leeds . He was born to Annie Thornton and William N. Thornton .
 He was born in East Boston, February 10, 1886 . beginning his education there and at the Boston Latin School . He was also educated in Boston .
 Mr Thornton was associated with the John A Frye Shoe Co., of Marlboro, for thirtyeight years before his retirement in 1948 as a result of illhess. During a long, active life in the shoe trade, Mr Thornton lived in Marlborough, England .
 He was Secretary-Treasurer of the Boston Shoe Associates for 25 years . He was regarded with respect within the shoe industry .
 He was a dedicated member of the Church of the Epiphany where he served on the vestry . He was also a member of a vestry at the church where he was a member .
 After ten years of singing as tenor soloist in the King's Chapel male choir, he continued his interest in church music at the Epiphany Church .
 In addition to his activities in music, Mr Thornton maintained interest in the Masonic Orders . Mr Thornton was a member of the Masonic Order .
 In 1914 Mr Thornton married Winifred A Harrington, also of East Boston, by whom he is survived .
 Funeral services were held Tuesday afternoon at the church of the Epiphany with the Reverend Mr Ralph B Putney, B.D., officiating .
 WMHA Plans First Meeting on Recreation facilities for teenagers . Winchester Mental Health Association has designed its first meeting of the year to hear on this subject . WMHA plans first meeting on recreational facilities .
 Osier Peterson, 1 Yale Street, will appear at 9:45m. Wednesday morning, October 28, at 9.45m .
 The local Mental Health Association wants to further the understanding of the behavior of teenagers . The organization's program committee is the thinking of its program committee, under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 A member of the Town Recreational Committee has been invited to attend the meeting . Discussion after the talk should relate to some of the plans the Committee has under consideration .
 Winchester Mental Health Association will start its fourth year of service to the town . Winchester is an affiliate of the Massachusetts Association for Mental Health . The group is a branch of the Mystic Valley and Mystic Valley Mental Health associations .
 Coffee will be served from 9:45 until 10:15, when the speaker will begin . The speaker will speak at the end of the session .
 Serving on the Program Committee with the above chairmen are the hostess, Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . Serving in the program committee are the hosts of the event .
 Planning Mr Chadwick, our representative in the General Court, will present the larger planning picture as it affects the entire metropolitan area . He will present a larger picture of the planning picture to the general court .
 In 1956, Mr. (’had wick) introduced the first Metropolitan Planning Bill which was designed to establish art advisory planning agency . The bill was introduced in 1956, and was intended to establish a planning agency.
 The bill was reported out favorably by the Metropolitan Affairs Committee this winter . But it was “killed” by the device of turning off the microphone without allowing either discussion or vote .
 Winchester will host a joint discussion exploring the problems of planning and the advantages of planning . Winchester’s relationship to the Metropolitan Boston area will also be explored .
 In this exchange of views, both men stand out as experts devoted to the best interests of Winchester, Winchester .
 Word has been received here of the death, suddenly, in Berlin . William S Bramhall died suddenly in his native Germany .
 William Bramhall was a former resident of Winchester. N.IL, on October 11, of William S Bramhall, a former . resident of . Winchester.IL .
 He came to Winchester in 1949 and made his home on Ardley Place until he left town to go to Maine in 1952 . A department store manager, he lived there until 1952 .
 Ruth I Bramhall is survived by a daughter, Judith B Getchell; and a son, Peter . Peter Bramhall . The Bramhall family also had a daughter and son, Mrs. Ruth Bramhall; and Mrs. Judith B Bramhall.
 The teacher may give out a warning at any time during the term he or she thinks one is warranted . Teachers may also give out warnings during the time they think they are warranted .
 Students are being asked to take the measure of their own failures and see what they themselves can, do to correct them . By this move the students are being . asked increasingly to . take the measures of their . own failures .
 Washington School Harvest Hop . Autumn is here again and school year activities begin to begin in earnest .
 George Washington School's annual Harvest Hop is held in honor of the new season . The annual dance is held at George Washington's Washington School in Washington, DC .
 The informal affair will he held tomorrow night, Oetohet 20, in the school auditorium from 9 to 1 .
 Samuel Perkins, have been working hard all month and promise a gala eve for all those attending .
 Guests will be treated to eye-filling decorations, punch, coffee, and light refreshments . Robert Fiore and his orchestra will provide music .
 There will be a special “Get Acquainted” table for new members and last-minute dicisionmakers . Remember, guests are welcome and there will be guests welcome and guests welcome .
 We'll see you tomorrow night at the Harvest Hop . Put on your dancin’ shoes and we’ll see you .
 Funeral services for Gustave Johnson of 31 Englewood Road were held Tuesday, October 10, at the Kimball Chapel . Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating .
 He was born August 3, 1903, in Brookline, Massachusetts, in 1903 . He was the son of Sven, and Marie Johnson .
 Until his recent retirement, he had been a maintenance man for 35 years at the Ford plant in Somerville . He had made his home in Winchester for 20 years, and until his retirement had been at the plant for 35 .
 The newly completed Wedgewood Apartments are located on the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center . All-electric living is a simplified, luxurious, all-electric lifestyle .
 Boxed books, travel, diaries, guest and baby’s books, baby photo books, scrap books and others, drastically reduced at Winchester Star . Call Mission 8-6250 Monday through Friday.
 $500 to $700 a month for qualified men . We are looking for two men to work out of our Reading office in Middlesex County .
 Salary and expenses paid during your training period . First year bonus $2,040 . Group insurance and retirement program for a secure future .
 This unusual home consists of a large living room with fireplace, full dining room, extralarge kitchen with laundry area, plus four twin bedrooms and two ceramic-tile baths . Four twin bedrooms, four bathrooms, two ceramic tile bathrooms .
 Almost new nine-room home on large wooded lot . Nine-room house on large lot . Realtors Ruth C PORTER Co. Realtor .
 Living room, dining room, 11electric kitchen with breakfast area, four bedrooms and den or fifth bedroom, plus panelled family room, three baths, two-car garage . Charming fi rep laced living room and dining room with 11 electric kitchen .
 For gracious family living, we have an older home, well maintained, of ten rooms, threo-and-one-half baths, in an excellent West Side location .
 Many extras go with the property, which we will gladly show by appointment . Many extras are available for sale, but many extras are needed .
 WHITTEMORE, Realtor 38 Church Street PA 9-3320, 0047, 5612, 2672. 1164, 5046, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER On the Bus Line .
 Three bedrooms, IMj ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining room, good living room with fireplace with fireplace . IMj Ceramic-tile bathrooms, lovely dining room and living room .
 Colonial in secluded Fells location features long living room, screened porch, patio, modern kitchen, four bedrooms, lots of charm . Four bedrooms, four bathrooms and four bathrooms . Colonial home has screened porch .
 Attractive firepluced living room, family dining room, large all-electric built-in kitchen, tiled bath, three twin bedrooms on one level . Three twin bedrooms .
 Lower level offers fire placed family room, bedroom, luvatory, and garage . Lower level has fire placed lower level family room and bedroom .
 Fine WINCHESTER COLONIAL on the West Side is a six-room Colonial . Buy a well-laid-out Colonial on the west Side of Chicago .
 All large rooms, l l A baths, plus a play room, screened porch and putio . Play room, play room and screened porch with screened porch .
 All-brick (’ape-ranch in a quiet secluded setting, yet handy to the center and schools . Winchester is located at 5 Church Street, located near the center of the city .
 NEW: George L Billman, Sidney C Blanchard, Dudley H Bradlee, II and Henry L Clark, Jr. George L. Billman was the Treasurer . NEW:
 Alfred D Elliott is the secretary of the Winchester Co-operative Bank . Alfred D. Elliott is a member of the Board of Trustees . Stanley E Neill is the chairman of the Trusteeship Committee . The board is also known for its security procedures .
 H Newton Clay, pastor of Crawford Memorial Church, came in to the Star Office Friday with a sprig of forsythia in bloom . Clay is pastor of the Crawford Memorial church .
 He picked the sprig from a bush at the parsonage and said there were many others on the bush . The sprig is one of many others picked from the bush, he said .
 1962 calendar refills, diaries, scenic calendars and Phillips Brooks calendars are in stock . All our 1962 calendars are now available .
 William Falzano, known locally as ‘Bill the Taximan, is recovering from major surgery . He is at Cambridge City Hospital recovering after major surgery performed last Wednesday .
 The operation was necessary for repairs from his near-fatal accident last February . It was necessary to repair the damage caused by a near fatal accident last year .
 The Misses will spend 10 days vacationing at the Elbow Beach Surf Club in Bermuda .
 Long School WeIIs 3-3339 Res. Res. july27-ti Newsy Paragraphs . Call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000 .
 States as distant from the campus as Hawaii and California were represented .
 Fryeburg Academy student Steve Wilson scored a goal in a recent home soccer game against North Yarmouth Academy . Steve Wilson is a student at Fryburg Academy, Maine .
 A /2c John P Mawn has returned to his duties at Bolling Air Force Base, Washington, D. C., after spending ten days leave with his family .
 Charles Charles School, Woburn, 1955, and Keith Academy, Lowell, 1959, entered the service March 15, 1960 . Charles attended Keith Academy in Lowell .
 Second in aeriea of Winahenter Morning"", presented by Winchester Wellesley Club in Hadley Hall, Church of th« Epiphany . Winchester wellesley Club . Winchester .
 College Club Art Group will meet at the De Cordova Museum in Lincoln promptly at 10:15m. October 20, Friday, Friday .
 Monday evening at 7 :30m, Guest night of The Fortnightly at Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall . Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist Church .
 Salvy and Dan Cavfcchio, marimba, xylophone, and accordion artists, October 24, Friends of Winchester Hospital, Volunteer Training Program for ALL HOSPITAL VOLUNTEERS, 8m Wyman School . Salvy, Dan and Dan, Salvy
 Vinson Owen School Parents’ Association Meeting. October 25, Wednesday, 8 a.m. Meeting. Meeting will be held at the school .
 October 28, Saturday, 10:15m., Children’s Film Program, Rich Room, Public Library . Children's Film Program is at the Public Library in New York City .
 The Fortnightly presents Gordon Bennett’s Tickle-um Theatre Marionettes to children and grown-ups at the McCall Junior High School Auditorium . Gordon Bennett's show is set at McCall Jr. High School .
 October 30, Monday, Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church, with Ted Langdell, auctioneer . Auctioneer Ted Langsell auctioneer.
 Winchester Historical Society at 7 :30m. in Library in Rich Room. November 2, Thursday, Thursday at 7 p.m. Winchester historical society at 7:30 m. in library in Rich room. Winchester Historical society will meet November 2 . Winchester historical Society will meet at 7
 Newsy Paragraphs For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000.
 Ruth Russell Crosby, bookkeeper at the Winchester National Bank, started her vacation on Monday of this week . She is on vacation from her job as bookkeeper .
 A new resident in Winchester offering Beauty Counselor products and service . Winchester, Winchester, is a new resident of the town .
 Jim stands 5ft.in. and tips the beam at 176.5in . Jim is a former Winchester high grid performer and former high grid star .
 J Paul Marcous of Winchester was one of 15 community chairmen who reported record breaking Heart Fund years in the annual report of the Massachusetts Heart Association's Greater Boston Chapter .
 Report: 15 cities and towns surpassed all previous years in raising funds during the annual Heart Fund drive in February . Report: These 15 towns surpassed previous years raising funds .
 Miss Sally Clark, daughter of Mrs. Clark, will be honored at the age of 9.86 .
 Cards received this week from Peter Marchesi report that he and Michele Bdlino, father of the famous football playing family, are traveling all over Italy, visiting Sicily, Naples, Potenza, Salerno, and Mt. Mt. Pa.
 Mr Bellino went to Italy primarily to see his aged mother in that country . He was visiting his mother in Italy to see her old age .
 A tree-planting ceremony was held on the common October 11 . Girl Scout Council President James Stewart led the ceremony . The event was held in Rochester .
 Harold Butters, Mr MacDonnell, Alexander Heimlich, landscape architect in charge of common beautification plan, Mrs. Mrs. MacDonnell and Mr. Butters .
 Next March will be the actual birthday, so we plant this laburnum or golden chain tree now . It may bear its lovely golden blossoms next spring . We plant it now .
 The first link in the chain is a Brownie, with her bright enthusiasm and eagerness to learn . The Brownie is the first link to the chain of learning .
 The second link in the chain is an Intermediate, with her growing knowledge and increase in skills . She is now an Intermediate at the age of eight .
 The third link is a Senior with her emphasis on service, who willingly shares her knowledge with the younger girls . The Senior is the third link to the girls' success .
 The next link is the adult Scout who gives her time and interest to leadership and administration, serving youth . The adult Scout is a leader and administration leader who serves youth .
 Today is soon tomorrow, And all our tomorrows Lie in the hands of youth, says President Obama .
 Her gift to youth was Girl Scouting, And her dream, a tree of fellowship Grown from a tiny seed . Her dream was to help youth with Girl Scouting. Her dream is to help girls with literacy skills .
 Richard Mulligan’s waltzy “Method” techniques do nothing to clear the clutter . Billy Brown and director Michael Murray's acceptance of O'Neill's eleven scene changes do nothing, writes Tom Charity .
 It's also true that the stage settings and properties are too consciously poor . It's true that it is also true to be too conscious poor .
 "Brown's" is an attempt to be mystical and classic with a story that is more in the tradition of Stella Dallas than Electra . But the primary fault is ""Brown’s," O’Neill's attempt to try and be mystical, classic .
 "Brown" is concerned with the whiskey-laced fortunes of one Dion Anthony, confident that he will be a great artist because his mother thinks he can . O’Neill isn’t trying to replace the old gods with new, when “Brown’s�
 Ripped asunder by internal agony never adequately explained, he staggers from boyhood to manhood, from mama's to wifey’s lap, weeping, hooting and hollering about the Philistine world .
 Dion moves from expectation that he'll rank with Titian to conviction that he’s nothing-nohow, $100 away from skid row . Dion: "I'm not going to be in trouble, but I'm going to make it happen"
 Dion’s wife, serving at once as mother, lover, and confessor, urges her “little boy” onward and upward . All the while, of course, Dion's wife, serves as mother and lover, urging her "little boy"
 When Dion's toots exhaust the cash from the sale of the old homestead, wife Peggy turns to her former lover and Dion’s college room mate, Bill Brown . Brown is a former room mate to Dion's wife Peggy .
 Bill, of course, is terribly successful, which is to say evil, owner of a thriving architectural firm . Bill is a terribly successful architect, but he is also evil .
 Dion grandly sacrifices art and integrity on the great God Brown’s high altar of business . Brown agrees to take Dion on for old school tie, and Dion sacrifices art . He agrees to work with Brown for an old-school tie .
 Cybel is a conventional good-hearted, rough-hewn whore, who, down deep, is still seeking true love . His only relief, save making a drunken ass of himself blaming every one for his failure, seems to be in the boudoir of one Cybel .
 Cybel possesses in large measure that special divinity dispensed by O’Neill to drunks and derelicts . This trite little plot is made “classic” and “complex” through the introduction of masks, slapped on and off .
 Billy Brown, fed up with Dion's charges that he’s palming off his drawings as his own, does Dion in . He steals his mask, takes his wife without her guessing the difference and is shot for the murder of himself .
 O'Neill considered it the principal business of drama to make more mysterious fit “Brown” proves something else about O’Neill . ‘Brown’ is part of the mystery .
 "He is too serious too lacking in that philosophic humor without which the outlines of tragedy cannot be seen," he says .
 This play is so terribly “sad,” that a single titter over one or two funny phrases has the effect of partial catharsis . The play is very sad, but it's so sad that a tittering over a few funny phrases can be cathars
 It is certainly its humor more than its sermonettes that makes “The Iceman Cometh” a moving play .
 Harry Hope tells us a good deal more of the human condition than Larry Slade . Harry Hope says he has a lot more knowledge of the condition of human life than Larry .
 There remain still three points to be made about the Charles pro-Charles proction .
 Edward Finnegan appeared in two bit parts in the film . The actor's brief appearance was an all-too-brief appearance .
 It is a painful reminder of the Charles’s best work and of Mr Finnegan's supreme acting skill . It is also a reminder of Charles' best work .
 No gesture, no word, no movement, no glance is separable from the dramatic effect Mr Finnegan intends and conveys, says MrFinnegan .
 Charles should schedule one play per season in which he leads or supports . He is superb and should schedule at least one of his plays per season . Charles should also schedule one of the plays he leads, supports or leads .
 Let us hope that the Charles drops O’Neill for a while, and Miller, too. Second, let us hope they drop Miller, and O'Neill, for a time .
 Moliere is not dead, nor Shakespeare, Brecht, Lorca, Strindberg, Pirandello, Hauptmann, or Marlowe . Moliere, Shakespeare, and Lorca are not dead .
 Sartre’s “The Condemned of Altona” still to be produced in America after two years in Europe . And there seems to be no good reason why the attempt can’t be made to do a premiere of something like the premiere of
 In too many plays at Boston’s theater of ideas, Nora is still walking out of her doll house . The play is about a girl who walks out of a doll house, Nora .
 Boston should be ashamed of itself that the Charles Playhouse is having difficulty raising $5,000 to keep itself going . Boston should also be ashamed that it's struggling to raise enough money for the playhouse .
 I looked for Winchester people at the theater Friday night, without success . Winchester people were there Friday night . Winchester is a Winchester town .
 The theater is the only serious theater in the United States . The theater's income and culture can help pay for it, it's hoped wc can finance it .
 Charles Players give us a drama to think about . After all, even when the play lets them down, the Charles Players make us think about the play .
 Rem* of rur af ter being badly burned Monday evening oil Ridge j Street near Lockelnnd Road . Oil Ridge Road was badly burned .
 John L O'Connor of Seituate Street, Arlington, had ignition trouble and gone to Arlington for help .
 Albert T MoDougall, president of Winchester Chapter, Guild of the Infant Saviour, announces upon word from Europe that Mrs. Mrs. Martha was to be buried in hospital .
 Joseph P Kennedy, mother of the President and matriarch of the fabulous Kennedy clan, will he in Winchester on Sunday afternoon, November 19 . He will be in Winchester, Winchester on November 19.
 Kennedy will lecture on her experience for the benefit of the Guild, at McCall Junior High School Auditorium at 2:30. Kennedy will be speaking at the school's Auditorium .
 John F Fitzgerald, Mayor of Boston, has been in the forefront of three generations of New’ England, national and international public affairs . Fitzgerald has been leading Boston Mayor in the past three decades .
 Her illustrated lecture will show some of the high lights of the turbulent prewar years . She accompanied him to England, and in her illustrated lecture she will show the high-light of those turbulent times .
 Kennedy has guided the careers, bhth in and out of public life, of her sizeable family . Kennedy has been very active in guiding the careers of her large family .
 Her son, John, was inaugurated as President of the United States last year . She has been involved in her son's inauguration as President .
 Newsy Paragraphs Officer David Boyle removed a cow belonging to Mr Rotondi last Friday afternoon from the driveway of 22 Laurell Hill Lane . The cow was removed from a driveway in the driveway on Laurell Hills Lane .
 Officers Cogan and D Boyle removed a horse from the B & M tracks at the Center depot just before noon last Friday .
 You can now order Eaton’s personalized stationery at the Winchester Star . The Winchester Star is now available in print and online .
 Ranch Type automobiles with Standard Transmission in which there is room for a collapsible cot stretcher making same a Cruiser Ambulance . Ranch Type cars with standard transmission with room for collapsible stretcher .
 Cars to be equipped with switch to switch to corttrol underthe-hood radio speakers . Cars will have to be fitted with speakers that can be controlled by remote speakers .
 The Board reserves the right to reject any or all bids or accept such bids as may be for the best interests of the Town of Winchester, Mass.
 That the zoning by-laws be amended by changing or altering tlu* map incorporated therein and made a part thereof . A portion of that certain distinct indicated and identified as a general residence district will be changed from a general . residence district to an industrial district . The following described area will
 Mystic Builders Supply, one hundred feet, more or less, described in plan of “Town of Winchester, Mass., Plan of Zoning Changes, Jan., 1961 . Town of Winchester’s plan of zoning changes was published in 1961 .
 Meeting of June 19, 1961, and approved by the Attorney General of Massachusetts on October 10, 1961 . Meeting was held in Massachusetts in 1961 and approved in 1961 .
 Ryerson Mrs. Mrs. Workers 32 Church Street in Toronto, Canada, will be offering a special Halloween special on October 19 .
 Volunteers being enrolled as a volunteer worker for the Residential Chairman Janies F Quine and hi Fund agencies to fill every human j need .
 Those wishing to serve as volunteers should call United Fund Headquarters at RI 2-2010 . Volunteers can contact the United Fund at RI2-2010.
 Figures released by Greater Boston United Fund for this fall’s ‘‘People Helping People’ campaign . Winchester Hospital, Winchester Visiting Visiting . Nurse Association, Winchester . Soc. for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, Winchester Hospital and Winchester . Visiting
 Patients admitted to United Fund aided community and Boston Hospitals numbered 1921 . Patients admitted were admitted to the hospitals .
 Pendleton jackets have a parade of plaids, patterns and plain colors . 1576 Winchester citizens were provided with further treatment and prosthetic devices .
 Pendleton jackets are lightweight yet amazingly warm . Lightweight yet incredibly warm, they are perfect for indoors or out . Pendleton jacket is perfect for indoor or out.
 Pendleton dyed, spun and woven by Pendleton to give you years of proud service . Here’s rich virgin wool .
 Neighborhood Service Teams and Volunteer Trainers will find stimulating subjects discussed in their fields of endeavor . Live question and answer periods are expected .
 The instruction, given by notable Scout Leaders, will enlarge upon those given in local councils, and in many cases, will give training that is omitted .
 Some 2085 Winchester youngsters participated in programs and activities of United Fund supported youth agencies . Keel heather clinics, camps, guidance centers, homes, nurseries and neighborhood houses helped fill the needs of 42 children .
 Over 2 million people live in 50 communities being served by the United Fund of Greater Boston . The United Fund is a non-profit run by the Boston area .
 Last year more than 500,000 families and persons sought and received aid from hospitals, health and rehabilitation facilities, family and relief services, homes for houses, Men’s, Boys’ and Ladies’ Shops .
 The U.S. Children’s services and youth agencies are supported by the United Fund . Winchester PArkview 9-3070 is open daily 9 to 5:30 Friday Evenings until 9:00 .
 Population Survey sample panel will be asked special questions on consumer plans to purchase automobiles, television sets, washing machines, and refrigerators . Census H fine liquors vintage wines choice beer and ale rent .
 This is part of a quarterly survey being made at the request of the Federal Reserve Board for use in a national study of consumer buying trends .
 The questions on education and consumer buying plans are in addition to the regular inquiries on employment and unemployment which are asked each month in the Current Population Survey .
 Massachusetts Federation of Republican Women planning a “know your congressman” panel . Panel will be held in Worcester on October 27 at the Hotel Bancroft beginning at 10m.
 Luncheon is scheduled for 12:30, which time the guest speaker will be lion . Luncheon will be held at 12.30, with a guest speaker at the time .
 C CAMEO CREAM SANDWICH COOKIES EDUCATOR DUTCH STYLE CASHEW COOKIE EDUCator SESAME CRACKERS SUNSHINE CHOCOLATE CHIP COOKies . Collision Work Our Specialty Service Ph
 It’s a good game, and you can get it and other new games at the Win Chester Star . You can also buy the game from the store .
 TWO DAYS ONLY FRIDAY & SATURDAY Long and G rannon SALE 11.90 Reg..95 u Big Winners At W 15.90 .
 A low-Htarked leather-beel shoe that oilers you |H*rfed support. HereV is a beautifully low-Tarked . leather- beel shoe .
 M. romhinution last lor perfeet lit . Made on our fammi. made on our family .
 Gome in Friday and Saturday and get your share of these marvelous savings . Visit the Gome on CNN.com/Heroes for more information .
 The Emeralds maintain their position in first place in the I Cafeteria Menu Bowling League . The second place Diamonds lost 4 points resulting in a drop to fifth place .
 Top honors once again to our chairlady, Captain Ginger Maggio of the Emeralds .
 "Ginger" is a rising star of the tennis world . She has a history of setting higher goals in her career .
 Our jovial Virginia Maeinanti of the Rubies is back on the top ten list . The Rubies star is back in the top 10 .
 Mary Fiorelli bowled in the same team and bowling quite well . Also bowling well is newcomer, MaryFiorelli .
 Florence Ciarcia of the Pearls with a total three string of 269. A fine performance was given by Florence Ciarra of the Paints .
 Being the spark plug helped her team win 4 points and thus defeat the 2nd place Diamond team . She was the sparkplug for her team and helped them beat the Diamond team by 4 points .
 Captain Louise Vigorita of the Diamonds was the recipient of a gift by the members of her team, Gert Fiore, Angie Dattilo, Emma Provinzano, and Phil Marrone .
 Daughter Ann Melaragni was hostess at a social gathering for many of Louise's friends . Louise's daughter Ann was a hostess for many friends .
 A dance to be held on Saturday, the eleventh of November, at the Sons of Italy Home .
 Everyone is welcome for a nite of fun, dancing and relaxation under the most pleasant conditions .
 Turkey pot pie, mashed potatoes, hot biscuit, cranberry sauce, or beef broth . Peanut butter and jelly sandwich, celery sticks, brown betty and sauce, milk . Thanksgiving pot pie .
 Baked lamb chop, potato pulf, green beans, apple jelly, date mulfin, date muffin, raspberry square, milk . Chinese chow mein, rice-noodles, buttered rice noodles and date muffins .
 Boiled frankfort, roll, baked beans, relish-catsup-mustard, cabbage salad, corn bread, or chicken noodle soup, frankfort in roll . Fudge cake, cocoanut frosting, milk. Thursday .
 Friday — Baked macaroni and cheese, tomato-lettuce salad, coffee cake, or orange and grapefruit juice, tunafish salad sandwich, butterscotch pudding, milk sandwich . Sandwiches — Sliced cheese, egg salad, sliced cheese, sliced
 When the bell rings for Trick or Treat for UNICEF, please support the young pegple . Please support the families of those with disabilities .
 As many streets as possible will be canvassed . If you do not see the collectors, please call the President of the Senior group, Norman Stafford, PA 90538, and someone will call .
 The Young People doing the canvassing will wear tags to identify them and they will travel in pairs . Young People will be travelling in pairs of people in pairs to canvass .
 John Carroll, big reserve tackle on the Holy Cross football team, was admitted to St. John Carroll's St. Francis Hospital . Carroll is a junior at Holy Cross and plays for the team .
 John A Carroll of 8 Bonud Road, is through with football for this year . Carroll is the only player to be through with this year's club . Carroll has been playing football for the past two seasons .
 Before enrolling at The Cross he starred in the line for Malden Catholic High School . The Cross is a junior in the state of Massachusetts .
 He has been doing well at Worcester which makes his loss to the team more regrettable . The Worcester club have been without a permanent replacement since his departure from Worcester .
 Winchester Boat Club held annual awards banquet Saturday . Rod Long and John Gannon were the “big winners’s”
 The two made a pail in the Snipe fleet two years ago, having since gone their own separate ways . They walked off with the two most coveted trophies at the Winchester Boat Club .
 Rob Dannenherg, Rod Long and Terry Cronburg drew the highlights in the Snipe awards for the three major 10-race series of the year . After a delicious turkey dinner, Ralph Swanson proceeded to award the numerous trophies and prizes .
 John Berger, Barbara Dannenherg, Alton Jones and ClarkBartell did likewise in the Turnabout fleets four series . The Turnabout fleet four series also featured in the series .
 After the awards had been distributed, the new officers for the 1962 season were announced . The new officers were announced at the ceremony .
 In the Snipe fleet they are captain, Russ Cook, first mate, Rob Dannenberg, and purser, Geoffrey Kerrigan . The Snipe is the first of a fleet that has a crew of four .
 In the Turnabout fleet they are captain, Dick Preston, first mate, Roy Sunesonr, purser, Paul Sanderson, and junior first mate Ron Bartell . They are captain and first mate Dick Preston .
 Snipe Fleet Awards “A” series — 1, Rob Dannenherg; 2, Norman Towle; 3, Dick Ivers. The Snipes Fleet Awards "A" series is a "series" of awards show winners .
 New at the Star office, three-hole Accropress genuine ring binders, assorted colors, excellent for theme or thesis, 80 cents each .
 Sam Brllino, “Choppers’ Gangi, ‘Moose” Bellino, Procopio, manager, William Fiore. Sam Brillino, "Moose" Bellino. “Moose. Bellino’s”
 Standing, Venerable Frank Dattilo, I ony Lueei, Tony Chefalo, Pete Gilbert! Dick Tofuri, Richie Bucci, Joe Berardi, Joe Berardi, iareia, Don Kinton, Bob Fiore, Chirk V
 Belmont Hill Youth Hockey program will commence Dec. this year and continue through Feb. 2019 . Sessions will be held each Saturday morning at the Belmont Hills School artificial rink .
 To be eligible a boy must have been seven years old Aug. 1961, 1961, and under 15 as of Nov. 1961 . A boy must be seven-years-old .
 If conditions necessitate those directing the program reserve the right to decline applications . If conditions require such a change, the program could be turned down .
 The program will definitely be limited in size which means that applications will be received on a first-come first-serve basis . The program is expected to be a limited program .
 Application blanks may be secured at the Sport Shop and should be filled out and mailed at once with a check for $16 to cover ice cost and accident insurance . Application blank blankes should be sent to the Sports Shop with a $16 check .
 The first session will be devoted to hockey and skating drills . The second session, to a four-team league with 1 hour of ice time per game, will be dedicated to ice time .
 First session will be devoted to hockey and skating drills and the second, to a six-team league (seven games | plus father-son) 1 hour of ice time per game .
 The first session will be devoted to skating and hockey fundamentals . The second, to a six team league of five games, will be a six-game league .
 Mail a jigsaw puzzle postcard of Winchester to your friends, 26 cents each at Winchester Star Tray Painting Classes Stenciling, Oil Painting, Gold Leafing on Furniture, Tinware and YVooden articles .
 Middlesex II ockey League plans to use proposed hockey arena in Wakefield as the home of all league games in 1962-63 season . Tickets on sale at the door — 50 cents .
 The Middlesex schools will fulfill their one-year contract obligation with the North Shore Sports, Center in Lynn this winter . They hope the Wakefield arena will he ready for the league by November of next year .
 If present plans follow in order, construction should begin in early spring and be completed in a year from next month .
 The $500,000 enterprise will serve ice hockey, figure skating, pleasure skating and exhibition needs of the area . It is to be located on North Avenue, olf Route 128, in Wakefield, Wakefield .
 Mr Donovan said, “The league's officials look with keen interest to this new arena’s new arena.”
 Middlesex Hockey League was created only last year . Belmont, Reading, Stoneham, Melrose, Winchester, Wakefield, Lexington and Watertown are in the league .
 Concord does not have a hockey squad, though it has hopes of organizing one in the near future . Concord hopes to organize a hockey team soon .
 Gas is competitive in price with other automatic heating fuels . No service contracts, no tanks, no unexpected repair bills . No tank tanks or service contracts .
 No trips to the basement to check fuel supplies . Clean warm heat . . . and faithful service . Service .
 You’ll get a FREE ESTIMATE for changing as well as an estimate of heating costs .
 If at the end of one heating season a home owner is not completely satisfied, we will remove the burner and refund every cent paid on it . We will also refund all the money paid on the burner .
 Going into the fifth week, it seems that Pat Bruno will hold onto the low score of 30 . The bowlers seem to he improve their scores as the weeks go by .
 If Roger Maris can break a longstanding record, so can a record be broken right here in our own league? The world's most famous player has never broken a record in his own league .
 Up-to-date scores and standings were given a week ago and we had no action the past week . You will be brought up to date in this column next week .
 Strike Lanes climb into second place in the race for the first time in a row . It was also a good night for Strike Lane who climbed into second position .
 It is being used to give the weaker teams a better chance and also to avoid a roll off in case of a tie string by giving each team a single point . Each team will receive one point if they finish in a tie .
 The league as a whole is still very strong with 56 r /c of the men still maintaining a 90 or better average . 56 per cent of the league's players maintain a 90/better average on average .
 American Legion 1 36 6 Strike Lanes 32 8 American Legion 2 30 10 K of C 26 14 Brothers-in-law 26 14 Post Office 2 Atlantic Gelatin 49er’s St. St. Lanes .
 Winn Post Office 2 Hobo’s Pinfall 7298 7009 7337 6735 6707 6910 7048 7048 6948 6929 6648 6454 5316 6397 . High single for night, R Russo, 134, 134.
 Lexington came to Winchester unbeaten in three games, including a win over Stonchatn, conqueror of Winchester, 22-8, in a previous league engagement . Lexington won the previous match at StonChatn, a previous victory over Winchester . Lexington came into the match unbeaten in
 Winchester's win was a must for the Sachems to keep their championship hopes alive . Saturday’s win for Winchester means another defeat would have just about ended the championship hopes . Winchester has just one game left to spare .
 Our l\ew Teachers hnld a pre-Rame rally and marched into the end zone . The high school student body | — ■ — Our l
 Winchester-Lexington game was held in Winchester, Winchester, last Saturday . Captain Mike Bell ino, 35, and Dan Mahoney, 35-year-old, go for loose hall in Winchester game .
 Winchester Invades Melrose Oil Saturday for League Tilt . Winchester won over Cambridge Latin and Lexington . Sachems return to war path in real earnest Saturday .
 Winchester need another victory to remain in Middlesex League competition . Winchester need to win another game to remain on top of Middlesex table .
 Stoneham beat Winchester 22-8, while losing to Melrose, 14-0 . On the other hand, Stoneham won over Winchester, while Melrose won over Melrose . Stoneham also lost to Winchester and Melrose in the other games .
 The Raiders have always been tough for the Sachems and Saturday’s game looms as a toss-up with the breaks having a lot to do with the final outcome . The game is a toss up as the Raiders have a lot of the breaks have a big impact on the
 Coach Knowlton rates his Sachems better than a year ago when they battled the Raiders to a tie . Melrose is not as good as usual this fall, and in spite of the Stoneham debacle, coach says they're better .
 Winchester had that one all but hung in the trophy room when a blocked kick in the closing minutes of play gave Melrose a chance to tie . Only a missed field goal prevented the Raiders from winning . Winchester had a field goal in the final minute of play to avoid a loss .
 Last Saturday against Lexington Winchester Winchester showed its best form of the season, and the Sachems should be no worse than an even choice against Melrose Saturday .
 Kickoff is at 1:30 and with the Lexington victory as a stimulus it is expected that a big crowd of local rooters will make the trip to Melrose . Kickoff will take place at Melrose on Saturday afternoon .
 A 1960 graduate of Winchester High School, Steve played varsity basketball, served as president of the Philosophy Club, and was a member of the National Honor Soiety . Steve played basketball, played Philosophy Club president, was member of National Honor Society .
 M Virginia Biggey, co-ordinator of elementary education in Concord, elected as president of Pi Lambda Theta . Theta is a national honor and professional association for wumen in education .
 The Parker House tea will be held Saturday, October 21, at the Parker House in Boston . A distinguished list of invited guests will attend .
 The College of Saint Rose students will be invested with the academic cap and gown at a ceremony October 25 in the college chapel . Francis *L McGarrahan, 25, is among freshmen at the college .
 The event will mark the formal reception of the freshmen as members of the student body . The reception will be a formal reception for the freshmen .
 The academic attire is worn by the students on all PHYLLIS A ROGDE . Miss Phyllis A Rogde is daughter of Mr and Mrs. Rogde .
 Miss Leslie Forbes Forbes Usher, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Arthur T Rogde of 15 Foxcroft Road, was married to Mr Rogde . Miss Usher is the daughter of Arthur Rogde and Miss Rogde, from Foxcroft, and Mr. Usher .
 W Lawrence Usher of 8 Grove Street, 8 Grove St., are members of the freshman class at Wheaton College, Norton . Usher and Usher are freshman members of college's freshman class .
 Lexington brings big group of rooters to Winchester . Lexington brought big crowd to Winchester for first time in football history . Lexington and Lexington meet in Lexington on Saturday at Lexington .
 The visitors after 35 years without a win over the Sachems were very confident . The visitors had never won in 35 years before .
 Lexington Minuteboys scored first in the opening period . Lexington quarterback Pete Brock passed to Greg Jones for a touchdown . Winchester quarterback, Pete Brock, threw a touchdown for Lexington in the first quarter .
 Tom Mooney broke through to block the try for the extra point from placement . The try was the first of the game in a row for the Irishmen .
 Winchester took the ensuing kickoff and drove steadily up the field, completing five first downs and reaching the Lexington two yard line . Winchester drove up to Lexington's two-yard line and reached the Lexington 2 yard line, reaching the end of the field .
 The Minuteboys fumbled in turn and Jim Menucci came up with the ball at the Lexington three . The Lexington Minuteboys lost their first two games of the season .
 Qellino on a fullback sweep right went over for the touchdown, but failed in an attempt to add two points by a buck up the middle . The score was a touchdown for the second half .
 Sachems went out in front in the opening minutes of the second quarter . The Sachem went out ahead in the first quarter .
 Winchester racked up two first downs to Lexington, Lexington 31 . Winchester had a first down count at its 26th minute of play . Winchester scored two touchdowns in the game .
 Bellino galloped to the eight after a three yard try by Benincasa put the ball on the 28, and Bellino got outside at the right for a gallop to the the eight . A three-yard try by Bellino put the game on the right, and a
 Bellino drove into the end zone for a touchdown, but the try for extra points by passing was no good . Bellino scored a touchdown on a fullback sweep right . The score was a touchdown for Bellino .
 Brock again hit Jones with a pass out in the right fiat for the score . Adzigian reached the nine for the other first down and then Brock hit Jones for the first down . The score came back to the end of the quarter .
 Lexington intercepted a Bellino pass at the Winchester 30 . Winchester had the ball deep in its own territory when Clough intercepted the pass . Winchester intercepted the interception in the closing moments of the second quarter . Winchester has the ball in the first quarter .
 Richard Olsen grabbed the ball in the end zone, out-jumping three Winchester defenders for the score . With time running out Dave Adzigian off a sweep threw a pass to Richard Olsen .
 Winchester was offside on the play and from the one yard line Adzigian bucked his way over the line for two points . An attempted kick for the extra point was missed but Winchester missed an extra point . Winchester was also offside in the play .
 Winchester picked up four points, but a holding penalty put the ball back on the 25 . Winchester had four players on the field in the first half of the match . Winchester won the match, but the penalty was awarded for a holding . Winchester's goalkeeping error was ruled out for a
 Benincasa on a nice run got back 16 yards, and on the next play Colliander completed a pass out in the ight flat to Rich Rowe who lost his footing and fell while in the clear at the Lexington 43 .
 Colliander then threw, this time to Bellino who was hauled down at the Lexington 19 . Bellino was pulled down at 19 yards . Collianders then threw another throw, which was intercepted by Bellino .
 Lexington was offside and the ball moved ahead to the 14, Benincasa bucked for three, but Bellino was stopped without gain . Lexington was also offside on the first play .
 Colliander again hit Bellino at the Lexington six and Captain Mike slithered over for the touchdown . Bellino ran over for a touchdown at Lexington .
 Bellino then on a power sweep right got over for the two point premium that tied the score at 20 . Bellino was on the back of a double-digit lead in the first half of the game .
 Lexington got no nearer than the Winchester 19 in the third chukka . Winchester had the ball at the 19 when the final quarter began . Winchester got the ball back at the end of the third quarter .
 The Minutemen advanced to the ten, but on fourth down, a pass fell incomplete and Winchester took over . Winchester took the lead in the first quarter . Winchester advanced to 10, but a fourth down pass was incomplete and it fell incomplete .
 Bellino and Rowe made first down at the 30, but a sweep went bad and the Sachems wore pushed back to the Lexington 35 . The Lexington 35 was the first down of the series .
 Bellino got some good blocking and swung into the clear, legging it all the Bellino on his patented sweep right rushed in the extra points . Bellino rushed in an extra point after the extra point .
 The Sachems recovered a fumble and drove to the six-point lead in the first half . A fumble was recovered for the hosts, with a score of six from the field .
 Sachem's Tom Mooney intercepted his second aerial of the season and again ran the ball into the end zone . Mooney also intercepted his interception of the year and ran the football in the end of the score .
 Macdonald fails to add the extra points on a sweep and soon after the final whistle blew . Macdonald failed to add an extra point on a clean sheet .
 Lexington — Le, Olsen, Harridan ; It, Carpentino, Malcolm; It, Napoli, Petrie; c, Clough, Stein ; c, Stein; rg, Calvert. Lexington — Lexington .
 Winchester G 6 X 14 — 14, Lexington 0 14 0 0 — 20 . Winchester G. 6 X . 14, Winchester G . 6, Lexington G 6, 14 . Lexington . 0 14, 14, 20 . Olaen . Bellino 4, Mooney, Jones 2
 Miss Gail Murray is elementary art supervisor in kindergarten and through grade 6 in Winchester schools . She will be art supervisor for kindergarten and grade 6 at all schools .
 This is Miss Murray’s first year of teaching, though she practice taught at the Lincoln School in the fall of 1960 . W* Photo by Ryereoii
 Born in Winthrop, Miss Murray moved to Melrose as a girl . Graduated from the Academy of Our Lady of Nazareth in Wakefield .
 She holds the degree of Bachelor of Science in Education, which she received in June from the Massachusetts College of Art .
 Guild “Bucky*’ Nichols, son of Mr and Mrs. Nichols, was born in Winchester, Winchester . Guild "Bucky" Nichols is the son of the Nichols family . He is a Winchester resident .
 Kezar Nichols of Hillcrest Parkway, and -John Swift, son of Mr and Mrs. Swift, are among the children of John Swift .
 The boys arc friends of long standing and were classmates at high school until John left to enter Holderness School . John and John are best friends .
 The New Enghind football officials organization is now in process of selecting a high school coach in Eastern Massachusetts for its third annual Memorial Award . Seek High School Coach of Year .
 This coach will be selected for maintaining the high ethical standards demanded of the football coaching professions . The coach is devoted to teaching the game of American football to boys so that they become men of true American sportsmanship .
 Any fan, player, coach or official may submit a letter nominating any high school coach of hus choice . The winner of the award will be announced at a local high school .
 Neither victories nor losses nor the division in which your selection is classified will affect the choice of your selection . The choice will not affect the winner's selection .
 Jan Kozlowski is the president of the N E. football officials organization . Submit all letters as soon as possible .
 The award will be made at the officials annual banquet Monday evening, Nov., at the Hotel New Brunswick in Boston .
 Coaches Don Mac PI wee, Bill Sipp, and PM Gravalese, are working hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needham . Coaches Mac Mac and Bill Mac have been working hard to get ready for the season opener .
 Hand-Made Florentine Leather Desk Appointment and Memo Pad . Shop Early for a CHRISTMAS GIFT for MOTHER or DAD .
 It s teen-ape apparel, gowns, and furs modeled by students and mothers, I Autumn in New Hampshire lets Hats also will be shown .
 A typical a beautiful door prize and other L ounty fair is ono of aevera i st op S gifts will be drawn during the evj . t , n j n n ^ r made as the trip propresses from Mrs. J. t . A typical door prize
 John Dobbs of Watertown and ape, Mrs. Mrs. Dobbs . Mrs. | tains resplendendendent in their fall foliasts .
 Donald McGinnis of Medford, a short film entitled Bridges are co-chairmen . Donald McGinis of . Medford , a short . film entitled "Bridges are Bridges" will be enjoyed particularly by Mrs. j . Donald . McGininis .
 Winchester I principles of construction of . construction of variCommittee members . Daniel Zenpa are Winchester members of the Winchester Committee of Winchester .
 Y.P.F. is sponsorinp the only showinp, this year at Epiphany of Don Sheehan’s Beauty of Epiphany . The only show in the show will be the only one at the Epiphany this year . The Beauty of the Beauty
 Mr Sheehan's colored slides of details of the church’s interior with musical sound accompaniment enriches the knowledpe and appreciation of this edifice .
 The Parish and friends in Winchester are cordially invited to attend this special event Sunday, October 22, at 5:00m. in Hadley Hall .
 A Badper’s Bad Day is about a bad per who stumbles onto the hollow lop home of a mother skunk . What becomes of a younp bad per is recounted in the book .
 The Friday nipht propram and its accompanyinp display of books is desipned for families . The Friday propram is a family-friendly event .
 Frank C Laubach b to teach illiterates to read, r while a missionary in the Philip> pines . Frank C. Laubch b . to teach the illiterate to read .
 Mr Laubach will also attempt to teach the audience to read a sentence in Ethiopian the way they employ the system to teach English .
 This meeting is open to anyone interested in hearing Mr Laubach’s talk . This meeting will take the place of the regular November meeting .
 It will be held in the church hall and there will be no admission charge . No admission charge will be paid for the event .
 He might well ask why so many Christians who claim this do not agree on the meaning of the Scriptures .
 Christ, of course, wrote nothing, excepting on one occasion — and then only in dust . Christ wrote nothing in the Bible, except for dust .
 The Bible itself does not claim to be the Inspired and complete word of God . The Bible is not the Bible itself .
 The answer is, of course, that the only living authority is the Catholic Church . The Apostolic Church is the Church whose traditions, beginning with Peter, begin with Peter .
 Clement of Alexandria was a secondcentury writer of Alexandria . It can present the testimony of such secondcentury writers as Clement of . Alexandria, Egypt, as well .
 Irenaeus, Tertullian and Origen; and from the third and fourth centuries Cyprian and Ambrose and Eusebius and Cyril, and many others . .
 "All these bear witness to the vital importance of the Apostolic tradition," says Pope Francis . Pope Francis is a member of the apostolic family .
 The Catholic Church was preaching the Gospel of Christ years before the last book of the Bible was written . It was 1,500 years before its writings were combined into a single book .
 Free pamphlet gives a brief but dramatic story in the words of the fourth-century historian, Eusebius . If you want convincing proof to support your Christian convictions, write today .
 The Camelot Ball was held last Friday and Saturday . Many people contributed to the success of the event . The Waltz Evening was held in Missouri .
 Dance Committee members include those who attended the dance, the loeal merchants who contributed prizes and those who served as Patrons and Patronesses .
 The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very grateful to the following who gave so generously of their time and efforts . The Winchester Hospital is very grateful for the following .
 i This new honor for Mra. Dietz is an Ion tractors Chidley . Dietz To Brief (Ion tractors chidley) i i
 Dietz of 19 I will come as no surprise to her Cambridge Street, Professor of many Winchester friends who are Building Engineering at Massu quit'* familiar with her work in chusetts Institute of Technology, j the dramatic arts both locally and internationally . Dietz is one of two
 We doubt if even T faculty who will brief contractj her friends realize how interesting or interesting she is . But we doubt that even faculty members of the Associated Gen. Gen. will realize .
 Mrs. Chidley has led and eral Contractors of Massachusetts j just how much she has done for and their staffs at a meeting being 1 our Town .
 Chidley, the former Frances Motor Inn in Waltham, has lived all S, Peter Volpe, executive vice vice viceher life in Winchester .
 She was, in president and treasnrer of the fact, horn on Church Street . She was the president of the president and president of a local business .
 After John A Volpe Construction Com| attending the Bellows School in pany and president of the AssociBoston . She graduated from the ated General Contractors of Massachusetts, will preside .
 Building Engineering and Con struction Management at M.I.T. will brief the contractors on a new construction management system being developed to meet the increasing need for exact scientific procedures .
 The first District 18 meeting of the Ladies Auxiliary, Veterans of Foreign Wars, will be held at the Aberjona Post Home, 15 White Street .
 Department President Margaret Eikrem will be present for the purpose of obligating new members . The department president will also be present to obligate new members.
 A drive has been started to increase membership in the Auxiliaries in District 18 . At present a drive is being launched to increase the membership of the auxiliary .
 It is hoped ladies from Winchester and surrounding cities and towns will attend this social . It's hoped ladies will attend the social .
 The Winchester Circle of the Florence Crittenton League will hold its first meeting of the 1961 ’62 season tomorrow, Friday, October 20, 1961 . Winchester Circle will meet for the first time since 1961 .
 Derail Hintlian, 7 Wood Lane, will host a dessert and coffee party . The party will begin with a business meeting and program .
 Helen E Terkelsen, Protestant Chaplain, Crittenton Hastings House, will be the speaker . She will speak at the end of the session .
 The Friends of the Winchester Hospital are very appreciative of the large number of people who served as Patrons and Patronesses for Waltz Evening last week end . The Winchester Hospital is very grateful for the support of those who attended the event .
 Lewis L Wadsworth Troop 9 STOP for 1 DAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE on all CHRYSLER BUILT CARS . ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc. Inc. provides 1-day auto-transmission service on all ChrySLER
 Friday afternoon there was a mass campfire of all the girls camping at Cedar Hill . The girls camped at the site .
 They are now planning a program for the Friendship Guild of the Congregational Church in November . The Friendship Guild is planning to meet in November for the first time .
 Conservatory, the Pacific Theological Seminary in Berkeley, Calif., and the Gloucester School of the Little Theatre .
 Chidley was a pioneer in obtaining suffrage for women . She was active in the movement ten years before suffrage was granted . She fought for the right to vote for women in England .
 She served as president of the Winchester Women’s Suffrage Association . She was on the executive board of the Massachusetts Women's Suffragist Association .
 When women's suffrage was granted, she was appointed to the Massachusetts Republican State Committee . She organized the party’s women's activities in the 16th Middlesex District .
 She supervised a study of living costs in Massachusetts, preparing a brochure on this subject .
 Schlesinger of Harvard and Bloomfield of the Boston Chamber of Commerce. Schlesingers of Harvard . Bloomfield: "It's been a great year for Boston. It's a great time for us to learn how to live with the world."
 In 1917 she was assigned to the Fort Devens base hospi tal as a Red Cross medical worker in which she served for two years . She served as a medical worker .
 After the war, as the 26th Division returned she was appointed as a casualty officer . She was appointed in which capacity she was able to learn facts about men of the division .
 She was assigned to a closed ward of shell-shocked patients at the U.S. Army Hospital in West Roxbury, Massachusetts . She worked with patients in two open wards in an open ward .
 She also served as a medical social worker at the Chelsea Naval Hospital . She also worked at the hospital where she was a social worker .
 In 1909, following a rigid test on the narrowest streets of Boston, she became the first Winchester woman to get an automobile license . She has held the license continuously ever since, with no accident decided against her .
 In view of the fact that she has driven 500,000 miles, this is rather a record . "This is rather than a record," she says of her car .
 She is an aficionado of horseback riding and kept her own saddle horse for many years . She is also a fan of keeping a saddle horse in her saddle for many more years .
 In addition, she was runner-up for three years in the women’s tennis championship of the Winchester Country Club .
 For two years she played on the third women’s golf club team at the Country Club, playing matches in surrounding towns . She played for two years at the club, playing in towns around the country .
 Howard J Chidley, pastor-emeritus of the First Con, has over 1,000 rug sizes from sizes 1.6'x2.6" to 14.6''x30' Heavily decorated, heaps of new, used, antique and semi antique
 She took over the duties of homo maker and mother to her two step daughters, Elizabeth and Barbara Chidley . Mon. through Kri., 8 A.M. to 8 A.'M. — Sat, 8 noon 8 gregational Church of Winchester .
 She was commissioner of the Winchester Girl Scouts for two years . She founded The Parish Players, 35-year-old church drama group . She was vice president of the Women’s Republican Party .
 She was able to utilize her medical social worker’s training helping the pastor in aiding people who needed assistance . She also organized the Social Workers’ Advisory Committee .
 During her thirty years as wife of the First Congregational Church pastor, Mrs. Mrs. Smith was married to the pastor of the church .
 Chidley entertained constantly, giving yearly teas to the new women of the parish . He entertained the choir, Sunday School teachers, the deacons and church committees and their wives .
 Chidley’s retirement from the pastorate in 1953, devoted herself to looking after many of the needy cases of the church and became active in New England theatre work .
 She was a founding member of the New England Theatre Conference . She served as chapman of the Community Theatre Division of that organization for six years .
 She served as chairman of the special projects division for two years and vice president for three years . She also served as vice president of the organization . She served in the organization as chairman, vice president and chairman .
 She is a former member of the Executive Board of the Massachusetts Council of Churches . She is also a former Executive Board Executive Board member .
 She is a member of the United World Federalists . She was appointed alternate delegate to the Stockholm Convention in 1954 . She is also a U.S. Federalist .
 She is also a member of the Atlantic Union, the United Nations Association, the English Speaking Union, and the American National Theatre and Academy .
 Chidley has traveled extensively in this country and Europe and has also visited Mexico, Alaska, and Latin America . He has also traveled in Europe and Mexico, and has visited Mexico and Alaska .
 Elder's father was senior counsel for the U.S. in Newfoundland Fisheries arbitration with Great Britain . She spent four months at the Hague in Holland, when her father, Samuel J Elder, was a senior counsel in the Newfoundland fisheries arbitration .
 Chidley’s interest in international relations stems, she believes, from this engrossing experience . Chidleys’ interest in diplomacy stems from this experience .
 It has taken her over the Atlantic, by sea and air, eighteen times . It is the first time she has been in the Atlantic by air and sea .
 Her friends have very much enjoyed the illustrated talks based on these travels . Her friends also enjoy the illustrated books based on her travels .
 Chidley has indeed lived an interesting life, in the Winchester tradition of community service . He has lived a fascinating life in Winchester, Winchester .
 Her friends congratulate her on her honour and wish her all the best in the coming years . Her friends also wish her best wishes for the coming year .
 The Win Chester Advance Gifts solicitation for the 1962 United Fund Drive is now underway . Auxiliary Gifts Move Attend Meeting . Win Chester will hold a special meeting on November 11 .
 Mr Schmink has a large and very able group assisting him in •this vital task of soliciting . Mr Schrink's group is assisting him with soliciting. He says he has a lot of support for the state .
 On Mr Schmink’s list of solicitors are Richard M Alt, Edward H Bailey, Richard E Bennink,; Bradford M Bentley, Dudley H Bradlee, Austin Broadhurst, Allan T Buros, William Davies, Thomas M Downes, Henry B Harris
 Edmund A Merriam Jr., Jr., Howard P Richardson, Dana D Sawyer, Arthur P Schmidt, Hiram L Smith, Jr. and Hiram Smith Jr. were named winners of the Pulitzer Prize .
 7th Grade Troop 9 from Neighborho<*I 1 were hostesses to 6th grade Troop 33 of the Mystic School . Girl Scout News on Wednesday, October 11 .
 Scouts of Troop 9 were kind enough to show us some camping skills . The Scouts are preparing for their first overnight camping trip .
 Group instruction for officers was held during the second half of the program . Group instruction was held for officers .
 Two skits were presented by Helen Rideout of Medford, Department Historian . The skits are part of a series of skits by the Medford School of Medicine .
 Members of District 18 taking part in the skit were Mary Thorne, President; Helen Rideout Jr. vicepresident; Florence Friend, President 1012 Medford; Marie DeLena 1012, Medford . Nellie Bolivar, President 3719, Winchester; and
 Also attending from Aberjona Auxiliary, Winchester, was Senior Vice President Gertrude Horn and Chaplain Anna Notemyer . Also attending is Senior Vice-President Gerterude Horn .
 The next workshop will be held on October 21 at the William A Davitt Post, 625, in Chicopee .
 Louis C Carey of Arlington, welcomed as a new member from Watertown, Mrs. Carey, from Arlington, was a member of the Watertown Town Council .
 Alfred Frock's wife teaches chemistry in the School of Liberal Arts, Mrs. Frock, who husband teaches chemistry at the school . Mrs Frock and her husband have been married for more than 20 years .
 Ivy Winterton, Vice-President of the BU Women’s Guild, stressed the importance of procur ing warm clothing and footwear for foreign students . Winterton: Show them American hospitality through invitation to individual homes .
 Arlington Mission 3-8770 Open Evenings 7 9 P M. M. (Ml2-tf) Wanted Women I With Smiles . Winchester, Bedford Veterans and Chelsea Naval 1 Hospitals are dedicated women volunteering .
 There is an urgent need for more of these dedicated women “to help make the monotonous life of patients a little more bearable.” “There is an immediate need for . more dedicated women,” says Dr. David Cameron .
 Doctors cheerfully do just about anything from feeding a patient to boosting his morale with a gentle touch of kindness . They cheerfully feed patients and boost their morale with kindness .
 One patient recently discharged after a long hospitalization wrote — “A little love and understanding still is part of the battle for recovery.”
 These women were there because they wanted to be. What made it extra special was that they were there for the very first time .
 A Red Cross Gray Lady course is being held at the American Legion Hall in Bedford November 2 from 9:45 to 2:30 . The course will be held in Bedford .
 Winchester Red Cross Chapter is providing transportation to Bedford . Winchester . Winchester Red . Cross Chapter provides transportation .
 We’d like to meet you before then to answer any questions and let you know more about the course .
 Robert Margeson, PA 9-4845, or the Winchester Red Cross Chapter, Pennsylvania 92300. The Winchester . Red Cross chapter of the Winchester .
 Reading Community Chorus will meet Wednesday, November 1, at 8:00 a.m. to start rehearsals for “A Century of Showstoppers’” The first production of the season is scheduled for November 1 . The group is looking for members .
 Anyone interested in participating in this production in any way is cordially invited to attend this meeting at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson .
 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats . CASHMERE SWEATERS with MINK COLLARS and LINED *47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED into a . CAPE, STOLE or
 Salvation is attained through spiritual awakening, growth, and progress . Salvation is achieved through spiritual awakenings, growth and progress, says author .
 This is a theme of the I,t*sson-Sermon entitled “Probation After Death"" which will be presented at Christian Science churches Sunday .
 Metcalf Union meeting for High School young people; speaker is Mr David McKeynolds. Metcally Union meeting is for high school students .
 Wells 3-3077 New HOPE BAPTIST CHURCH . Cross St. near Washington Street .
 Parker, Esterbrook, and Scripto pens and fillers available at /the Stax office, 8 Church Street. 9:80ra.
 A most cordial welcome is extended to Friends and their friends in Reading, Wilmington, and surrounding towns, as well as to those in Winchester .
 Visit us soon and take a Rambler Discovery Drive in a l%2 American, Classic 6, or Ambassador V-8 . I0.00000000000000000 o o o. o o . o o  o o i o o or o o rambler .
 Widest choice, of compacts anvichrrc — all with Rambler Excellence and economy . Widest choices, most affordable compacts in the world, with a price tag of $1,800 .
 Mr Kerrigan and his committee will he responsible for the activities of Tufts and Jackson graduates in the Reading,. Winchester, Wakefield, and Woburn areas . The committee will also be responsible for Tufts, Jackson graduates .
 Service Of Dedication Service of Dedication Photo by Ryer . Hon ire shown with children from the Unitarian Church .
 Although quite a few early birds came, we hope for a better turn out next time . We hope for better turn-out next time next time.
 Next Sunday the Y.P.F. will begin its program on Alcohol and Alcoholism . The program will focus on alcohol and alcohol abuse .
 The first session will be concerned with personal and social damage which alcohol can lead to . The session will focus on the personal damage caused by alcohol and alcohol .
 There will be four sessions one every week, followed by a session on Young Marriages . The sessions will take place at the end of each week .
 We are very pleased with our new members and the terrific show of enthusiasm from the sophomore class . We are also pleased with their new members .
 Approximately forty mothers arrived to hear from the principal . Mr Handy explained the curriculum and facilities available to our young people .
 Home Economics room was very attractively decorated with pumpkins set in pine branches and lovely bouquets of chrysanthemums . Claude Callaham were in charge of refreshments .
 The executive board wishes to thank all who participated in this first social hour . Special thanks to Junior High girls who helped to make the hour go so smoothly .
 A native of Woburn, Mr Kerrigan graduated from Tufts in 1 1948 .
 Insurance executive is executive with the Boston agency of the Union Central Life Insurance Company . He says the insurance industry has been in decline for years .
 Leaders of the national campaign are Carl J Gilbert, chair man of the board of the Gillette Company, and Albert W Vanderhoof, president of the company . The Gillette campaign aims to raise awareness of the issue .
 Mr Kerrigan is a Navy veteran of World War II and has achieved national distinction in the insurance field . He is an insurance expert and a Navy vet .
 OILS PAPER i SURRA T TEXACO TEXAS GF UNION UNIVOIL KIM CLK ST REG I S ATCHSON d Co. i SURvia T TexACo Texas GF UNion UNIVoil KIMCLK
 Senior, junior and sophomore high school students, their parents and school guidance personnel are cordially invited to attend . The event will be held in honor of students and parents .
 Royal J Gardner, O.P., associate dean of admissions at Providence College, will be the guest speaker . Providence College's admissions dean will also be a guest speaker at the event .
 Following Father Gardner’s talk, guests may visit booths of the colleges represented and speak with alumni associations .
 William W Davies III, opera chairman of the Boston Vassar Club, has arranged today’s preview of the new opera “Command Performance” that will have its World premiere in November . The opera is scheduled for November .
 The pre-view is being presented at the Midtown Motel, Boston, for Vassar Alumnae and friends . The composer at the piano, accompanying a few of the soloists, is the librettist and producer .
 The opera is based on a charming bit of Elizabethan adventure and intrigue, involving the plight of a young musician sent to Turkey with an elaborate organ for the sultan . The queen dispatched the musician to Turkey to provide an organ for Sultan Sultan .
 The sultan accepted both with such verve that the young man had quite a time escaping . He had to make his way back to England to report to the queen .
 The composition of this opera was made possible by an anonymous donor as a tribute to VassalCollege on the occasion of its centennial year .
 First choice of seats for opening night, Friday, Nov., at Kresge Auditorium in Cambridge, will he available to, and through, Vassar Alumnae for one week following today’s pre-view, before becoming available to the general public . The
 Chamberlain Windows were dedicated to the Unitarian Church in the Michelsen Room last Sunday .
 These are a gift of Mr Edward H Chamberlain in memory of his wife, Grace Caverly Chamberlain, who died last February . The gifts were presented to Mr Chamberlain in his honour by his wife .
 The windows will serve as a background for the worship center of the children of the first, second and third grades . The windows are expected to be used as a backdrop for the children's worship center .
 The eighteen window panes depict the brightness of the universe and tell the story of the wonderful works of God . The eighteen windows depict the bright light of the world .
 The sun, the moon, the planets and the planets, the stars, the birds of the air, the flowers of the field, the animals of the forest and the fish of the sea are represented in lovely color .
 These window panes are arranged in a design that permits the outside scene to come through . These window windows are arranged to allow the outside to see the outside .
 A quotation from the writings of Joseph Addison is used as a memorial legend . A quote from Addison's writings is used in a memorial story .
 The firm of Wilbur Burnham and Wilbur H Burnham, Jr., of Boston, designed these beautiful windows .
 Mr Burnham and his son also designed the windows in Meyer Chapel and the windows devoted to the theme of the Red Cross in the Cloister . The windows were placed in memory of Dawn Bartlett Kelley .
 The public is cordially invited to ' visit the church and see the Burni ham windows'
 Come to Hadley Hall, Parish of the Epiphany, Wednesday evening, October 25 . Then come to the Parish of Epiphany .
 On Thursday the 26th the bazaar will re-open with a flourish . Come one, come one, cpme all.
 A special children’s luncheon, pony rides, movies and a room set aside for the young shopper with articles priced for his pocketbook . The event includes pony rides and movies .
 The tired mother has spent almost her last cent for aprons, candy, knit articles and ‘knick-knacks” at the White Elephant table . She can sink gratefully down and spend her last night for tea .
 Miss Olivia Gagnon, a student in the graduate nurse program at Boston College, is now working with the local agency to gain field experience in public health nursing .
 Purtle, President, conducted the business meeting calling for reports by committee chairmen . Purtle also conducted the meeting .
 Mrs. Mrs. Johnson was elected as a member of the House of Representatives . Mr. Johnson Jr., presented the following names for election as members at large .
 Dieterich, Corresponding Secretary, was instructed to inform the new members of their election . The new members will be informed of the election by the Correspondent Secretary .
 Volunteers are urgently needed for transportation, autoclaving, and for clinics . Volunteers are also needed for transport and autoclave, and clinics .
 Eugene M Pollard will welcome calls offering assistance to any of these departments . Eugene Pollard welcomes calls from any departments offering assistance .
 The pain is not the price you pay for medicine that relieves pain and quickly restores good health . It's not the cost of pain, but it's the price of good health, says Dr. Phil .
 Nothing else so vital to your well-being costs so little as prescribed medicine . Prescription medicine is a form of medicine that can be prescribed in the U.S.
 WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows, Floors, Paint Washing, Rubbish Disposal. PArkview 9-4572 janl9-tf . Cleaning is a full service .
 WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 oot5-4l ELECTRICIAN ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. We are happy to provide an easy way to reach out to people in need
 Well over $40,000 house, reduced to *36,900 for quirk sd*' For appointment rail owner and builder BI 4-3247. For appointment .
 Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Raffs, also Rubbish Removal . Metal Furnace removed, Iron removed, and Rubbish removed .
 Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes New and Repair Work Satisfaction Guaranteed Free Estimates Guaranteed .
 For the finest, most dependable TVRADIOHI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMB0S l i TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing .
 1954 Ford Convertible is excellent .conditioned .condition, used as second car . Used as a second car.
 Wells 60570. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because wo use remnants. Well's 60571. julsey 60572. Jules 60573 .
 1958 Volkswagen blk. ww. tires, 16,000 miles, $1,095. Hnverty, WElls 3-5389. sept 12-tf FOR SALE .
 Mustell immaculate I960 I960 Volkswagen sedan, carnation blue, white walls, 5.500 mileage . Mustell must have a white I960 with white paint on the back . Must also be a white Volkswagen with white interior .
 Four-burner Ultramutic Caloric Gus Range, excellent condition, $45. For sale, four-burners are for sale in excellent condition .
 1953 DoSoto sedan. good engine, 4 good tires and new spare, plus 2 snow tires . For KAI.E, good engine and 4 good tire .
 1961 Cadillac Convertible is white, white, mileage 19,000, excellent condition . 1961 Cadillac convertible is white and has only been driven by a woman .
 Five room apartment, modern buth, oil heat, near Center. For rent for rent: Five-room apartment near Center Center . For rent: $1,800-plus .
 Garage Call PA 9-5285. For rent: Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location . Garage Call 9-4285.
 Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments . $190 up. Call WElls 3-2384 .
 First floor has 3 large rooms with modern kitchen und pantry . Second floor has three nice bedrooms, den, and modern bath . Third floor has modern kitchen, den and modern bathroom .
 Rides from Stonoluim Square to Wakefield Square.:80m. Hlllcrest 65521.
 Would like week day ride to Harvard Square, arrive at Harvard by 9 and leave ut 5.30am .
 Hours arranged to fit your s e li e d u d u 1 telephone Mr Proctor for appointment . Hours arranged for appointment.
 Imby sitter, ♦nuill children. W Ells 3-3300 . Experienced Imby-sitter.
 Reliable woman for baby sitting, one or two days u week, (‘all pa 9-6623.’) Reliable . woman for babysitting, one and two days a week . Needed a reliable woman for one day or two .
 WANTED Secretary for Church School office. 30-five hour week, 50 wt*eks, 2 weeks paid vneation. Wanted secretary for church school office.
 Experienced woman secretary would like part-time office position or will do typinff at home and cnll for and deliver work . Experienced female secretary is needed in office or work at home .
 Dargle, Master of Music, NO 2-9020. octl9-4t . SEWING MACHINE SERVICE .
 All makes including Japanese manufacture, 36 years of prompt, courteous service . 36 years in service .
 Wells 3-0052. aug7-tf: MISCELLANEOUS WINCHESTER EMPLOYMENT — 10.00 to 12m., 4:00 to 9:00m. ET. WElls . aug7: "Micellane
 PLUMBING — Heating, Oil-burner sales and service. Coll. Coll PA 93132. Coll Pennsylvania 93132 .
 TeL WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There is a way out. TeL is 31947 .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the U.S. and ull Over The World can be mude at tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent .
 Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you .
 A public hearing was held thereon in the office of the Building Commissioner, 9 Mt. Mt. That a public hearing of the building commissioner was held .
 Autobridge is a bridge game you play by yourself anywhere with champions as partners . Improve your bridge game with Autobridge .
 1955 Ford Fairlane, 4-dr. 1955 Fairlane for sale for $1,800 . 1957 Ford Fairlane 4x4x6, 4x7, 5x8, 6x6 . 1955 F1 Fairlane 4x5 4x6 4x8
 Sedan fully power equipped, including Fordomatic drive, pow. steer., brakes, windows, and a 4way seat . Sedan, fully power . equipped, has a 4-way seat, 4-seat seat, and full power windows .
 Modern 3-bedroom Ranch home with 2 baths, living room, dining room, all-electric kitchen, 2-car g a r a g e . Ranch home has 2-bedroom home, complete finished basement . Ranch Ranch home is on the market for $1 million .
 Published in response to call made by Comptroller of the Currency, under Section 5211 .
 Willium D Sullivan, Cashier, of the above-numed bunk . Sullivan declares that this report of condition Is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief . Sullivan: "I, Willium . Sullivan, cashier" Sullivan declares .
 Directors confirm the correctness of the report of condition and declare that it has been examined by us and to the best of our knowledge und belief is true and correct .
 Revised Statutes Report as of September 27, 1961, of Winchester National Bank • Building Trust . Winchester National National Bank: Winchester Bank, Building Trust. Winchester National bank: Winchester . Building Trust: Winchester. National Bank . Winchester . National Bank; Building Trust; Winchester National .
 The Winchester National Bank Building TruBt is owned by the Winchester Nutional Bank . Winchester National National Bank is located in Winchester, Virginia . The building was built in the 1950s .
 None I, Leelic J Scott, Treasurer of Winchester National Bank Building Trust, do solemnly swear that the above statement is true, to the beet of my knowledge .
 Leslie J Scott Sworn to and subscribed before me this fill du> of October 61.61.
 Shnwmut Association owns 13,360 shares of the outstanding shares of Winchester National Bank, Winchester Massachusetts . The Winchester National bank is based in Winchester, Massachusetts .
 Tyler Tyler, Vice President of Shuwmut Association, does solemnly sweat that the above statement is true, to the beat of my knowledge and belief . Tyler is a member of Shumut Association .
 David A Thomas, Notary Public. , Legal Notices COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.
 To all parson* interested in the estate of MABEL L VINTON late of Winchester in Winchester in I said County, deceased . I To all . interested in this estate, please send a copy of this article .
 A petition lut* been presented to said | Court for probate of u certain instrument j purporting to he the last will of said deceased by ROLAND R CARTER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed executor thereof, without giving a sure
 Witness: John C Leggut, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this third day of October 1961 . Witness: "The third day, October 1961" Witness: "The Third Day"
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by PHILIP BOONE of Winchester in the County of Middleaex praying that he be appointed executor without giving a surety on his bond .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-fifth day of September 1961 . Witness: "John C . Leggats"
 Charles E YOUNG, formerly known as CHARLES E YOULD, JUNIOR late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in his estate, please contact the deceased .
 A petition lias been presented to said Court for probate of n certain instrument purporting to ho the last will of said deceased by ALICE E YOUNG of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof .
 Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parkin# Lot and Embassy Laundry july€-tf COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS .
 James SIDNEY ALLEN, also known aa JAMES S ALLEN late of Winchester in Winchester in said C<rtinty, deceased .
 A petition lias been present'd to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased . BKADLKE E CAGE of Amherst iri the County of Hampshire and SANFORD T A BULK of Glou
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty -eighth day of September 1961 . Witness: Sir John Legga, Esq. John C. Legg at, Esquee, First .
 James S. KENNEDY, also known as JAMES S Kennedy and J SHERMAN KENNedy, late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by LOTTIE G KENNEDY of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she bo appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her
 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to give permission to add a room to existing dwelling numbered 06 Grove Street, locating the same less than fifteen feet from the lot line .
 After your first deposit is accepted, you receive a checkbook for use in making your withdrawals and keeping records of payments . Of course, if you are unknown to us, references are properly required .
 The Friendship Guild, of the First Congregational Church, will meet Tuesday evening, October 4, at 8:00 p.m. in the Palmer room .
 A skit, “And You Never Know,” is planned . The skit is supplied by the Mental Health Program, which is planned for the show .
 Gloria Keville, psychologist by background, and School Adjustment Councilor for Winchester Public elementary schools, will also lead a discussion period . The discussion period will also be led by psychologist and school adjustment councilor .
 Manning C Morrill, chairman of Waltz Evening; Mr Richard Champagne, judge . Manning . Champagne is a former member of the Waltz evening .
 When Mr Khrushchev speaks of peace, he means a piece of the Congo, Laos, Berlin, Berlin and America . When he spoke of peace in the 1960s, he said: "Peace is peace."
 David Lawrence Conner of Winchester participated in the Florida Bankers Association Workshop October 12 on the Rollins College campus . Conner attended the workshop in Florida .
 David is one of six students in a money and banking course invited to the annual FBA session . David is a sophomore business administration major at the college .
 National Catholic Youth Week kicks off October 28 at 7m. Nites to 9 P.M. for high schoolers . CYO Holy Hour and Dance A Holy Hour will be held at 7:30 p.m. ET .
 Monsignor John P Carroll, archdiocesan CYO director, will conduct the Holy Hour . Monsigner John P. Carroll will conduct Holy Hour.
 Richard Casalinuovo, Fred Fiumara, Patricia Overacker, Richard Rowe, George Nowell, Kathleen Kelley, Helen Nash, Gail Snelling, Betty Jean Kennedy, and Paul McCarthy are among the writers .
 Three Gates If you are tempted to reveal A tale someone to you has told About another, make it pass Before you speak, three gates of gold . Three Gates: Three gates to tell a tale someone has told about another .
 If to reach your lips at last It passes through these portals three, Then you may tell, and never fear . Never fear What the result of speech may be something inherently dramatic .
 The 6.14 act as a sort of mental catnip for tired conformists who, after a hard day's work, go home to their wives and families .
 Few plays would be written if people were uniformly good; there would be a drastic dearth of good plot material . Few plays are written if everyone is uniformly good, but few are good enough to write them .
 Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton in Boston is a Boston hotel . The Statler Hotel is located in Boston .
 Janies W Blackham III of 33 Canterbury Road won two tickets to the Hamid-Morton Circus at the Boston Arena as a result of his prize-winning entry in the Herald-Traveler’s “Name the Kangaroos Contest’ sponsored by the
 Bill’s was one of the 53 prizewinning entries to find the two most appropriate names for a pair of kangaroos the Shriners are presenting to the Franklin Park Zoo . Bill's was the winner of the contest to find out the best names for the
 His entry was selected from more than 10,000 received from all parts of New England in the kangaroo-naming competition . The winner of the competition was chosen from 10,500 entries received in New England .
 Prodigal son for whom they kill the fatted calf is the fated calf . Ever since Biblical days it’s been the prodigal .
 Verbal plaudits of a good man seldom occur until his funeral, but appreciation of a bad one comes at the time of his reformation . Verbal praise for a bad man often occurs at his funeral . A bad man's reformation is the time he reverts to his
 Learn the Play Way “Flash I Cards” are now on sale at the Winj Chester Star .
 Charlie Jones of Wichita, Kansas, got on a plane to fly eastward . Charlie Jones was a pilot at the time of his first flight .
 The plane came down in St. Louis, Missouri, after being refueled by a refueling truck . The plane was refueled when it came down .
 The plane came down next at Celeveland and once more a red truck came to refuel it . The plane was refueled once more at the time .
 The plane was on the ground again at Albany, once more being refueled from a red truck, when Charlie Former Selectman William N looked at his watch and observed . William N. was a former Selectman .
 The new assistant in the optical-goods store was being instructed by the proprietor .
 “Bill” is a member of next year’s forty-year class at Tabor Academy . He attended a sponsors meeting last Saturday for the discussion of plans for the drive .
 Stationery imprinted with the Winchester Sachem in red . While at the academy he participated in rowing . He graduated from Harvard and Harvard Law School .
 Two Irishmen stood in front of | the kangaroo’s cage in the Bronx Zoo . PArkview 9-1062: Two Irish men stood in . front of . the cage .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . Nites to 9 P.M. Nites from 9 p.m. aprl3-tl FREE DELIVERATION ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 Mirak's complete shop facilities (one of the largc>t service and body shops in V F I oilers oilers skillful service ami repairs on all makes . Expert Service and Repairs Mirak is one of the largest shops in the world .
 S Senior Hass Hass West Berlin Student Likes Studying Here . “I like America very much, and I love Winchester. Winchester. University of Winchester, Massachusetts, is a major in Germany .
 Gisela Von Klocke, a German girl from West Berlin, is living in Winchester and spending the school year as an exchange student at Winchester High School . The exchange student is sponsored by the School's ParentFaculty Association . She is the daughter of a West Berlin resident .
 Gisela spoke of her liking for Winchester and America during a recent visit to the Star Office . The Star Office is located in Winchester .
 Waldron’s three children, Susan, a junior at high school; Judy in eighth grade at McCall Junior High and Brad, a pupil at Lincoln School . The Waldron's three children live on Pleasant Street .
 Her introduction to American teen-age fun was at a big party in Bedford, former home town of the Waldrons, to which she went .
 We need the addresses of the servicemen and women who have entered the service since last December because we do not have any record of them . We need to know where the addresses are of those who have joined the service .
 We do not want to miss anyone from Winchester who is serving our country, th erf ore, we need the help of their families . We need to be sure we have the latest correct name, rank, and address .
 Meeting on Shelters Tonight will be held at the Vinson-Owen School, Johnson Road, on Thursday evening, October 2(5.30pm) Meeting designed to better inform the people of Winchester on civil defense problems .
 Miss Lanigan has been asked to discuss school safety in the event of a nuclear attack . She was asked to talk about the possibility of an attack on Britain .
 It is felt that this program will answer questions in the minds of all of us as to how we can best protect our families in an emer-^ gency . The program will also provide information on how to protect your family .
 A class will be held at Bedford American Legion Hall November 2 from 9:45 to 2:30 .
 For more information cal PA 9-4845 or your Winchester Red Cross Chapter 9-2300. For more info cal . Winchester . Red Cross chapters 9-2445, 9-2245 or 9-2545 . Winchester Red . Cross chapters are 9 to 2300 .
 Youths found guilty of break; Sent To House Of Correction . Robert Callahan, son of Mr and Mrs. Callahan . Stole school money .
 James Callahan of 11 Richardson Street was chosen to represent the Immaculate Conception School in the Massachusetts Heritage Day Program at Plymouth, Saturday, October 21 .
 He was accompanied by Sister Mary Rosanna, principal of the school, and Sister Mary Alisa, his teacher .
 Henchey Monday mortiWobtirn District Court to the Billerica House of Correction after they had previously been found guilty of breaking and entering with intent to commit larceny . They were also convicted of breaking into a building and malicious damage to a school house .
 The two youths, one 19 and the other IS were arrested early in the morning of October 5 at the Lynch Junior High School at the Well Field site . One 19-year-old was arrested at the time .
 Officers Archie O’Connell and John Farrell found the pair while making a routine check of the building . The pair were found by police officers Archie O'Connell and . John Farrell .
 When they were picked up the youths had a crowbar, a pinchbar, and a combination pick-axe and adz with a short handle .
 Dartmouth’s varsity football team, en route to meet Harvard at the Stadium Saturday, will practice Friday afternoon at 2 o’clock at the new Reading High School athletic field above the square . The vouths were taken to the Big Green at Reading Dartmouth's varsity
 Dana Kelly, former Winchester High grid star, is one of the quarterbacks with the team . Dana Kelly is also a former high school grid star with the Winchester High School team .
 Police say the youths admitted they had previously broken into the McCall Junior High School and stolen $100 from various school funds at the building . Police say they also admitted to breaking into the school and stealing $100 .
 Damage estimated by the police as amounting to several hundred dollars was done the school . Damage was estimated to be in the hundreds of dollars .
 Money stolen included insurance money, candy money, bus ticket money, towel money and other sums . Money stolen includes insurance money and candy money .
 A revolver used for starting races was also taken, and as yet the police have not been able to locate this .
 The two youths appeared later in the morning of October 5 before Judge Henchey in the Woburn Court, at which time a continuance was granted .
 The case was continued until October 13 when Judge Henchey found the youths guilty as charged . The case is expected to be heard in court October 13 .
 Attorney for the pair asked for probation, but neither the Judge nor Police Chief Joseph J Derro would agree . Police Chief said the pair should not have been allowed to serve probation .
 Winchester Girls Named Williston Scholars at Mt. Mt. Williston . Winchester girls named Williston scholars at Mount Mt. YouTHS. YOUTHS, continued to page 7 Winchester girls .
 Two Winchester girls named Sarah Williston Scholars at Mount Ilolyoke College . The two girls were named Sarah williston Scholars . The girls are from Winchester, Winchester .
 T hey are Miss Phyllis L Rutter of 78 xford Street and Miss Marcia Anne Smith of 92 Lawson Road . Miss Rutter and Miss Smith are Miss Smiths, from 92 Lawson Street .
 Both are members of the junior class, and graduates of Winchester High School . Both are students at the school and high school .
 Frank W Rutter, last year received the French Government Prize for excellence in the study of French . Frank W. Rutter received the award last year .
 Robert M Smith, received the Bernice Mac Lean Prize for special projects in basic zoology in 1960 . Smith received the award in 1960 for his work in the zoological field .
 Sarah Williston scholars are those students who made a high academic record in their freshman and sophomore years at Mount Holyoke . Sarah williston scholars were those students with a good academic record .
 Sarah Williston prizes are awarded to the five scholars who stand highest in their class at the end of their second, third, and fourth years . The five scholars at the University of Cambridge will be awarded to five of their class .
 The awards are named for the first woman elected to Mount Holyoke’s Board of Trustees, in 1884 . The first woman was elected to the board of trustees in 1883 . The awards were named after the first female member of the board .
 41.2% of residential solicitors and 50% of small business solicitors have enrolled for this fall’s United Fund campaign . Winchester United Fund leaders have reported that 41.3% of residents have signed up for the United Fund .
 Volunteers are still welcome to help make this year's campaign succeed . Fund leaders report that volunteers still welcome .
 To fill the urgent financial needs of United Fund agencies, to keep them open and able to serve, they must have more dollars . The agencies need more dollars to fill the needs of the United Fund . The United Fund has been in need of funds for more than a decade .
 Call your local leader, or call United Fund Headquarters at Richmond 2-2010 . United Fund headquarters at Richmond, Virginia, is located in Richmond .
 Selectmen set no date for a special town meeting to consider the request of the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee for more money than the appropriation voted by the town to build the school . The Board of Selectmen at its meeting Monday evening set .
 The Building Committee has written the Selectmen asking them to call a special town meeting to appropriate at least $11,000 in addition to the $9,000 remaining in the original budget . Building Committee is asking Selectmen to appropriate more than $10,000 to the Town Council .
 The committee has estimated that at least $20,000 will be needed to complete the school . The committee estimates that the school will cost $20 million .
 The Selectmen have met with the School Building Committee to discuss the additional funds required . At these meetings a complete list of necessary items with exact costs was not available . Selectmen are unwilling to call a special town meeting to consider the matter until they have more exact knowledge of what is now
 The school has been in use since the opening of the school year in September . The new building houses the offices of the Superintendent of Schools .
 Building Committee has mentioned that the new school needs books for its library, science equipment, aids to teaching, furnishings for the teachers’ room and School Committee room . Building Committee also needs racks for storage of lumber and metal for the woodworking and metal working shops .
 It is possible that some changes in the school ventilating system will be necessary . It is also possible that changes will also be necessary to ventilate children .
 One of the requisites to transferring the land on which the school is located from the Water and Sewer Board to the School Committee was the erection of a fence around the well fields remaining .
 As yet this fence has not been built, it raises the question whether this land is still under the jurisdiction of the Water and Sewer Board . As yet, this fence is not being built, raising the question if this land belongs to the city .
 The School Building Committee is reviewing its requirements to complete the work at the school with costs of the items necessary . The school building committee is currently reviewing the requirements .
 Selectmen are awaiting this information before calling the special town meeting requested . The Selectmen will be waiting to hear if the town will hold a special meeting . The town meeting is expected to be held on Monday .
 More than 1000 persons representing a cross section of the country’s educational, cultural and scientific life are attending the conference . More than 1,000 people are expected to attend the conference.
 Mr Spaulding is a member of the United States National Commission for UNESCO and is a National Commission consultant for the Panel on Educational Systems .
 He is a member of the hoard of Franklin Publications . He is also educational consultant to the group .
 Police Chief Joseph J Derro has announced that complaints of a serious traffic hazard existing in the vicinity of the Winchester Hospital have prompted a “no parking” restriction for the westerly side of Highland Avenue from Fairmount Street .
 Neither fire apparatus nor an am| bulance could get through on an emergency errand . Conditions in this location during peak traffic have been such that neither fire apparatus or an am | bulance can get through . Neither fire . apparatus nor a . bulance were able to get through the
 Arthur l\ Bonney of Winchester, English teacher at Stone-ham High School, has been invited to present her material on a linguistic approach to spelling to a Linguistic Workshop in Philadelphia, November 21, 22 and 23 .
 Bill Davies’ musical career began in the Mystic School Band . Davies was a member of the band at the school in Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 He played in the high school band while still in junior high . He earned his letter before going on to lead the band at Deerfield Academy Academy .
 Since graduation, he has been playing regularly with civic symphony orchestras as Quincy, Concord and Boston . He has “arranged” for Herb Pomeroy .
 Davies has been a regular member of the Unitarian Church Choir and the annual May Musicale in Winchester . Davies has played character roles in productions of Unitarian Players and Unitarian Choir . He has also been regular members of the choir and the May musicale .
 William W just been engaged to play the forthcoming new opera its world premiere at her 17 and 18 . represents the Sultan of Turkey, requiring great virtuosity of the player as well as dramatic experience .
 This unique event was made possible by an anonymous friend of Vassal* College, in honor of its centennial . The college is celebrating its centenary .
 J Churchill Ilindcs, retired Winchester dentist and supporter extraordinary ot all high school teams, have donated the trophy in his honor . None at all acquainted with high school athletics, especially football, can think of any one more deserving .
 If for no other reason, this should make the trophy doubly worth the winning . This should make it doubly worthwhile for the winning side .
 "Doc" graduated from Vermont Academy at Saxton's River and played his first organized football there as a left halfback on the Academy eleven . A native Vermonter, “Doc’s” graduated from the Academy . He is a former halfback from Saxton
 Those were the days when it didn’t cost well over $100 to equip a boy to play football . Now, it costs less than $100 for a football kit .
 You let your hair grow long to protect your head . You wore a knit turtle-neck of a jersey around your ears to keep them intact . You let it grow long and wore it around to keep your ears intact .
 Shoulder pads were sewn to the outside of the jersey and pants were also padded at the hips and knees, with deluxe models having rattan guards at the thighs .
 If your nose and shins were tender, you wore a rubber nose guard and shin guards of canvas-covered rattan . If you had a sore nose or shins, you used to wear rubber nose guards .
 Six young singers returned by popular demand for their third triumphant season at the Terrace Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton in Boston . AWARD, continued on page 11 "The Show Toppers"
 They have also won acclaim in Bermuda where they appeared in the past summer .
 Tomorrow night they will present a program of songs from top Broadway shows, both past and present, accompanied by the music of Ruby Newman . Ruby Newman will sing Broadway songs .
 They are the top barbershop quartet in New England and have also placed high in international competition . They are also the top New England quartet .
 I lie new ‘Doe’ llindes football I ropb\ promted to \\ inebester j the leader of the group, is a rosilligli School by friends ol l)r. The leader is a leader .
 J Churchill Hindus, retired d< ‘iili.-t and a staunch supporter of high,dent of our neighboring eity of school teams . J. Churchill Hindus .
 I he trophy is awarded yearly to a member of the iootbull team lor '’Outbiuiidiilg Woburn.’ outbiuiuiilg .
 Many parties have been planned interested in this phase of teaching high school English . She has spent several years developing her procedures with her students .
 Bonney will complete the requirements for the degree of Master of Education for Experienced Teachers in English . Bonney is currently studying for the Master of English in English at the University of Cambridge .
 Stoneham High School granted a three day leave of absence to attend this meeting . She has been granted three days leave to attend the meeting .
 Bonney resides at 10 Norwood Street with her husband and three children, Alfred, James, and Mercer . Bonney lives with her family .
 Sherman B Russell reappointed Winchester chairman for the 1961-02 Christmas Seal Campaign . Russell of 1 Wolcott Road has been re-appointed Winchester chairman .
 Opening date of the 55th Annual TB Christmas Seal Campaign is Monday, November 13 . Letters with TB Christmas Seals enclosed should reach all Winchester residents by that date .
 Mr Russell will be working with Miss Anne Foley of Woburn, volunteer campaign director during the next few weeks .
 Daylight Saving officially ends Sunday morning, October 29 . Set your clocks and watches hack w’hen you turn in Saturday night . Daylight Saving ends on Sunday morning .
 That hour you lost last April when you set the time pieces ahead for the benefit of the gardeners and sportsmen comes back to you next Sunday . That hour of time will be returned to you when you return to the BBC One show .
 You won't need to grope around in the dark when you get up to go to work from now on . That is, unless your rising schedule is unusually early . You won’t need to get up early to get to work .
 Motor Vehicles Registrar Clement A Riley has issued a warning to motorists that their driving vision won’t be as good as it has been on the way home .
 He cautions drivers to look out for wet leaves and meandering pedestrians .
 Those who attend “Musical Moods” will have an opportunity to win as a door prize an evening for two, all expenses paid, at the Statler Hilton Terrace Room .
 The committee members have been working under the direction of Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline .
 Richard T Preston, chairman, to bring this top musical talent to Winchester, are Mrs. Mrs. Preston and Mr. Preston, of Winchester, will be joined by Mr Preston .
 Winchester Junior Circle of Florence Criti teuton is sponsoring the show . Don’t miss this fine show, which I is being sponsored by tlu* Winchester Junior circle of Florence .
 A record total of 14,113 depositors will share in our highest dividend payment f* are happy to ufitiounre the latest di\i»lend payable October l l l L UMl, in the amount of $336,355 .
 This is a fitting climax to our *)th year of service to \V inchester savers and home-owners . This is the culmination of our year-long service to savers .
 Cash and Deposits in Ranks S 6.171,81 1.66 1.161,126,84 13,788.843.71 61 1 .696.39 20.888.39 . Other Assets S 6,171,821 1.171
 William J Speers, Jr. 1871-1961 Our 90th Year Edward V French Ralph W Hatch Waldon B Hersey Charles T Main, 2nd Charles L Moore Herman F Pike William J. Speers .
 Autumn meeting of Bay State Historical League held at State House . Philip P Wadsworth James B Willing Joseph Wort hen latest dividend per annum . Philip Wadsworth .
 The new Archives Building, with its many valuable documents and exhibits beautifully displayed in the Edward J Cronin Hall, were most interestingly explained by Dr. Dr. Cronin . The Archives Building is most interesting to be shown .
 Members of the State House Police took groupB on guided tours of the many offices and corridors . They also pointed out portraits and statues of many celebrities .
 The afternoon meeting was held in the House of Representatives, with its white mahogany paneled wall and above the rostrum are five murals entitled “Milestones on the Road to Freedom in Massachusetts’s Massachusetts .
 Hale introduced them for Secretary of State Kenwin White, who later graciously greeted the League at his office . Hale introduced the group to White's office, where they were greeted by White .
 Mr Richard F Lufkin gave some pertinent historical facts concerning the building, saying that the comer stone was laid July 4, 1796 by Gov. Gov. George W. Bush . Mr. Richard F
 Director Edward P Logue spoke on “Some Historical Aspects of Boston’s Redevelopment,” saying thut Historical Societies should work with the Development project .
 There are Colonial, Revolutionary and Victorian buildings and most should be preserved in their location or redistributed, and not destroyed . Most of these buildings should be kept in their locations or redistributed .
 Governor William Bradford’s manuscript of the History of the Plymouth Colony, Commission to Sir Edmund Andros as Royal Governor of New England, jeweled gold medal from Government of Haiti, and sword and chair of Governor Endicott .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist Methodist Hall was decorated with Halloween colors for the Guest Night of The Fortnightly on Monday, October 23 . Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist Church was decorated in Halloween colors .
 John B Wills had decorated the coffee table with beautiful autumn foliage .
 Social Committee chairmen Frank White and Frank White were very efficient chairmen of the Social Committee, who served the delicious dessert .
 Ralph W Hatch, President, and Mr Hatch greeted all just inside the Hall of Fame . President Hatch was in attendance at the event .
 This was followed by the Salute to the Flag, and by the singing of “America the Beautiful” with Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline Obama .
 Salvy and Dan Cavicchio gave a delightful program of popular, semi-classic and a few classic numbers . The well-known musicians Salvy, Dan and Dan gave a program of music .
 Four ladies and four men volunteers came to stage and each were given what looked like a small pipe of an organ, and played the “Bells of Saint Mary’s” with the assistance of Salvy Cavicchio .
 The Literature Group invited all members of the Fortnightly to their program in the Rich Room on Wednesday, November 1 .
 Eva Henderson speaking on the “Middle East” to be held November 10 at the home of Mrs. Henderson . Eva Henderson will speak on the Middle East at her home in November 10 .
 Adolescents And Parents Workshop Theme to be held November 9 at Massachusetts Mental Health Center at 74 Fenwood .
 Registration will start at nine and sessions will continue till after luncheon . Registration will be open until after lunch .
 The meeting is being sponsored by the ladies of the Massachusetts Mental Health Center Auxiliary . The keynote address will be given by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . The meeting will be held at the center .
 Wermer is a training analyst of the Boston Psychoanalytic Institute . Wermer also is a member of the staffs of the Children’s Hospital and the McLean Hospital . He is a faculty member of Harvard Medical School .
 There will be small workshop discussions in which visitors may participate . There will also be small workshops .
 The leaders of these small groups will include eminent local psychiatrists whose work has been with young patients . The leaders will be led by eminent psychiatrists who have worked with young people .
 A panel will then review the conclusions reached during the workshop’s day . A panel of experts will then discuss the conclusions .
 Young people of Crawford Memorial Methodist Church have a busy weekend planned . UNICEF Sunday will be the focus of the young people at the church . The young people will be taking part in the annual youth ministry activities .
 UNICEF provides milk and food for children in many under-privileged parts of the world . The organisation is operated entirely under the direction of the United Nations .
 It has provided tools and instruction in agriculture to provide further relief in these stricken lands . Also provided tools, instruction and tools to help farmers in the region .
 The young people will leave the church, two by two, on Sunday afternoon at three o’clock . The church will be closed at 3 p.m. Sunday afternoon .
 When they have completed their assignments they will return to the church for a “snack supper” and a brief devotional service . The children will also have a snack supper at the church .
 The program is headed by Norman Stafford, president of the senior M.Y.F.F and Calvin Keeler .
 Winchester Mornings subscribers turned out to hear Miss Margaret Clapp, president of Wellesley College . Richard L McGuire, adult advisers, was also speaker .
 M iss Clapp spoke of four basic facts which are influencing our education in this transition period, namely, the explosion of knowledge; the shortage of teachers; and the shrinking world .
 She spoke of the problems and confusions which face us and of the great tasks which lie ahead in the field of education .
 We must be wary of impatience and short cuts and realize that there are diverse needs and many roads to meet them . We should be concerned not with theories but with the individual. We must not be concerned with theories, but with individual needs and needs .
 We have to realize that in the not too distant future our secondary-school student may be facing a world which has very little resemblance to that of today . We need to be prepared for a world that may not resemble the world of today.
 She spoke of the marvelous revisions in curriculum which have alroady been achieved, especially in the secondary schools .
 In the fields of mathematics and science great strides have been and are being made . There are the beginnings of a change in the teaching of history and history .
 We can no longer consider a Western world and an Eastern world, but we must learn to think in terms of one world . We must learn from each other to think of a one world, says David Cameron . Cameron: "We must not think of Western and Eastern worlds. We must
 The need for teachers is tremendous, teachers who have enthusiasm and something to communicate, teachers with the sort of character we would like to have our young people imitate . Teachers with enthusiasm and communication are needed in schools, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 This is not an easy order, Miss Clapp admitted, but such we must have if we are to make progress in achieving our goal . This must be 'such a task' she admitted, adding that it is not 'easy'
 In the light of the importance of education in our world and of its increasing cost, Miss Clapp feels that we should re-examine our expenditures of time and money .
 Developments in the suburbs are encouraging, she said, but they cannot live in isolation . Whatever happens in poorer sections of our cities is going to affect the suburbs .
 The problems and the dangers are many and we must keep in mind that education is not for greed, not for the purpose of outdoing one’s neighbor . Education is for the benefit of all, and not for outdoing your neighbor .
 Saville R Davis will speak in Hadley Hall on Thursday, November 30 . Subscribers are reminded that he will be speaking at the end of the month .
 Winchester Toastmistress Club meets at home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . Club meets in Winchester, Winchester .
 Mrs. Barbara Harrington, president, presiding, and introduced the guests for the evening . Mrs. Harrington was president of the board .
 Alice Coldwell of Reading was Toastmistress for the evening . She introduced the two 5 to 7 minute speakers . Alice Coldell of Reading, Reading, introduced the speakers .
 Mrs. Doris Dagnese, Medford, gave her maiden speech about “The Clock,’s ‘The Clock’ Mrs. Dagnesese, a new member of the Medford-Medford House of Representatives, gave a speech .
 Inez Yagjian, Winchester, was the Topic Mistress . She passed each member unusual topics of interest for the impromptu speeches .
 Beulah Thompson, Medford, was general evaluator and pointed out many common errors used in the speeches . She was also a general evaluation of the speakers .
 Phyllis Thorensen, Malden, timed the speeches and proved that good Toastmistresses abide by the “Golden Rule” not to talk overtime and put everyone to sleep .
 Members were called upon to demonstrate the many different ways gestures could be used and to be aware of the gestures used by speakers .
 Every member of a Toastmistress Club has an opportunity to participate in all meetings which is part of the training program the club affords . Toastmistresses are required to attend all meetings .
 The club meets every two weeks on Monday evening and to be uble to think on ones feet is the prime objective . The club is based in New York City, New Jersey, and meets every week .
 Don't be a poor Susie, and get all frustrated when asked to speuk to people at your clubs next special occasion . Visit Toastmistress and observe how one can gain poise and diplomacy that is so important in the world .
 Jo your weekly shopping at Converge.com . For more information call Mi 3-9630. *e*'' * * ft'* eo%y .
 Winchester Home and Gar1 den Club opened its year’s proi Next Sunday morninfr, Dr. Dr. Clearly Dr. Wrong. Wrong . Old Testament Scholar At Second Church WhA Snow y W, 2b .
 Miss Sandra Motwm L nor offortyawards, gave ave| lev Snow, to Gregory Downes, son I r y beaut,fuI and outstanding illusgational Church. Miss Sandra . Motwm . L. Motwm gave a .veve | lev
 He has served as Field Secretary of the American Schools of Oriental Research . He has also served as field secretary of the AOPEC .
 He was professor of Old Testament History and Theology at McCormick Seminary before he came to Harvard . Dr. John Sutter is a professor of theology at Harvard .
 Wright is the Archaeological Director of the Drew-McCorniick Archaeological Expedition to ancient Shechem in Jordan . He is the archaeologist director of the expedition .
 The Old Testament and its history and relevance for the present church have been discussed in many of the books written by the author of the Bible .
 Paul C Dunn of Grove Street, located in Ashburnham, burned down last week Monday . Dunn was located on Grove Street and located on the corner of the street .
 Dunns spent the week-end at the cottage and left everything in order . The Dunns had spent the weekend at their cottage .
 A defective chimney is believed to have been responsible for the delayed fire . The fire was caused by a faulty chimney believed to be responsible .
 Glamour Tips For the extra glamourous touch to your hairdo trv streaking . Trimpanese hair tips include trims and trims .
 These little pin points of light throughout your coiffure give it a high fashion look .
 Heimlich showed member of the senior class at Wheaton College how each problem was solved and Wheaton was solved .
 She was a debutante of the 1958-59 season . She was presented to society at the Debutante Cotillion and the Country Ball .
 J Edward Downes of Cambridge Street, prepared at Belmont Hill School for Harvard from which he was graduated cum laude in the class of 1981 .
 He was a member of the Delphic Club, the Hasty Pudding-Institute of 1770, and the Varsity Club .
 Diana Maureen Connor is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Connor . She is a daughter of Ms. Connor and Mr Connor . Memorial Hospitals.
 Frederick A Connor of Sheffield West is a graduate of the Massachusetts Memorial Hospitals School of Nursing . Connor is a member of the staff at Massachusetts Memorial Hospital Hospital .
 The attractive feature this year is a fabulous 17 day excursion through Italy with all expenses paid, for two, or the equivalent in money .
 As usual there will be a large number of articles for sale ranging from hand knit items; imported religious objects; plants and flowers .
 John Fallon of 61 Hutchinson Road reported to police that two men got out of a ear and stole two pumpkins from his porch, driving away .
 Westland Avenue mother phoned the Star that two pumpkins she had carved for her youngsters had been smashd by boys on her front steps .
 She bonders what fun boys get out of spoiling children’s fun, and the Star wonders too .
 Kirsten Travel Agency 29 Thompson Street, Winchester — PA 9-5410 extraordinarily beautiful gardens were created, enhancing the beauty of the home .
 He outlined the changing schools of thought regarding placement of plantings and general effects desired . He outlined a changing school of thought on plantings .
 After World War II two schools of thought emerged, one emphasizing “massed effects;” the other, restraint, topography, apd beautiful lawns . The other is restraint and topography . The lawns in New York City are considered beautiful .
 At the present, the trend is away from large plantings massed against the house . Instead there is developing as strong emphasis toward beginning with the outer edge of one’s property .
 Mr Heimlich’s lesson in wall building was simple and practical . He showed by his pictures how to begin a wall .
 This combination will insure years of slow steady root growth so essential to a beautiful Alpine wall or rock garden . This combination of root growth is essential to an Alpine wall .
 Mrs. Lewis for the secretary’s report of the spring meeting, and upon Mrs. Harold S Lewis for . Harold . Lewis .
 Vaccaro announced the Certificate Service Award given the club by the Veterans Administration hospital at Bedford for out standing volunteer service to the hospital . Vaccaro said the club was given the award for volunteer service .
 The committee in charge of this project consisted of Mesdames Ray Brown, John Wills, and Harold Twombly .
 Letters of appreciation were read from the Board of Trustees of the Winchester Library for the memorial gift in memory of Mrs. Mrs. Martha Smith .
 Stewart Chaffe and Blind Handicraft Shop volunteer for the Sale for the Blind . Stewart Chaff is the owner of the shop that sold the items to the charity .
 Announcement was made regarding the Christmas Greens Sale to be held December 6 at the First Baptist Church . The sale will be held at the church .
 Granville M OilPatrick’s lovely home for the making of Christmas decorations and wreaths .
 Cones and all other materials that can he used for the sale, are needed . May he left at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Cones . All other materials needed are needed and may he left .
 John Baylies and Miss Sylvia Parker are honored for their devoted work of solicitation of flowers and fruits for the Boston Flower Mission .
 A newly developed member participation project centering around a theme for the month, was explained by Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The project is part of a new group of members .
 Two beautiful arrangements depicting the fall theme were on display, arranged by Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Russell P Pearl, social chairman, assisted by Mesdames John J Hefferman, Lorenzo Della Femina, Clifton Shea, Edward Devlin, and Miss Sylvia Parker . Mesdame John J. Heffman, Lorenzo . Della . Femina and Cl
 Winchester interest in the marriage of Nona Rae Hig and Irene Louise Keegan . The marriage took place at /gins of Brookline to Paul Edmund; daughter of Mr and Mrs. Edmund .
 Susan will represent Lexington and  inchester in tin* Miss Massachusetts Pageant at Lexington this spring . She will compete in the Miss Massachusetts pageant at Lexington .
 Winner of this contest will vie for Miss America honors at Atlantic Citv.com . Winner will compete in Atlantic City, Florida .
 Robin Beth Bainbridge was born October 17 at the Henry Ford Memorial Hospital, Detroit, Mich. She was born to Roger C Bainbridge of 23732 East LeBost Drive, Novi .
 Janies Faieta, III, was born on October 20 . Janies is the son of James Faiete and Janies Fieta of Malden .
 William McLaughlin of Flint Avenue, Stoneham announce the birth of son, William . McLaughlin at Winchester Hospital, October 5 . William McLaughaughaugh was born at the hospital on October 5.
 Frank Frongillo of Kugler of Washington, D.C. an-*C,inn Road and Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Fongillo, of Washington . an-C,Ninn Road, an-Ninn road .
 William J Gallagher, Jr., of Wollaston, formerly of 40 Church Street, Winchester, announce the birth of a son, William Joseph, HI. William Joseph was born at St. Mary's Hospital in Honolulu, HI .
 Gallagher is the former Madelyne Moynihan, the grandparents of Mr and Mrs. Gallagher . Gallagher is also the former madelyne Gallagher, the grandmother of the late Mrs. Moynihans . Gallagher: The grandparents arc Mr. Gallagher, who is now Mr.
 Edward Fitzgerald, Jr., of 15 Church Street announce the birth of a second daughter, Karen Mary . Karen Mary was born October 10 at the Winchester Hospital .
 Edward D Fitzgerald, Sr., all of Winchester. rge McLaughlin . McLaughlin, Summer Street, Stoneham. McLaughlin,. McLaughlin and Fitzgerald all died at the age of 60 .
 Miss Camille G Gravellese of 20 Ledyard Road is soon to marry Mr Salvatore Caraviello, Jr., of West Medford . Joseph Nastasi of 41 Leslie Road recently gave a pre-nuptial tea and cocktail party in honor of Miss
 The refreshment table was beautifully decorated in white and red and lavish flower arrangements made an attractive setting for the party . The party was held in New York City .
 Miss Gravallese will be honored at several pre-nuptial parties before her marriage to Miss Marcia Louise Good row, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Good .
 Papal Blessing was imparted at the 10 o’clock ceremony . Ceremony took place in a setting of white and pink gladiolas and chrysanthemums . The Papal blessing is imparted by Pope Francis .
 Daniel Cavanaugh, who was also celebrant of the Nuptial Mass which followed, was also a celebrant .
 Church of the Advent in Boston, j. Mary’s Church to Richard Ralph . Richard Ralph The Rev. Ralph .
 The Junior High Fellowship of the First Congregational Church will meet in Chid ley Hall on Friday, October 27 at 7:30m.
 Each Junior High person is asked to bring a gift for men confined to Nursing Homes such as tooth brushes, tooth paste, razor blades, face cloths, handkerchiefs, pocket kleenex and postal cards .
 She wore a gown of silk organza over taffeta with Chantilly lace appliques, a matching lace chapel length train and long organza sleeves . The designer wore a silk silk gown with a matching train and matching lace .
 Her French illusion veil was caught to a crown of sequins and pearls . She carried a white missal topped with an orchid and having streamers of stephanotis . She also wore a white print print print .
 Miss Ellen C Lamplough of Arlington was maid of honor and the bridesmaids were Mrs. Mrs. Lamploug, from Arlington, was Mrs. Ellen Lamplugh of Arlington . Miss Ellen was a bridemaid .
 Howard R Goodrow of Mansfield Center, Conn. Mrs. Goodrow and Miss Murphy of Medford. Miss Goodrow, Miss Murphy, were married at a ceremony in Medford, Connecticut .
 All bridal attendants wore dresses of emerald green peau de soie with hell-shaped skirts and matching how headdresses with short veils .
 Goodrow, mother of the bride, wore light blue lace over mauve silk with matching accessories and white orchids . Goodrow wore the lace to the ceremony in light blue silk .
 Mathson, mother of the bridegroom, also wore white orchids with her Dior blue crepe dress with lace top and matching accessories . Mathson also wore a Dior dress with a lace top .
 The bride, a teller at Winchester National Bank, is a graduate of Matignon High School in Cambridge . The bride is a former high school student and teller from Winchester .
 Mr Mathson is a graduate of Woburn High School . He is associated with the Polaroid Corporation in Waltham .
 Martin J Dolphin, who was also celebrant of tho Nuptial Mass which followed, was also a celebrant .
 The bride, who was attended by her sister, Miss Bobbe Morse of Needham, wore a gown of heavy ivory satin embroidered with lace and pearls .
 Her fingertip veil of illusion fell from a crown of pearls and she carried a white prayerbook topped with stephanotis and white orchids . She was accompanied by a prayerbook made of white orchid flowers and a prayer book .
 The bridesmaid wore a princess style red velvet dress with a boat neckline, three-quarter length sleeves and a semi-full skirt . She wore the dress to the ceremony in New York .
 Her headpiece was of white pearls and she carried a cascade bouquet of white chrysanthemums . Her headpieces were of white Pearls .
 The bride wore a grey and blue Chesterfield suit with a matching grey hat, black accessories and a white orchid . She wore the suit to the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania .
 She is a member of the . veiyet frock with matching shoes Chi Omega sorority sorority .
 Miss Keegan was given in marriage by her father, and attended by her sister, Miss Gail Ann Keegan of Winchester, as maid of honor . Her sister was also a maid .
 Miss Patricia Witham of Jamaica Plain was flower girl and bridesmaids were Miss Rose-Marie LaBreque of Lowell, Miss Jane Bahhin of Arlington and Miss Roberta Davis of Framingham . Miss Patricia witham was the flower girl .
 The bride wore a gown of Alencon lace and net with a pearl neckline and a matching veil caught to a headpiece of pearls . The wedding was held in New York City .
 She carried a white missal topped with orchids and having streamers of valley lilies . The missal was carried by her as well as a white set of white missals .
 The honor maid wore a tangerine velvet dress with matching headpiece and shoes . She was the honor maid of honor at the ceremony .
 Christopher DiFranco of 58 North Border Road announce the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Ann, to Mr Salvatore Colozzi of Somerville . Elizabeth Ann's parents Christopher and Elizabeth Ann of 58 N.B. Road announce their engagement .
 Kimball of Woburn, and Rye, N. II., have the honor to announce the marriage of Mrs. Kimball . She and her husband were married in July 2013 .
 Dr. Kimball’s daughter, Josephine Frances Avcndano, was married to Garrett Mullins, the son of Dr. Mullins . Josephine and Garrett were married at the time of the wedding .
 Nadine Mullins of Concord, N. H., on Saturday, August 19th in Los Angeles, California . Nadine's funeral was held in Concord, New Hampshire, on Saturday .
 Mr Mullins graduated from Wil liston Academy and attended Mid dlebury College . He graduated from Midbury College and attended Williston Academy .
 Miss DiFraneo is a graduate of Winchester High School, class of 1961, and' is employed at Raytheon . Miss Difraneo graduated from high school .
 Mr Colozzi is stationed with the Air Force at Lowry AFB in Denver, Colo.
 George H Peckham of 20 Euclid Avenue celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary on Saturday, October 21, at the home of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Peckham .
 Mr and Mrs. Peek ham, Jr., and Mr Richard T Peckham, all of Winchester, all died at the age of 60 .
 Beckham's family celebrated their 0th anniversary October 21, grandchildren . Beckhams celebrated their first birthday with two great grandchildren and two great great grandchildren .
 Annual Church Fair at Old South Methodist Church in Reading, will be held on Thursday and Friday, November 2 and 3 . Harvest Festival will be in the colorful setting of a Harvest Festival .
 The timely motif of our bounty of New England in the fall will he carried out throughout the spacious church buildings under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson, the author of the book, will carry out .
 There will be a variety of arrangements and plants at the plant center . The plant center will be open at the end of the year .
 The festival will be climaxed by a delicious roast beef dinner to be served at 6:30 on Friday evening by the Rachel Circle . The Rachel Circle will serve roast beef at the event .
 The bride graduated from Matignon High School in 1958 ami from Burdett . The bride is a native of Burdet, Louisiana .
 Monsignor Manion, the Spiritual Director, opened the meeting with a prayer . Monsigner Manion is the spiritual director of the church .
 President Ruth Sylvester then held the business meeting, and the Country Store to be held November 8 at St. Paul's Country Store .
 The refreshments for the evening were supplied by the Mothers of the School in the form of a “pot luck” supper .
 Betty Crocker could take a few lessons from her cooking skills . Her recipes were something to behold . The recipes included a variety of dishes and desserts .
 Eleanor Stygles and hen* committee along with the mothers are to be complimented on a job “well done” certainly nobody went home hungry. Eleanor St. Stygle and hen*. committee .
 Frank J Hums of 2 Wyman Court, retired cut-sole manufacturer, died at his home shortly after midnight Saturday morning, October 21 . Spring 4*6600 i
 N H. H. lie spent more than 50 years in the cut-sole manufacturing field . He retired eight years ago because of failing health . He was president of Burns Cut Sole Leather Co. in Boston .
 He was a member of the Charitable Irish Association of Boston and the Hatherley Golf Club of North Scituate .
 On August 29, 1921, Mr Burns married Bessie McCHllis of Bridgewater, who survives with three daughters . Miss Justine Burns of Winchester, Mrs. Justine and Mrs. Mrs. Burns of Bridgewater also survived .
 A son, Edward M Burns of Winchester, seven grandchildren and seven grandchildren . A brother, Rev. Ernest J Mansmann Jr., of Alexandria Va., also survived . A son and a brother are also survived by a son and wife .
 Raymond Bums, O.S.B., of Manchester, N.H., and two sisters Miss Rose Burns and Mrs. Burns; and two . Burns and Burns' father, Raymond, was a member of the Bums family . Bums' wife died in December .
 The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the late residence . Solemn Requiem High Mass was held at St. Mary's St. Michael's Cathedral .
 Rev. Thomas Lane of the Immaculate Conception Church, Newburyport, was celebrant . Rev. Lane, Rev. Michael Lane and Rev. James Boulden of Newbury, Massachusetts, were celebrants . The service was held in Newbury .
 Miss Betsey F Nutter, a Winchester resident for nearly 60 years, died Tuesday morning, October 24, at the Reading Nursing Home in Reading after a month's illness . Miss Nutter was a member of the family .
 She was born September 10, 1877, in Salem, and attended the Salem schools . She graduated from Salem High School .
 She came to Winchester in 1902, making her home on the Parkway with her mother and her sister, Lillian . She moved to Winchester, Winchester, in 1902 .
 Harry Y Nutter, a dentist in Winchester and later for many years, Town Treasurer, died in 1953 . Nutter was a dentist and Town Treasurer .
 As a young woman she worked as a clerk for the Boston & Maine Railroad . She later was a secretary for an accountant in Arlington, Arlington .
 She last worked as a bookkeeper for the Winchester express and furniture moving firm of Kelley & Hawes, and their successor, William Kuhn .
 Miss Nutter retired from this position and in July of 1958 entered the Home for Aged People . She retired in July 1958 .
 She was actively identified with the First Congregational Church . She was a member of its Business and Professional Womens’ Club .
 Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at 2:30 at the Kimball Chapel with Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister will be buried at Kimball Funeral Services .
 William E Gross of Winchester is USAF Senior Advisor to the 8310th Air Force Reserve Group . The group is a part of the new recovery mission . Gross is a senior advisor to the group . Gross says the group is part of a new recovery program .
 It is believed this mission can save millions of lives throughout the nation in the event of war . The mission is believed to be a lifesaving tool for the nation .
 She was born December 12, 1895, in Lockport, Illinois . She blit lived as a girl in Winchester in Glengarry, graduating from Winchester High School in the class of 1§13 .
 Funeral services were held Friday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister . The minister was the minister at the service .
 Margaret E Aiken of Stetson Hall died early Thursday morning, October 19, after an illness of three years . She was the widow of Daniel Aiken and mother of Professor Howard H Aiken .
 Emanuel F Marascia, 41, of 5 Laurel Hill Lane, died suddenly Tuesday, October 24, in the Rockville Hospital in Rockville, Conn. He was an accountant with offices in Malden, Connecticut . Emanuel F. Marasia died suddenly on October 24 .
 He was on a business trip in Connecticut when he became ill while driving his car . He became ill in his car while driving in Connecticut .
 His death which occurred an hour after his admission, was attributed to a heart attack .
 He was born in Hartford, Conn., and had lived in Winchester, Winchester, for the past seven years . He had lived there for seven years.
 During World War II he served as a lieutenant, junior grade, in the U.S. Coast Guard .
 He leaves his wife, Ruth V (Sullivan) Marascia; his mother, living in Cromwell, Conn., and four sisters, all in Connecticut . He leaves behind a son, John, 15, of Winchester, and a son of Winchester .
 The funeral will be Saturday morning at 9 o'clock from the Owen P Doonan Sons Funeral Home in Malden . The funeral is scheduled for Saturday morning .
 Over 1000 ORIENTAL RUGs from sizes 1.6'x2.6* to 14.6"x30* . Includes new. used, antique and semi antique in all qualities .
 David Baird was awarded a gold and silver arrow, William Byford, a gold arrow and a silver arrow . Robert Shannon was awarded his seventh silver arrow and Bear Badge . David Baird also received a gold, silver and gold arrow .
 Robert Gilpatric, Clifford Letty, Bevill Lambert, Reed Sullivan, Dean Hakanson, Bruce Clark, Curtiss Clark, Frank Cullen, John DeVries, Dana Smith, Michael Smith, Robert Thompson .
 Paul Visconti, Douglas DeNatale, James Mulcare, Aathur Page, Timothy Price, Ralph Roberto, Kurt Woodward, Richard Bannister, Marc Harrington, Stephen Lanigan, Larry Spang, David Swiedler, Jay Bradley, Jr., Mark Carlson
 Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club continues to draw players from all over the greater Boston area . All roads appear In lead to Winchester on Wednesday evenings .
 Club master point night on October 18th was attended by visitors from Lexington, Medford, Arlington, . Arlington, Belmont, Stoneham, Everett, Dorchester, Waltham, Framingham, Lincoln, Wellesley, Cambridge, Wakefield, Burlington, Newton .
 Section A completed 22 boards at 11 tables for an average score of 110 . Section A scored an average of 110 in the competition . Section B completed 22 board games at 11 table games .
 Gerry Lawrence and Betty Yeomans out-distance everyone in both fields by a healthy margin . Gerry Lawrence is the guest editor of last, week, and Betty is the writer of this week's feature .
 This tournament attracts more interest than any other type of tournament . It is generally considered to be the major event of the year . The tournament is considered the most prestigious in golf .
 Guy MingolelH is the 19th guest editor of this week's column . He will discuss the hand that appeared to be quicker than the eye as he discusses necromantic matters .
 A good magician can perform his wizardry before an alert audience . He can also perform his magic tricks before a good eye-witnessing audience .
 The not so good magician must rely on a not so alert audience or a bit of confusion such as the babble of voices which attends a friendly duplicate session .
 It was i played 5 times by EW at heart I contracts, 3 of which were set . EW played the character five times . EW: "It was i . played five times. I played five . times"
 Our hero, one of the more ambitious, | played and fulfilled a contract of j 3 hearts . Our 1 hero played and played for the first time .
 The spade bid by E was very important in that it prevented all but one NS pair from arriving at an unbeatable 3S contract . E's bid prevented all of the NS pair arriving at a 3S deal .
 VV tested the heart situation, forcing the AH, and learned about the had trump distribution . VV forced the AH to give up on the AH .
 N returned a singleton JS (a heart return would have ruined the trick) which was taken in dummy . N returned the singleton .
 Our friend reached deep into his hag of tricks and led a low club finessing his jack, picked up the K with his A and made dummy’s Q good .
 A spade was ruffed by declarer and a club led to the eight of hearts to complete the sleight of hand . A club and a spade were led by a club to the heart .
 Orange Juice Valencia 6 oz can Sweet Peas Tender lOozpkg Corn Whole Kernel, Golden, Broccoli Chopped or Chopped . Can also be purchased from First National Stores in New Jersey .
 Cracker Barrel — Sharp Kraft Cheese Supplies ""All-Morning"" Energy Quaker Oats 2 LB 10 OZ STICK Hershey, Nestle's, Milky Way, Sky Bar, Waleejo, M&M's, Bolster, Schrafft's
 Your neighslated governments match the aid hor’s son or daughter will ring received at least two and a half your boll and chant, “Trick or times.” ‘Trick’.
 It is hoped that everyone will cooperate with the young people in their efforts to he useful and constructive on their fun night .
 Small coins collected Trick or Treating for the Children’s Fund totalled $1,750,000 . Last year the small coins collected collected collected by Trick or Triggers .
 The annual open house at the senior high school will be on Thursday, November 2, at 7:45m. Winchester Appliance Co. aprl3-tf Open House At High School will be at 7 a.m. The school is located in Pennsylvania .
 The ParentFaculty Association has planned a program enabling parents to become directly acquainted with a typical daily schedule of a high school student . Parents will follow their son’s or daughter's program and pass to classes according to a special bell schedule . On that evening, parents will followed their
 Teachers will meet with their various classes and supply pertinent informa tion concerning their area of study . Informality will be the keynote in the school cafeteria where refreshments will be served through out the evening .
 At the end of the class schedule, there will be a very brief business meeting of the Parent-Faculty Association in the cafeteria to vote on changes in the constitutional by-laws . The meeting will take place in the school's cafeteria .
 Mulhall. acting manager; Marguerite MeCarron and Paul Donahue, members of the tin' executive committee .
 More than forty members of the club will participate in the show . The show is under the capable direction of Mae and George Kean .
 Chairman for the evening’s fes tivities was Marion Manone; cochairman, Julia Petitti, ably assisted by hostesses Gerri Buzzotta Ven. The evening was marvellous .
 Gussie Fiore, Ann Dunbar Marie Pizzo, Vi Bruno, Jennie Amie Am ieo, Joanne Mistretta. Guss Fiore was nominated for the award-winning Italian TV show .
 An evening of fun and dancing was enjoyed by all to the music of Billy Radd’s Orchestra . The evening was attended by all .
 Set Sauce Pans S*49 Q7 Val. v/c Bob Pins 25 c Val. 9c Picture Frames $1.00 66 69c 47c Kubbcr Mats 3 .oo i 77 Val.9c Picture frames $100 .
 Playing the disks on a record player enables the blind to hear and absorb the spoken words . Playing disks on record players enables the deaf to hear the words .
 The Telephone Pioneers of America celebrate the oOth Anniversary of the founding of that nationwide organization at the Hotel Somerset in Boston on November 2, 1911 . Chairman of the Board of Selectmen, Sherman Salt marsh, has proclaimed Pioneer Week .
 The North Council is presenting a bronze plaque to Cambridge during Pioneer Week commemorating the first long-distance two-way telephone conversation by Alexander Graham Bell and Thomas A Watson from Boston to Cambridgeport .
 On October 31, the Council will hold an Open House at the formal opening of the new Pioneer Lounge and Work Shop in Winchester .
 They have also entered a float in the Woburn Lions Club Halloween shire .
 Parade held annually on this date, dren who have normal vision, is held annually . She is now teaching chil .
 On November 2 at the Ilillview board member was Charles A FarCountry Club in North Reading, rar from Winchester . Members and guests of the j ter is Norma .
 This was the beginning of what is believed to be the oldest continuous Community Service project in the Pioneer Association through out the country . The Pioneer Association is a non-profit organization .
 In the first year, the Council purchased two recording machines and cut approximately 1,200 records . The Council cut 1,000 records in one year .
 In 1960, seventy-five North Council volunteers cut 6,600 records . Since that time, three additional machines have been purchased .
 The machines are now installed in five air-conditioned soundproof recording booths at the National Braille Press of Boston .
 Just last week the Council produced a musical revue oalled ‘Sentimental Journey’ at the Arlington High School Auditorium as a fund-raising project .
 Two more recording machines have been purchased and will be installed in the new Winchester Lounge, thus broadening the opportunities to assist the blind . The Winchester Lounge will be expanded to accommodate the blind, with the addition of two recording machines .
 The Work Shop will take on the additional responsibility of repairing and helping to keep the machines used by the blind in good working order .
 Plans for the dinner will include dancing, enter tainment and a hobby show .
 The guest speaker will be Thomas M Hennessey, vice president of Public Relations of the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company . Winchester resident of Winchester, New Hampshire, will be speaker .
 After joining the Telephone Company he held several administrative posts until 1944 . He was appointed assistant vice president in charge of Public Relations . In 1956 he was elected vice president .
 In 1947 he was Greater Boston general chairman of the U.S.O.O., and has been a member of the New England and Boston Development Commission and of the United Fund .
 In addition he has held several positions on Boards and Committees for the Town of Winchester . He has also held positions on boards and Committees .
 The Telephone Pioneers of America is an association open to all men and women working in the telephone industry who have spent at least 21 years in the business . The association is open to those working in telephone industry .
 The other 200,000 members of the organization, the largest social fraternal organization of its kind in the world, provide close ties with their fellow members . Actively engaged in such community-minded projects as repair of ‘talking book” machines for the blind .
 He had larned Braille in an effort to help his daughter who had become totally blind . He had been trying to help her with the help of his daughter .
 HS&M gathers the clans for a parade of this season’s handsomest suits . From Scotland's glens comes the inspiration for the fall patterns . The Massachusetts Division of the Blind learned of "Talkhai rr scuaFFiiei & MARX"
 Our HS&M suit collection is wide and varied for a particularly personal choice of model, fabric and color .
 He is married to the former Sandra Merrill Nelson, the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Nelson . He is also married to former Mrs. Merrill Nelson's daughter .
 Helen E Terkelsen, Protestant chaplain at the Crittenton Hastings House in Brighton, was the featured speaker at the first meeting of the Winchester Circle of the Florence Crittent League .
 Terkelsen acquainted the circle with some of the problems and joys associated with her position at the Home, as well as discussing the factors which in general, are responsible for the difficulties the girls find themselves in .
 Terkelsen raised three sons before enrolling at Andover-Newton Theological Seminary . She graduated with honors from the seminary in New England .
 She proved herself eminently gratified to handle the spiritual phase of the program at Crittenton Hastings House .
 Maxwell McCreery, president, welcomed the large group of new and old members to the meeting . The meeting was held in the beautiful home of Mrs. Mrs. McCreary .
 Bradford Bentley led a short devotional period which was followed by the reading of the secretary’s report .
 Paul LaMarche introduced the twenty-five new members who were cordially received by Mrs. Mrs. Paul LaMche . Mrs. LaMachere introduced the new members .
 Florence Crittenton Bazaar to be held at John Hancock Hall on November 29 . William G Urmson, chairman of the Bazaar Committee, gave a detailed report of her committee’s work and plans for the Winchester table .
 Urmson also invited all members to attend the pre-sale to be held on November 15 at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Urmson .
 Baptist Couples Club to Hold Square Dance at 7:45 a.m. Club members and their friends may enjoy a gala square dance in the Social Hall of the church .
 Winchester’s favorite caller, “Mickey” Meurling, is known for his square dances . Winchester's favorite square dances are growing more popular each year . The club's square dances will be held at Winchester's Country Club .
 More couples than ever before before join hands in a good time for the big bash . And this one promises to be the biggest yet, with more couples joining hands than ever .
 All Baptist couples, or any Winchester couple who would like to join the group for an evening of fun, frolic and refreshments, are cordially invited .
 Irene Brigham, chairlady of this event, and her committee have worked very hard to make this a success, which we are sure it will be .
 There will be a table of special prizes worth $5.00 donated by the business firms . The event will take place in a bid to raise money for the charity .
 There are also penny tables, toy tables, penny tables and hand made articles .
 Everyone is cordially invited and welcome, not only will it be fun but you can get a head-start on your Christmas shopping . The event will be held in a bid to encourage people to get ready for Christmas .
 Tickets will be on sale Thursday and Friday, October 26 and 27, at Converse Market .
 Walter G Overacker announced the first sewing meeting to be held on Thursday, November 9 at 10:00m. at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Overacker .
 Report gives members a first-hand account of daily doings at the Home . This report gives the members of the Home a report of daily happenings .
 Richard R Pettingell arranged the program for the day and introduced the speaker to the group . Richard Pettingel arranged the event for the group and introduced it to the public .
 James P O’Brien, 27 Governors Avenue, has been elected secretary of her class j at Addison Gilbert Nurses Training school at Gloucester .
 John Dolan and Officer William Haggerty picked up a girl who they found hiding on the railroad overpass in the center of the city . The girl was found on the overpass and police say she was hiding on it .
 Edward F Bowler, giving several names and addresses that were obviously fictitious . Bowler gave several names, addresses and gave several fictitious addresses . He gave the names of several people, including Bowler .
 Bowler called the Lexington police and learned that the girl lived in that town, was 17 and a confirmed runaway . Bowler learned that she lived in Lexington, Kentucky, and was 17 .
 She was held at headquarters and given into custody of her father later in the morning . She was later taken into custody by her father at headquarters .
 The doors will open that evening at 7 o’clock, and bidding starts promptly at 7 :30 . The bidding begins at 7:30 .
 During the evening there will be an old fashioned snack bar, with doughnuts, coffee, cider for sale, to keep bargain hunters refreshed .
 Interesting antiques,* tables, lamps, china, pewter will be auctioned off, as well as many oddities that make any auction fun to watch . The auction will be held in New York City .
 We will do the hard, dirty work, which is removing the old finish, and then you eon do the fun port of putting on a new finish . We will remove the old finishes and then put on the new ones .
 KY’EN-KYEN Wood Stain and Wood Finish apply with just a cloth to produce a rich, beautiful finish just about as easy as (lusting) The company will demonstrate its new wood stain and finish .
 Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr. Established in 1880 .
 A counter spy for the FBI was a member of a communist cell for nine years . Not too many did, but those who were in the auditorium heard a lot of things about communism .
 "Upon how we, the western peoples meet this crisis depends our very existence. Upon how . we meet this . crisis depends upon how we . meet this [the western peoples] face this crisis," she said .
 When communism came into being with the overthrow of the Czarist regime in Russia not more than one per cent of the population was communist .
 One-<|uarter of the globe is under communist domination . Now onethird of all the peoples of the world are communist . One-third of the people are communist and one-thirrd of all of the . world are communists .
 The communists are continuing to take over territory at the rate of a thousand square miles each day . The communists continue to take control of territory in Ukraine .
 In Mr Philbrick’s opinion, there is no ‘cold war’ between democracy and communism . In his opinion, he says democracy is not communism .
 There is also no such thing as a “good communist,” except in the communist sense . There is no ‘good communist’ except in a communist sense, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says there is no good communist .
 A communist has only one goal, the overthrow of the free world hy communism . A communist is only interested in overthrowing free world, he says .
 The communists with whom lie associated in bis communist cell in Cambridge were almost invariably well to do and included business and professional men, college professors, physicians, physicians and well educated people .
 Communist propaganda is disseminated to the masses, the poor, the down-trodden, the underprivileged . Communist propaganda was disseminated by the masses .
 The real communists are not of this strata, according to Philbrick . Support of communism often comes from such people, but the real communists do not, he says .
 Communists in Massachusetts said Mr Philbrick number some 300, and in the whole of the U.S. only 10,000 in the United States . Communists in . Massachusetts said some 300 people are Communists .
 The communists are careful to have none hut true party followers enrolled in their ranks, working on the assumption that one real communist at the right time and in the right place is all that is necessary for their world conquest .
 Not a few have found comfort in the often heard statement that the Red Chinese and Russian Soviets do not like each other . However, they are likely to grow wider apart through the years .
 Mr Philbrick pricked that bubble by saying that recent pictures of Red Chinese troops show them wearing Russian made helmets and hoots .
 Russia would hardly he he arming a huge nation it may have to tight some day . Russia is hardly the only nation it might have to arm .
 They both have the same plans for all free peoples. their conquest by the proletariat. Their plans for free peoples are similar to that of the Communist Party .
 China wants to move violently against the west, meaning the L nited States at once . China has been seen as the most powerful state in the world .
 American apathy and stupidity will land the nation in its sphere without violence, says President Obama . "America will be in the sphere of the world without violence," says Obama .
 Our government, in Mr Philhrick’s opinion, is getting nowhere in opposition to the communist campaign against the free peoples .
 It is failing he said primarily because it has no clear conception of what action it is necessary to take and because of what he said baldly is sheer stupidity . The speaker does not believe that communism is making its inroads in our country because of treason in high places .
 "Inept handling of our campaign and poor salesmanship throughout the neutral world are to blame for our failure more effectively to combat communism to date," says President Obama .
 The speaker said that this country is supplying airplanes and arms to Yugoslavia which in turn are being sent to Cuba to aid the communist campaign against us there . As an example the speaker said the speaker .
 Some in the Philbrick audience recalled the scrap iron and steel sent to Japan during World War II to kill our soldiers in the Orient . The scrap iron was used to kill the Japanese soldiers .
 He is not the jxx>r cane cutter many suppose, a leader springing from the down-trodden . Instead, he is not a politician but a leader of the people he represents .
 He comes from one of the wealthiest families in pre-revolution Cuba . He is well educated and comes from a well educated family .
 Mr Philbrick says the government is failing in its effort to combat communism . It is now necessary to take the fight to the people at the grass roots, he says .
 They are in his opinion the last hope. nce they get a clear conception of the danger to their freedom posed by communism . They will effectively oppose it. They are . effectively opposing it .
 Mr Philbrick believes education is the key to the success of his project . He says education is key to success of the project .
 On every side are conflicting claims, many of them communist-inspired to becloud issues and confuse those ignorant of communist procedures . "On every side is conflicting claims," many of which are Communist-inspired, beclouds issues .
 "Our first duty as citizens is to learn all we can about communism," says Julian Zelizer . "We need to learn exactly what a communist is, exactly what he believes, how he works and toward what goals"
 A communist thinks that anything that promotes communism is good, that only with world communism will come peace, he says . A communist is a communist who thinks only with communism is peace . He says only with a communist world would come peace will come .
 Anything communism can do to further its interests is a step toward peace . Anything that brings al>out world dominance by communism is a movement toward peace, he says . Communism can bring world domination by communism, he writes .
 Philbrick said the communist party violently denounced as murder, the execution of two persons in this country convicted bv a court of law of treason . The execution of people in a satellite country accused of sedition by Soviet spies, he said .
 Mr Philbrick is far from hopeless about our failure to combat communism more effectively . He warned his audience not to panic or to take a defeatist attitude .
 We do not have to he “red” or “dead,” but we do have to wake up and know communism for what it is and combat it wherever possible . We have to woken up and fight communism wherever possible, but we have to .
 Talk about communism, tell your friends about communism . See to it that our schools arc not inadvertently teaching communism . Talk about Communism, tell friends about it .
 New England, the Cradle of Liberty, is perhaps the section of the country most apathetic to the threat of communism, says Philbrick .
 In the middle west and on the west coast big crowds turned out to hear him . In the west west he performed at the end of his career .
 In the south and west emphasis is being laid on patriotism and the American wav of life in schools .
 The speaker expressed himself as pleased to see many young people in the audience . He said he was happy to see young people attending the event .
 One of the youngsters asked a question sufficiently pertinent to indicate lie had followed Mr Philbrick’s remarks closely . The youngster asked the question to indicate he had followed him closely .
 Elsewhere in a hall a small group of teen-agers talked and laughed during much of the latter part of his talk . Elsewhere, a group of teens laughed and laughed as he spoke .
 Philbrick and Khrushchev agree that unless U.S. wakes up our young people will grow up under communism . This is ironic because of the threat of communism in Russia, they say .
 The young people in the hall last Thursday were the ones who will he most terribly affected hy a successful communist conquest of this country . Young people will be terribly affected by a successful Communist conquest of the country, he said .
 It was good to see that most teen-agers present paid the closest attention to the event .
 Mr Philbrick, using as a slide rule the rate of communist take-over in the past, predicted that we have 1 2 years of free society left us, UNLESS we wake up and take positive steps to defend America .
 He believes the same vision Washington had in those dark hours and the same courage and devotion to duty shown there will keep this nation what it has always been since the Revolution, the greatest country on the earth .
 Let’s Keep Channel 2 . How often we hear TV programs critizcd as being of little value, even as entertainment . Let's keep Channel 2.
 Many have said they would he glad t<» have paid TV if through that instrumentality they could he sure he sure of getting worth while programs . Many say they would be glad to see paid TV .
 Those who had appreciated what tlu* station had been doing educationally and culturally contemplated no further programs, at least for a time .
 The Catholic Television Center in Boston made it possible for Channel 2 to continue its programs the very day after the tire tire tire . Channel 2 was able to continue to do its programs that day .
 Individuals and business responded with financial donations . Many persons have promised to initiate community-wide drives for contributions .
 LIFE Magazine last month called Channel 2 ‘'Hie most prestigious station,’s most prestigious . NI AVSW ELK devoted a full page in reviewing a recent program .
 World renowned, hardly a week passes without several overseas visitors, most at the ministerial level, touring the W ( d»l 1) studios .
 Messages flooded the area from across the nation as news spread of the W (D3D) disaster . Messages flooded from all over the world .
 Manv of these states viewed Channel 2 programs on the National Education Television Network and wired pledges of financial assistance to them .
 W(iBH officials stress that the station must literally rebuild from the ground up new studios, new offices, “new everything” at a cost of $ 1,500,000 . The station will need new studios and offices at the same time .
 The sooner this goal is reached the more quickly \\(»BH can resume its significant cultural role, the sooner it is reached . The sooner that is reached is that the organization can resume a cultural role in America .
 The development of the town manager method of administration in Massachusetts must he divided into two distinct periods based on the “weak manager” concept, stem ming from the Norwood act of 1914 . The “strong manager’ form was created hy the Saugus act of 1947
 Towns of Norwood, Stoughton, Middleborough, Orange and Mansfield fall under the first category . Towns which have accepted town manager enabling legislation since 1947 come within the latter category .
 Staunton, Virginia, is usually mentioned as the first community to utilize this form . The origin of the council manager plan is uncertain .
 In 1908, Staunton, by ordinance hired a “general manager” to serve as a full-time administrator under an old-fashioned weak mayor and bicameral council system . In 1908 the city hired a "general manager" to serve a full time administrator under
 A committee of seven was ap pointed and after due deliveration presented a report . Committee of seven presented report into the case .
 Committee charged with creating a scheme of government that would be in harmony with new office . Committee believed existing form of government did not lend itself to such a project .
 The activities of this committee led subsequently to the adoption of the Norwood Town Manager Act of 1914 . The committee led to the introduction of the new town manager legislation .
 The adoption of this was indeed a major step for a Massachusetts community to take, but by today’s standards it illustrates weak manager administration .
 The special act concentrated more essential managerial authority in the selectmen than in the manager . The selectmen have more authority than the manager, according to the law .
 Under the act, the moderator, five selectmen, five school committeemen, the treasurer and collector, the finance committee, library trustees, the planning hoard, and the board of health were all elected .
 Selectmen appointed the town clerk, town accountant, physician, fire chief, building inspector, sealer of weights and measures, forest and fire warden, fish and game warden . Selectmen also appointed boards of assessors, public welfare and appeals .
 The selectmen were given the powers of the board of public welfare, highway surveyors, water, sewer, and park commissioners, municipal light board, and tree warden .
 The town council fixed the salary of the manager, assessors, town clerk, and town accountant . The council also fixed the salaries of the town clerk and assessors .
 He was to organize, continue or discontinue such divisions or departments as may be determined by vote of the selectmen or in the absence of such vote .
 He had the power to appoint and remove all superintendents or chiefs of departments and all subordinate officers and employees in such departments and to fix thensalaries and wages .
 He was to attend all selectmen meetings and give recommendations of the needs of the town . He was also to give recommendations for the town's needs . The town's selectmen voted to appoint him to the position .
 He prepared budgets for departments under his control, was responsible for maintenance of town buildings . He also was purchasing agent for all town departments except schools .
 He had control and supervision of the police department subject to the direction of the selectmen . Finally, he had control over supervision of police department .
 The special acts establishing town managers in Stoughton, Mansfield and Middleborough were essentially the same as Norwood act .
 In Mansfield and Middleborough the finance committee was abolished and its duties transferred to the selectmen . In Stoughton, a five-man elected finance committee also acted as a planning hoard, received the budget estimates from the town manager .
 The town treasurer and collector of taxes were elected in Middleborough and appointed by the manager of the manager in Mansfield . Middleborough was elected in 2011 . Mansfield was also elected in 2012 .
 The selectmen exercise control over the major appointments and supervise the administration of departments ostensibly under the town manaKer . The town's selectmen continued to exercise control of the appointments .
 The answer is to be found in analyses of the charters, which seem to indicate that certain principles of public administration are being violated . The answer to the question is to find out what is happening in the charter system .
 The list is actually so long that one wonders just what that section referring to his power to appoint superintendents and subordinates really means .
 The phrase “subject to the direction and supervision of the selectmen’s.” tends to violate the separation which should exist between politics and administrationif the manager plan is to be successful .
 If “direction and supervision” is interpreted to mean interference in the day-to-day administration of municipal departments, then the authority and responsibility of the manager is irrevocably undermined . “Direction and supervision,’s interpretation of the law,” says
 It would be foolhardy to expect any Massachusetts community to accept a strong manager charter at such an early date when the plan itself was relatively unknown and untested . Like all modifications in government, the changes that are involved in the adoption of a town manager charter are very slowly accepted by
 Full acceptance was given to the strong manager concept with the introduction of a town manager charter in 1947 . The bill subsequently passed and the citizens of Saugus ratified it in 1948 . Full acceptance of the idea was given in 1947; the bill passed and ratified it .
 It had been 17 years since Orange had accepted the town manager method . The town manager plan is important because it reopened consideration of the plan as one method of improving a town's management .
 The Saugus bill tended to correct some of the shortcomings of the previous charters granted to Norwood, Stoughton, Mansfield, Middleborough and Orange . Further, the bill tended . to correct the shortcomings . of the . previous charties .
 The town manager’s power to appoint was extended to such positions as a planning board, a board of welfare, board of health, and board of playground commissioners . Three qualified assessors, a town clerk, town treasurer town collector, town accountant, accountant, superintendent of public works
 The selectmen were limited to appointing members of the board of appeals, board of library trustees, election officers, registrars of voters, and the town manager . The town manager was appointed by the selectmen .
 The selectmen have the appointing power over these boards since they are quasijudicial and are not concerned with day to day administration . It is certainly fitting and proper that the selectmen should have the power over the boards .
 He was authorized to reorganize, consolidate, or abolish those departments, commissions, and boards within his province . He could also establish new departments, transfer duties, powers, and appropriations .
 The town manager established by this legislation was, indeed, the chief administrative officer of the town and had the authority commensurate with his responsibilities . Although it appears that too many boards still existed, it appears too many still existed .
 The office of selectman in Massachusetts town government is being reduced to impotence under a strong manager charter . The position is an “ancient and honorable” position .
 The role of the selectman is being redefined in the light of modern pressures on town government and upon the office of selectman in particular . We shall endeavour to point out, however, that the role of a selectman has been redefined by modern pressures .
 As a practicing hypochondriac, I am constantly confounded by the number of jicoplc I meet who never visit a doctor . I'm not sure why I'm a doctor, but I'm sure I'm going to see my doctor .
 Many lesser souls will wind up unnecessarily dead long before anyone conies around to ask us the secret of our longevity . Many of us lesser souls . We'll wind up unnecessary dead long .
 Some of tis will get knocked off playing the great American game of Detroit Roulette . "Detroit Roulette" is a game of American Roulette, the author says .
 You know the figures as well as 1, and it’s a measure of our callousness today that forty thousand annual deaths on the highways bother us somewhat less than having the TV set blow out .
 But there’s a bigger and more dreadful and more wasteful figure than that. It's not just a waste of money, it's a terrible waste of time and energy .
 A quarter of a million Americans will die this year who don’t have to die, because they’ll have had cancer . They’ve had cancer and won't know it until too late, too late .
 Two hundred and fifty thousand people — equal to about two-fifths of the population of Boston — will he gone twelve months from now because they didn’t get a checkup in time . About two-thirds of Boston’s population will be affected by the health crisis
 This word “checkup” has had a lot of lip service, but most of us haven’t given it much thought . This word "checkup" is a term for a medical checkup, but it's not always been given much thought about .
 To many it sounds like a corrective procedure, so they don’t get one because they feel fine . To many people, the procedure sounds like corrective surgery, so many don't get one .
 A proper anti-cancer physical examination is devoted to finding cancer, or conditions which may lead to cancer, in its early stages . A proper cancer physical examination can be used to find cancer in its earliest stages .
 This is virtually the only weapon we now have against this killer, and it’s nut used often enough . It's nut used to be used often in the face of this killer .
 There are some two hundred clinics already established throughout the country . It's best and most thoroughly practiced at a new type of clinic .
 Massachusetts Cancer Detection Clinic at 1095 Beacon Street, Brookline, is a non-profit, voluntary organization chartered by the Commonwealth .
 Norman Lenson was a surgeon who saw one hopeless case too many and resolved to do something about it . Lenson is the son of Lenson, a surgeon in the U.S. who was diagnosed with HIV in the 1980s .
 The clinic is staffed by nine part-time doctors who receive just a token fee for their examination . Volunteer professional nurses and lab technicians who serve without pay are also on staff .
 In two visits taking a total of about three hours, you can get a thorough-going physical examination that will amaze — and, I trust, delight you .
 Fees scale down from a maximum of twentyfive dollars, according to the examinee’s ability to pay . The examinee's ability to be examined will vary depending on the amount of money they pay .
 Massachusetts requires at least a cursory physical examination for your car twice a year . Massachusetts and many other states require at least at least an inspection of your car . Massachusetts is one of the most populous states in the U.S.
 There is no law I know of, however, that says you have to do something about preserving your own life . There are no laws that say you must do something to preserve your life, says author .
 A postcard or phone call to the Clinic at BEacoti 2-191“ will bring you all the information . Beacoti will be available at the clinic .
 The Winchester Star assume* no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements . Will publish without 'harge a correction in the neat issue, or republish that portion oi the advertisement which is incorrect .
 At i Police Chief Derro producing the lettf parents of children Washington School cipal. Washington School principal. Police chief Derro .
 To provide for the best traffic safety for our pupils, we need your assistance in eliminating the hazards . We need to provide the best road safety for pupils .
 We will appreciate any support that you can give us in this phase of the child's education . We will be happy to ask for any support from the public .
 Nurn burger is at Forest Street and Highland Avenue at the foot of Hie hospital hill . The burger is located at the bottom of the hill .
 Mr Lambiase directs traffic at the Kenwin Road and Washington Street crossing . The crossing is between Kenwin Rd and Washington St. at the intersection .
 Some children criss-cross the roads and walk in the streets with no regard for their own safety . Despite warnings from both home and school, some children are still crossing the roads .
 Accidents can occur in less time than it takes to mention the possibility . Accidents happen in less than a few seconds, says CNN.com .
 A certain number of our pupils favor short-cuts where there is no officer on duty . A number of pupils prefer short cuts where there are no police officers .
 "We must make a concerted effort to see that they cross in the proper places," says Drexler . "We need to make sure that they are crossing in the correct places," he says .
 Because of the hospital construction, great caution must be exercised on Fairmount Street . Fairmount St. is closed to traffic .
 They require a wide swing when they enter and leave the hospital grounds . They need to be seen by staff at the hospital .
 On rainy days, those who drive to school are aware of the congested traffic . Traffic will be more congested on rainy days .
 There are no one-way streets in the school area . Use Reservoir Street and Appalachian Road to get to the school .
 The officer cannot control the situation when cars are going in both directions on Appalachian Road . The officer says he can't control the traffic situation on the road .
 Children should not dash out between parked cars when they see your car . Please caution children not to dash out of parked cars .
 We request that you do not park your car near the Highland Avenue and Kenwin Road crossing at dismissal hours . The full view of the children who are proceeding to the crossing is obstructed when cars are too close .
 We suggest that you allow approximately fifty feet from the intersection before you park to wait for children . You should park about fifty feet away from an intersection .
 Two years ago this week Dr. Sylvester died and after being euj greater caution when pupils are en route to and from school . Dr. cannot overemphasize the need for Sylvesters to be treated with caution .
 Sincerely yours, Leonor M Rich, Principal (»ct>iue Washington School (Washington) Washington School School .
 Herbert Philbrick spoke to students at Winchester High School Auditorium about communism . A half-filled audience showed interest in learning more about communism, how it works and how best to combat it .
 Mr Philbrick’s statement was based on the take-over rate by communists since 1945 and projected to conclusion, 1973 . The statement is based on take-overs rate by communist since 1945 .
 It is sobering thought if we all just take a few moments to consider what it would mean to each and every freedom we now enjoy, it would be a sober thought .
 It is sobering if we consider how close the timetable could be, it could be close to the end of this year . It is indeed more sobering than we think how close this could be .
 Mr Philbrick stated that the forces without and within our shores were one and the same . He said that the 10,000 party members operatin our country are truly a dedicated and efficient team .
 I therefor submit that one important place to start this knowledge is in our own school system . I submit that . one of the important places to start is in the school system, the school .
 "This is not a proposal to administer an entirely new course in our school curriculum," says the headteacher . This is not an entirely different course in the curriculum, he says .
 It does make sense to me that in this apparent late hour a study of some book on how to understand and combat communism should be more important than “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” with due respect to Mr Shakespeare .
 I logigcd by the priest for his goodness to these poor people, he was buried, as he had wished, amongst them . Farnum, 7 Edgehill Road, was buried among the poor people .
 An old Indian came up to us and said, “We see Dr. Dr. John Sutter.” Dr. Sutter's grave is in the shadow of the mountains .
 A year ago last June, Governor Furcolo was attending a conference of U.S. Governors at Glacier National Park in Montana . 1 wrote to His Excellency and asked if he were anywhere near Browning, would he please visit my brother’s grave .
 A short time later, I received a beautiful letter from Mr Furcolo in which he enclosed colored photos, one of which showed the primitive cross inscribed with the name Dr. Dr. Furcolo . Dr Furcolo wrote that a primitive cross was inscribed with his name .
 A circle of flowers was planted there by his beloved Indiana with whom, even in death, he shared a common bond of affection . Corrigan and Indiana Corrigan were also in the circle .
 The ex-Governor has been in the hospital for more than 20 years . He says he is praying for the Doctor and a kind thought for the ex-governor .
 The writer believes that when a I I specific situation is met with such good judgement our police officers should be backed and commended .
 Last week there was a horse galloping north on the railroad overpass between the two local stations . The horse was galloping on the overpass at the time .
 The Judge, in refusing leniency, strongly condemned the actions of the youths and warned others that he did not baby-sit or take by the hand these young ttien .
 He said that both young men had been given every opportunity to go straight and pointed out that recent crimes they had committed came while one was on probation and other awaiting trial on a continued case .
 Sylvester Corrigan was a chief medical officer amongst the Blackfoot Indians in Browning, Montana . Corrigan is a graduate of Harvard Medical School and a medical officer among the tribe .
 Girls’ STRETCH SKI PANts Made of 100% Stretch-Nylon If atcr-Rcpellcnt IN RED, NAVY, LODEN, ami BLACK Sizes 3 to (>x, $8.98 Sizes 7 to 14,
 Many, many thanks to your good paper for publicizing M.S.C.A.’s recent fashion show by Monet Through your columns we now extend appreciation to the ladies of Winchester for supporting this event so enthusiastically .
 Committee members thank patrons of McCormack’s Apothecary, Dr. Dr. John McCormack . Committee members also express appreciation for patrons of the event .
 The committee also sincerely thanks the donors of our door priz* es, who include Avon Cosmetics, Chitel’s, Emerson Rugs, McGhee's, Happy House, Kays of Newport, Kyanize Paints and Mr George Warren Smith .
 Pres. Kay Longworth, Fashion Show Chairman Mary Knox and Fashion Show co-Chairman Kay Cardin, Pres. Mary Cardin . Kay Longwillworth, fashion show co-chairman Mary Knox, fashion co-chairs Mary Knox . Fashion Show will be held in New York
 Winchester Auxiliary, M.S.P.C.A. to express our gratitude to the j tolerate actions such as these any townspeople who made contribu‘ >°nger. Winchester . Auxiliary to express gratitude to those who have made contributions .
 Ho expressed himself as tions to the league during our res, * rr V *° r the youths’ parents, who cent tinance drive . Since our own league members oT ’ s * provide two-thirds of our income i At the conclusion of his stiff
 Winchester voters voted for the first time in 2008 . Winchester voters will be able to vote again this year . Winchester is the first city to hold a seat in the House of Representatives .
 "The faithful support and encouragement from individuals throughout the town is greatly appreciated by our hard-working volunteer members," says volunteer group .
 Winchester citizens share Winchester citizens' concern for good government . Such readiness to give to our league is surely a sign of Winchester citizens . Winchester citizens are concerned about good government, Winchester officials say .
 Such cooperation must be endorsement of the non-partisan approach to governmental problems characteristic of the league program . Such cooperation would be an endorsement of non-partisanship, informed approach to government problems .
 Officer John Frongillo handled the “litterbugging” on the common one Sunday afternoon a few weeks ago . I had expected that several would appear in print commending him for the way he handled the incident .
 Officer Frongillo not only went into action but used excellent judgement in the manner in which he handled the situation . A lazy man would have looked the other way, but he did not look lazy, he said .
 I hope he was officially commended, for the town and its officials should let it be known that such alert and intelligent work is appreciated . The town should be aware of his alertness and intelligence work .
 Some youngsters waiting for a bus at the common got a little too exuberant and were at the point of damaging property . A police officer came upon the scene and ordered the children to walk home .
 Winchester Civil Defense Stresses Shelters . The walk to the farthest point in the town of Winchester would not hurt any one of these active boys .
 A very important question was brought before the staff by Mr Joseph Dolben of the school committee . Mr Dolben asked the school staff to explain why they should not have been allowed to take part in the debate .
 After considerable discussion it was decided that all school children should be sent home immediately .
 Civil defense authorities state that there will be at least a twenty minute warning before attack . That would provide ample time for children to reach their homes, authorities say . Civil defense officials say children will be given time to reach homes .
 Winchester schools do not have adequate shelter space or supplies to care for students for 14 days . Winchester schools have no shelter space, supplies or shelter space for students .
 As you can see the only conceivable plan would be to instruct the children to get home as soon as possible .
 Civil defense staff in this community is the ‘Wait and See’ attitude of the citizens . Something that bothers the civil defense staff are the “Wait and see’s attitude .
 In most cities and towns public opinion has definitely assisted the preparedness of their respective communities . Public opinion has also assisted in the preparation of the emergency services .
 It will be interesting to see if the ‘Wait and See’ attitude can be changed to a public spirited preparedness unsurpassed in this state .
 On each of the three counts against them, ttie sentences to run concurrently . House of Correction on each count against them will be tied to a maximum of two years .
 The youths appealed and were held in $500 bail for appearance in Superior Court Monday morning . The youths again appeared in court before Judge Henchey and waived their appeal . T he youths appealed . However, however, the youths again showed up in court .
 Officers Baird and Frongillo of Winchester Police took the pair to the House of Correction in Billerica .
 Officer John Frongillo found upon arrival a born mongrel in the act of killing a chicken in the Ericson chicken coop . The dog was found dead in the coop of the Ericon Chicken Coop .
 Officer Frongillo succeeded in getting a rope on the dog and took him to Headquarters . The dog was taken to headquarters by the officer .
 Winchester Real Estate Office is located at 5S5 Main Street, Winchester, Winchester . The office will be located in the same location as the previous office .
 Forum members attend service on the last Sunday of the month . Forum members are represented in the leadership of the service by a chaplain, deacons and choir .
 Frank Curtis, president of Forum, will serve as chaplain this month, with the following boys also acting, as deacons; Steve Emery. Frank Curtis will be the chaplain . The boys are also acting as a deacons .
 James Gustin, Neal Baker, David Bird, Neal Kirkpatrick, Alan Hodge and Peter Carletdn; and as ushers; were ushers . Neal Baker and David Bird will be in attendance .
 Bob Stewart, Axel Boehrke, Bruce Carpenter, Scott Erskine, Peter Fisher, and Bill Gaffney. Bob Stewart. Peter Fisher . Peter Fisher: "I'm not going to let it go"
 Forum Choir has as its chairman, Judy McKinley with Robert White as director, Robert Mulford, organist and assistant director, and Mrs. Mulford .
 The October supper meeting will be held in Chid ley Hall at 8:00 Y-m. this Sunday . October supper will be at 8 a.m. Y-M. M.
 Mr Hotzapple was one of the leaders of Spring Conference last April . He proved to be a most stimulating person .
 Mr Holtzapple will lead Forum members in their thinking about problems of segregation which do not readily appear as local problems . Much interested in social issues and relation of religious faith upon them .
 The annual Work Day for Christ contributions will be brought to the October supper meeting . Work Day Day Day contributions are expected to be brought at the October meeting .
 A service of dedication will be led by Linda Carter and Jane Hood, cochairmen of the memorial service . Linda Carter will be joined by Jane Hood and Linda Carter .
 Massachusetts Congregational young people this year through their Work Days is the providing of a community library for Mt. Mt. Mount, Massachusetts . The goal of the young people is to provide the community library .
 A j mounted rider from the nearby riding stables in Medford out looking for greener pastures . hut ending up trapped in the cement northbound waiting area of the Wedgemere station .
 The 1 1 1 :23 :23 was slowed down to a creep and caused its conductor to wonder if Indian raids were coming back to the Aberjona run . Not however, before it had slowed the 1 1:23 .
 Constructed with four rubber tired wheels for running on the roads, four smaller inner steel wheels for gripping the tracks . Steering apparatus which adjusts to either use and adjusts to the other use .
 This “truck’s” spent the day last Friday testing both branch lines running into Winchester . Winchester is the largest city in the state .
 It was seen in the middle of the town progressing very slowly south and then backing hell bent for leather to get out of the way of the same 1 1 :‘23 which had so politely deferred to the horse a few days before .
 Library Film Program at the Public Library this week end will feature one half-hour color film . Film program at the library will feature an hour-long color film.
 Old Order Amish is an interesting study of the Amish folk of Pennsylvania Dutch country . The Amish are Amish Amish people who live in Pennsylvania Dutch Country .
 Their resistance to influences from and assimilation by contemporary society is shown most graphically as they are shown living on farms and attending oneroom schools . Their resistance is shown in the film as they live their daily life on farms .
 Completing the program will be Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale of the Steadfast Tin Soldier . The program will also feature a fairy tale from Andersen's The Steadfast Tinker Soldier .
 The Friday night program and its accompanying display of books is designed for families . The program is designed to be family friendly .
 Saturday morning school age children may get tickets in the Boys’ and Girls’ Room at 10, and the program begins at 10:15 . School age children can get tickets for the program at 10.15 .
 Margaret Healey of 18 Robinhood Road had last Thursday forenoon with her lost pocketbook containing $73.00 and personal effects . Healey's pocketbook contained $73 .00 .
 The pocketbook was found at the junction of Cambridge and Church Streets . It was found by Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Clarence Roberts of 20 Westland Avenue, who took it to police headquarters, took it home . Clarence Roberts was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 The newly completed Wedgewood Apartments are located on the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center . The apartments offer simplified, luxurious, all-electric living .
 Each upurtment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bed rooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area .
 Situated on a large and lovely lot, this four-bed room, i two-bath home offers real value . Four-bedroom home is located on a lot with a large lot .
 All this, plus a two-car garage, sun porch and convenient locale, will sell this house . The house is located in a convenient location .
 Ruth C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers . Richard If. If. P.C. If . P.P. Orr . Orr. Ifr . Ifr. Or
 Beautifully proportioned living room, study, dining room, kitchen and lavatory on first floor, two bedrooms, nursery and tile bath on second floor . Two bedrooms, three-bedroom, two-bedroom home .
 Several new homes in choice locations nearing completion nearing completion . The new homes will be built in the state of India .
 Realtor Let WINCHESTER Capes Ranches Colonials 2 -3 -4-5 BEDROOMS FROM 17,000 UP. us help you solve your housing problems .
 Three chambers, 2Vfc ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage . Two-car garage .
 Three bedrooms, 1 ceramic-tile baths, lovely famJ ily dining room, good living room with fireplace . One ceramic tile bathroom .
 Eight room home in the modern manner on West Side Hill with five bedrooms — two baths — modern kitchen — den — den . Secluded yard with patio-car gar. Secluded backyard with patio.-car gar . Five bedrooms, two baths and two bathrooms .
 One-room efficiency apartment with private bath suitable for Business woman or widow . Private bath for business woman or widows .
 Attractive fireplaced living room, family dining room, large all-electric built-in kitchen, tiled bath, three twin bedrooms on one level . Three twin bedrooms .
 A wcdl-laid-out six-room Colonial or\ the West Side, here is your opportunity . Fine WINCHESTER COLONIAL — $26,900 .
 All-brick Cape-ranch in a quiet secluded setting, yet handy to the center and schools, in its muny fine features .
 Guaranty Fund Surplus Other Reserves $263,417.46 169.718.06 131.776.776 . $ 564,910.59 $6,752,207.31 .
 Alfred D Elliott, Alfred D. Elliott, Frederick W McCormack, Charles A Murphy, Curtis W Nash, Stanley E Neill, Elizabeth A Kehoe, Martha C Ellis, Anne G Shaw, George L Billman and Charles A. Billman . Winchester Co-operative Bank 19
 Winchester residents are attending the 8th National Conference of the United States National Commission for UNESCO in Boston this week . Charles E Greene of 7 Lewis Road is among the Winchester residents attending the conference .
 Greene, former chairman of the School Committee, is registered for the discussion panel on adult education . Greene is registered to be on the panel .
 David B Thoms of Maxwell Road left Boston last Sunday to fly to San Juan in Puerto Rico . He was on a business trip for the Wayland Plant of Raytheon . Thoms left Boston for San Juan, Puerto Rico, last Sunday .
 Friendship Fiesta features unusual party centerpiece and favors . Get your unusual party decorations and favors rirthday, shower, bon voyage, and special holiday decorations .
 Leslie J Scott of Wildwood Street, president of the Winchester National Bank, attended last week’s convention of the American Bankers Association .
 Lynch Junior High School pupils are creating a fire hazard in a growth of pines near Ardley Road . Police were notified Saturday afternoon that smoking by pupils at the Lynch junior high School, during and after school, is creating fire hazard .
 Auction Monday evening October 30 at 7:00 . Ted Langdell, auctioneer. WE 5-0570. iuly6-tf Auction Monday night October 30 .
 Last Saturday afternoon at 4:53 the Fire Department was called to put out a grass fire along Route 93 in the Highlands .
 For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000. tf Bill Cleary, electrical contractor, wiring and repairs. For Fuel . Co. Fitzgerald Fuel .
 The sum of $22,623.64 includes a reduction of $663 in payment for hot-topping the school basketball court, this work having been done and now paid for . Included in this amount is the re ta inage fee of $6,450 held against the contract
 When money to pay the out standing school bills was finally appropriated by the town meeting, it was stipulated at the behest of the Legislative enabling aet that no hills should be paid unless and until they had been approved by the Town Aecountant and State Department of Accounts .
 Authority to pay the bills was vested in the Board of Selectmen, who have already allowed the payment of some bills outstanding . Others are still under investigation .
 Less than the money for the retainage fee, the amount of bills outstanding is some $15,995.32 . Less than that amount of money is owed to the family .
 This amount seems destined to go to arbitration, though Chairman Saltmarsh of the Board of Select men told the Star there is always a chance of agreement before arbitration is reached .
 Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke is attempting to work out a method of arbitration that will be acceptable to the town and the contractor, Keystone Construction Company . The town is working with the contractor to find a way of arbitration .
 Mr Saltmarsh in discussing payment with the Star reiterated his previous statment, ""that all just debts owed the contractor should be paid as soon as possible"
 Miss Carlene Hatehell, a member of the class of 1965 at Smith College, has been elected freshman representative for Franklin King House . Miss Hatehell was a class of . 1965 Smith College student .
 If you need light bulbS, call Winchester Lions, PA 9-6584 or PA 93548 . Winchester Lions also need light bulbs for light bulbs .
 Old favorite chicken loaf, with tasty cream sauce, jellied salad, hot homemade rolls, homemade chiffon cake and coffee . Homemade chiffle cake, chiffled cake and  coffee .
 Jay Finn & Co will do business under the name of Jay M Finn and Co . Many in Winchester know Mr Finn through his association with the Winchester Theatre as manager .
 Loew worked for Loew, Theatre Inc. at theatres in Connecticut, Springfield, Virginia and elsewhere in the South .
 He ushered, sold tickets, swept up and swept up, and generally learned the theatre business the hard way . He ushered and sold tickets at the theatre .
 Mr Finn is married to the former Sally Sherburne of Winchester, who before her marriage was a secretary in the Winchester Edison office .
 Dodi von Velsen, from Germany, fit""' 'of ""the* “winchester "" chapter, attend inp Melrose High School, Melrose . High School .
 The contest, postponed once because of had weather, was held at Manchester Field last Sunday afternoon . Charles "Sarto" Walsh, former Winchester High and Harvard football star, was acting as judge .
 First-place winners in the respective classes received a National Football League uniform, second place winners, a warmup jacket; and third place winners received an official football . First, second and third-placed winners in each class received a uniform .
 Scores compiled here Sunday will he sent on to regional headquarters of the contest . Those sufficiently high will enable those who made the score to participate in the regional contests .
 Winners of the regionals go on to the finals, with announcement of those eligible for this contest to be announced December 10 . Announcement will be announced on December 10.
 Ellsworth West, 116% of the field, with a point for every foot covered . Ellsworth was awarded a point each foot covered, minus a point off center .
 October 27, Friday, 7 :30m., Family Night Film Program, Rich Room, Public Library . Family night film program is held at the library in Rich Room .
 The Fortnightly present* Gordon Rennett’a Tickle-um Theatre Marionettes to children and grown-up* at the McCall Junior High School Auditorium . The Fortweekly present the Gordon R. Rennett'a . Marionettes .
 Huge AUCTION in Chidlcy Hall, First Congregational Church, with Tod T>angdell, auctioneer. Monday, Huge Auctioneer.
 The History Group of the College Club will meet at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson at 1:30 a.m. October 30 .
 Wednesday, Wednesday, “Friendship Fiesta,” First Congregational Church. November 1, Wednesday . Wednesday, October 1, at 9 p.m.
 Wednesday, The Fortnightly Literature Group nt Rich Room, Library at 2m. Wednesday, Wednesday . Wednesday, Thursday, Thursday .
 Winchester Historical Society will meet at Winchester Public Library November 2, Thursday, at 7:30m. Winchester historical Society, RichRoom, Winchester public library . Winchester historical society will meet on November 2 at 730m . Winchester Historical society will provide information on Winchester's history .
 First Congregational Church will host a "Friendship Fiesta" November 2, Thursday, November 2 .
 Joseph P Kennedy, mother of President Kennedy, will give a lecture entitled “An Ambassador’s Wife” for the bene1 Cafeteria Menu Week of October 30 November 3 Monday . American chop suey, chef's salad, corn bread, baked raisin rice pudding,
 Juice, cheeseburger on roll, sliced onions, saltines, peach upside down cake, cream, milk . Tuesday — Juice, cheese burger on roll and sliced onions on roll . Tuesday . Tuesday's menu includes fruit, cheese, bacon, cheese and bacon .
 Soup, dagwood, French roll, celery sticks, apple square, milk . Wednesday: Soup, bread, salad, rolls, apple squares, bread .
 Thursday: Chicken a la king, mashed potatoes, cranberry sauce, coffee cake, apricots, milk . Thursday: Mashed potatoes, mashed potato, cranberries sauce,  coffee cake and apricot cake . Friday's recipe includes chicken, mashed mashed potatoes and cranberry
 Scalloped macaroni and cheese, crisp cole slaw, hot muffin, chocolate fudge pudding, sauce, milk . Friday night's menu includes hot muffins, muffins .
 To or Treat for UNICEF on October 29 . Young people who will he wearing a UNiceF tag (United Nations Children Fund) will collect coins . Each coin collected means health and hope for hildren who would lead a short, siek and hungry life if they
 Methodist Youth iuild of the Infant Saviour will meet at McCall Junior High School Sunday ifternoon, November 19, at 2:30 .
 Eric Johnson, first vice president, is in charge of tickets, assisted by Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . Eric Johnson is the first vice-president of the country .
 Fellowships will attend Winchester High School football game with members of the Winchester Fellowship . Saturday afternoon they will attend the Winchester High . school football game .
 Martin Garnis, Fred Josephson, Janet Butterworth and Ronald Ondrejka are pictured with his Christian Citizenship World Outreach Committee . The committee was formed by the Christian Citizenship of the United States and Canada .
 Guest students will visit in the church school and attend Morning Worship at eleven o’clock . Sunday morning the guest students will be at the church in church .
 The students will be overnight and Sunday dinner guests in the homes of members of the Fellowships . They will be returned to their respective homes Sunday afternoon .
 Mrs Ruth Grainger of 42 Highland Avenue reported taxi had run into her parked car parked in front of her house . Taxi had driven away without the driver making himself known .
 Officers William Nash and David Boyle went to the scene, and i message was put on the air to al ert police of the affair . Officers Nash and Boyle were able to find out what had happened .
 The call was picked up by Officer Mario Buzzotta in a cruiser and he stopped the taxi at Forest Street and Laurel Hill Lane . The taxi was stopped by Officer Buzzotta and he was arrested .
 The driver was booked for drunk enness and driving while under the influence of liquor . The driver has been charged with driving while drunk and under influence .
 He was admitted to bail and ordered to appear in the Woburn Court Monday .
 Monday Fuller failed to appear in court and Police say he had been arrested Sunday night in Lowell . Fuller was arrested in Lowell, Massachusetts, on Sunday night .
 He appeared in Woburn Tuesday morning, which time his case was continued for a week .
 The Wyman Teachers’ Luncheon was served at the home of Mrs. Wyman .
 Earle F Spencer, 26 Ginn Road, for the teachers of the Wyman School on Tuesday, October 24th. Earle will be at the school on October 24 .
 Mr Gilson, supt of schools, music supervisors, art supervisors; Mr Frederick Murray. Mr Murray. Gilson . Gilson. Murray .
 When OffiII eer Boyle arrived he found the mvnIKHllll ill tOIl 1 (,f tht * animal had removed her • from the Penta premises. When OffIII eeer Boyle . Boyle arrived .
 Officer Due to open house at the high . Boyle’s feelings were not made school there will he no badminton , public so we wouldn’t know if he was relieved .
 The executive board of the Community School Association held its first meeting of the year at the home of the new president .
 Gay, the reports of the Secretary and Treasurer were read and accepted . Gay was the first woman to be elected to the House of Representatives .
 Charles Raffi, Theater chairman, announced the program of “The Children’s Theater School” under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. J. Raffei . The Children's Theater School will be held in the fall .
 Gay said many of the boys and girls attending the Friday afternoon and evening sessions of Mr Curry’s Dancing Classes have been arriving too early and have been causing a disturbance both in and outside the Town Hall . Gay then called the attention of the . Board to the fact that many of
 Mr Curry urgently requests all parents to make sure young people arrive at the appointed time of their lesson to avoid further complication .
 With the notice of a coming meeting to be held with the School Board, Mrs. Smith says she wants to see the school board meet with her .
 Mr Spaulding went to Ghana and Nigeria to make a survey with a view to the possibility of opening a branch office there for Franklin Publications . Franklin Publications is based in Nigeria and Ghana .
 Police say the Pontiac had stopped to enter the hospital drive when the accident occurred . The Pontiac was pulled over at the time of the accident .
 The driver of the Cadillac told the police her car skidded when she attempted to stop . The driver said she was trying to stop her car when she lost control of the vehicle .
 Material which cannot be burned at the Incinerator may be disposed of on the ground at the site . Stoves Washing Machines and spring mattresses are not allowed to be burned . The disposal of the above items is effected by contract .
 Trucks and Trailers of over one half ton size using the Incinerator must be equipped with a dumping mechanism . Trucks must be fitted with a dump mechanism to dispose of them .
 Any spillage at the dumping door or at the conveyor must be shoveled into the storage pit or on the . conveyor . Spillage at dumping door must be . shoveled in storage pit .
 Board of Health Rules for Transporting Over Highways . All private trucks using the Incinerator shall display a sticker which may be obtained from the board of health .
 All private trucks hauling refuse shall use a tarpaulin or other form of covering to prevent littering of highways and Incinerator grounds . Private trucks must use a covering to avoid littering .
 All private vehicles shall display a sticker which may be obtained from the Board of Health for the transporting of refuse over the streets . The stickers are required to be used by private vehicles .
 Under no condition will refuse collected outside the Town of Winchester be accepted at the Incinerator . Refuse from Other Towns will be accepted .
 All truck and car drivers should expect to be questioned by the Incinerator personnel as to the source of their loads, and if required, shall produce a document showing that the refuse is from the Town of Winchester .
 Enforcement Incinerator personnel are authorized to reject any truck or car w hose operator fails in any way to conform to these rules and regulations . Enforcement officials will reject any vehicle or vehicle that fails to comply with the rules .
 Continued neglect by such operator of the rules and regulations may result in suspension of permission to use the Winchester Incinerator and for an indefinite period of time . Continued neglect will result in the suspension .
 Winchester has spent nearly a half million dollars on the Incinerator and all concerned must give fullest cooperation . Town of Winchester spent nearly half a million dollars . Winchester must give full cooperation .
 Please separate allowable non-combustibles from combustibles so that each may be placed in the proper location at the Incinerator Site .
 If non-combustibles get into the Incinerator furnace they may well cause a breakdown which will affect the refuse disposal of the entire Town . Culling out of non -combustible materials in the storage pit is an impossible task .
 These regulations do not apply to the collection or disposal of Garbage which is now disposed of out of Town . Garbage is now collected out of town .
 It is essential to the proper operation of the Winchester Incinerator that these Rules and Regulations be followed by each ami every resident and private collector .
 He is a magna cum laude graduate of Tufts . He is secretary of the Tufts Alumni Interfraternity Council . He also is a member of the University of Cambridge .
 In Operation “Sea Shell” Charles R Moran Jr., boatI swain’s mate third class, USN, son of Mr and Mrs. Moran Jr. In Operation "Sea Shell" Charles Moran Jr.'s father was a Navy sailor .
 Winchester Auxiliary of M.S.P.C.A.’s lush fashion show of Monet's strikingly high style creations . A large audience turned out at the Winchester Theatre last Thursday .
 Lighted candles, (lowers and gleaming ‘silverware on snowy tablecloths’ transformed the lobby where Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline lived .
 Fred Cardin welcomed the enthusiastic audience, then turned the “mike” over to Mrs. Cardin . The Cardin family is proud of their achievements .
 Winthrop Knox was chairman of the show, who brought commentator Julie Dane to the spotlight . Dane was the first female commentator on the show .
 Miss Dane of WHDH was chic in severely simple oatmeal wool and sable hat .
 The show opened with several stunning variations of the walking suit . Many of the coats were fur lined and the blouses vividly colored .
 A flame red cocktail sheath with multi-colored bead trim and a full-skirted cerise chiffon dinner dress received a big hand . Later a flame red dinner dress and a cerise dinner dress were also seen .
 In contrast to these was an all black jacket dress of cut velvet on satin .
 A gorgeous ball gown, mid-calf length in front, with a small train, silver straps and silver bead trim in a star design brought down the house . A small train and silver straps with silver straps, silver beads and silver beads, brought down house .
 Fashions by Boston designer Cynthia Michael included floor length pink taffeta ball gown with pink lace beaded jacket worn by Mrs. Jacqueline Woodward .
 An emerald green theatre cape over a black velvet sheath was modeled by Mrs. Walter Wilcox of Arlington . The cape was worn by the actress in a theatre cape worn by her theatre cape .
 Mayan Wilcox, Jr., wore a Trudy Geismar original — a black velvet princess frock with yellow daisy trim . The eight-year-old wore the original .
 Pendleton Doughnut Skirt is a full 64"" diameter, falling into a free ’n’ whirly drape from an extension-tab waistline . Slipover can be color-mated yjr perfectly in auv of the colors .
 Harold N Stevens appointed to newly created Air Pollution Committee of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts .
 The group has been formed to provide assistance in alleviating health or property damage that might result from air pollution .
 A.I.M. aims to encourage voluntary cooperation between industry, government and the public in solving air pollution problems .
 Kelley K Davis, W’ellesley pediatrician, spoke at the October meeting of the Boston Association for Childbirth Education .
 Meeting will be held on Monday, October 30, at 8m., in the third floor lecture hall at Phillips Brooks House, in the northwest corner of Harvard yard .
 Davis is on the staffs of the Children’s Hospital, Newton-Wellesley Hospital and the Boston Lying-In Hospital . Davis is also on staffs at Newton-wellesley Hospital .
 A non-profit, non-sectarian organization of parents and professional people, the association’s aim is to make pregnancy, delivery and parenthood a more informed and satisfying family experience . The association is non-partisan and non-religious .
 Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Thanksgiving and Christmas . These holidays are to be happy occasions in accordance with the American tradition . Help is a chance to help those with limited incomes .
 To help our less fortunate Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food and clothing are earnestly solicited . Winchester Winchester friends will be asked for donations to help Winchester friends .
 Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order . MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. MAIL this Coupon to the Winchester Star 3 Church St.
 Harold Pyne was chairman of over a hundred health and welfare agencies . He has worked for more than 100 health and social welfare agencies in the UK .
 The Recognition Program was held in the Rotch Auditorium of Red Feather headquarters in Boston, Boston . Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson was a member of the Red Feather staff .
 Students from Winchester participating in “Operation Kindness** included Lynn Anderson, Karen Armstrong, Hope Barker, Debby Berger, Marilyn Beckley, Charlene Bertolucci, Betty Bowes, Judy Carr, Lindy Carr, and Jackie Cartier .
 Also participating were Victoria Cass, Sarah Clark, Linda Dennehy, Leslie Dube, Gwen Eugley, Nancy Falznno, Elizabeth Folkers, Claudia Gordon, and Ann Grant .
 Prudy Griffith, Susan Haley, Susan . Haley, Pamela Hall, Margo . Harmon, Debby Harrison, Mary Frances Henry, Nancy Hollinshead, Karen Dale, Jane Hood . Karen James, Jill Johnson, Mary Ann Johnson, Sue Johnson .
 Beth Kauppmann, Sue Keppler, Marcia Kimball, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Ann LaPointe, Wendy Lewis Marilyn Long, Martha Maloney Sue Manimon, Lina Maroney, Laurie McLean, Mae Mumma, Paula Murphy, Ellen Myette .
 Barbara Monsen, Debby Nichols, Janet Niles, Suzanne O’Claire, Joyce Pettingell, Sylvia Pirotta, Carol Preston, Pamela Raymond, Ellen Richardson, Kate Rubinson .
 Susan Tully, Terry Vercolloni, Sue Wallace, Sue Waldron, Joan Wheeler, Dorothy Williams, and Dorothy Williams are featured in this week's iReporters .
 Agencies served were Margaret Fuller House, Cambridge, the Massachusetts Mental Health Center, Boston, and Winchester Hospital, Massachusetts .
 Schools attended these volunteers include Belmont Hill School; Cambridge School, Weston; Clark School . Schools attended by these volunteers are Belmont and Cambridge schools .
 Honored Cadet David Lawrence is son of Mr and Mrs. Lawrence . David Lawrence will be honored in honor of his parents . Lawrence will represent at least two schools .
 On recommendation of the Command Board at the Academy, he was appointed to the rank of Cadet Ensign .
 This commission indicates that Cadet Lawrence has demonstrated exceptional ability and overall aptitude in both studies and leadership at the Academy . This commission .
 Cadet Lawrence will receive a license as Third Mate in the Merchant Marine, a Bachelor of Science Degree, and a commission as Ensign in the United States Naval Reserve .
 As Battalion Welfare and Recreation Officer, his new duties will consist of supervising and directing the four Regimental Balls . His final year in the Cadet Corps will be his final year as Battalion Welfare Officer .
 "He takes care of many other functions for the welfare and recreution of his Battalion," he said .
 National Round Up at Button Bay State Park in Vermont for the summer of 1962 will have a selections meeting at Cedar Hill October 27, 28, 29, 29 .
 Four girls will attend the Round-up and five girls will be chosen as alternates . They will spend three days camping, one of the requirements for selection .
 Our four delegates will join four delegates from Reading to make a patrol . The patrol will be trained by Mrs. Mrs. Robinson, who will also be on patrol .
 Greta Uhlig, Gwen Eugley, Diane Dube, Elaine Sullivan, Nancy Robinson, Rita Gramzow and Rita Gramsow . Carol Butters, Carol Niles, Carolyn Carr and Nancy Robinson are among the winners .
 The Winchester Council of Girl Scouting opened the College of Girls Scouting Inst Thursday in Boston Latin School by supplying the Assembly program, a flag ceremony .
 Carol Butters, Kate Robinson, Mary Frances Henry, Joyce Pettingill, Debbi Harrison, Sue Waldron, Judy Zimmerman, Paula Murphy, May Mumma, Sue Bryant, Gwen Eugley, Rita Gram zow, Diane Dube’, Beth Gilpatrick,
 A varied program has been planned, including music and exhibits . Music and exhibits, election of permanent officers, and keynote address by Dr. Dr. David Cameron .
 The Association invites the membership of teachers in all branches of music, both from school staff and from private teachers .
 Bateson points out that nev or before in the nation’s history has it been so essential for Ameri can soldiers to know qnd understand other people throughout the world . Bateson says the U.S. has never had such a strong military presence in the military .
 Demand for soldier scl entists and technicians has risen steadily . Also, demand for soldiers and technicians is also rising steadily .
 The Army has met this requirement by a comprehensive civil schools program, by . increasing emasis upon language training and by . provding on-duty and off-duty educational opportunities in every relevant field of study .
 Each year, the Army sends hundreds of commissioned and enlisted personnel to leading colleges and universities on full duty status for study . The Army sends them to study to fulfill training requirements .
 Thousands more enrolled in voluntary off-duty courses through the Army’s General Educational Development Program .
 In each overseas command, branches of leading American universities furnish facilities for resident credit studies conducted during the soldier’s off-duty free time .
 Trained educational advisors are available at unit level to help soldiers plan their educational program . Trained educators are available to help students plan their education program .
 The Army library system offers the same reference and other facilities soldiers would find in their home town . The library system is located in the U.S. Army base .
 In the Army’s own service schools, the curricula are modified and improved constantly to meet ver-changing requirements .
 In I960, a major revision of the curriculum at the U.S. Military Academy was made as the result of recommendations of the Academic Board and the superintendent of the Academy . For example, I960 was made in I960 as a result of the recommendations .
 Similar up-dating of the instruction is always in the process at higher level Army schools, the Command and General Staff College and the Army War College .
 Today’s Army offers greater opportunity for a more varied education, at less personal cost than any soldier could find in civilian life . The Army offers more opportunities for a varied education than you can find in your own life .
 Almost 65% of Army enlisted personnel are high school graduates or have also attended college . Almost 70% of enlisted personnel have high school or college degrees or have attended college.
 Army officers constitute one of the most highly ducated groups in the nation, 90% have had some college work . Nearly 60% hold at least one coL lege degree .
 Winchester faces another tntighie in its Middlesex League series . Winchester faces Reading Here Saturday; To Meet Sachems Winchester . Winchester will play Reading Saturday .
 The Red Rockets of Reading and the Sachems of Reading meet in the annual football game . The game looms a toss-up, likely to go either way .
 Winchester Teachers’ Association held its annual fall supper at the Girl Scout Camp with eighty-six in attendance . The Winchester Teachers' Association held their annual Fall Slipper .
 Miss Sybil Daniels, president of the association, welcomed the special guests . Mrs Daniels was accompanied by Mrs Daniels, Mrs Daniels and Mrs Daniels .
 Mr Austin Broadhurst, a member of the school committee, and Dr. Mary M Brink chairman of the . school committee . Dr. Brink, Dr. Mrs Brink and Mr Broadhurst were also present at the school meeting .
 Harry V Gilson, superintendent of schools, and all other guests present . Mr Gilson: "I am happy to be here for the first time"
 The delicious supper consisted of Bar-B-Q chicken, potato salad tossed salad, pickles, hot buttered rolls, ice cream, and coffee . The delicious meal was served at the University of North Carolina .
 The association extended its hearty thanks to Miss Patricia Doherty and her splendid committee for a very delightful evening .
 The Rockets lost heavily by graduation, especially in the hackfield, and their one star hack holding over from last year Graham Gernrde has been used sparingly this year because of injuries .
 Gerarde is a real speed boy, who last year, running with such backs as Ilorton and Runge, was very effective outside . Gerarde will be in contention for a place at the Emirates Stadium in 2015 .
 This year with less help from his mates and hobbled by injuries, he has not done so well . This year he has struggled to cope with the injuries he has suffered this year .
 If he is in shape to go all out against Winchester, the Sachems will have to watch him closely . He is in contention for a place in the starting line-up .
 Reading have a veteran line, but several key men in last year’s great frontier played their last ball a year ago . Reading up forward hasn't been as good as usual this season .
 Winchester has only two veterans from last year, Joe Dattilo, guard; and Captain Mike Bellino, one of the best backs in the league . Winchester is looking to build on a strong defensive line with a strong nucleus of players .
 Coach Knowlton rates his team this year superior to last year’s eleven, and at times the current edition has looked very good . Coach Knowrton rates this year's team superior to the last year's eleven .
 The Sachems lost Tom Mooney, first string center, against Melrose . Jim Menucci, reserve lineman, has been playing well on defense . Tom Menucci is a reserve lineman .
 Mooney’s loss will definitely hurt as he has been a key defensive player all year, and also passed well . Mooney has been key to the team's success this season .
 Reading always plays its best game against Winchester, while the Sachems are seldom in top form for the Rockets . Winchester are rarely beaten by Reading, while Reading play their best game .
 The Commonwealth of Massachusetts will observe Veterans Day with ceremonies to be held at 10:30m. on Saturday, November 11, at the Hall of Flags in the State House, Boston .
 Willard Paul, former Commanding General of the famed 26th Yankee Division, will be the principal speaker . Governor John A Volpe will give the ndress . Governor Volpe is also expected to speak .
 Paul Paul is serving as President of Gettysburg College in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania . Paul is currently serving as the President of the College .
 Nineteen veterans organizations with their auxiliaries will particiI pate in the ceremonies and will present memorial wreaths to the j Commonwealth to be placed in the j Hall of Flags .
 National Catholic Youth Week begins Saturday evening, October 28, at 7:00 p.m. with a Holy Hour in St. Mary's Cathedral . CYO Week begins October 28 at 7 a.m., October 28 .
 Top target for the week is every CYOer at the Communion Rail . Sunday, October 29, is the Feast of Christ the King .
 This year’s Youth Council officers elect will take part in an installation ceremony .
 Monday, for greater holiness in youth; Tuesday, for help in the choice of a state of life . Wednesday, in honor of all the Saints and for the Souls in Purgatory who will be saints in the future . Thursday, for the increase of religious vocations among youth;
 Sign up teams will take place at the Police Station for one week . Sign up for these teams will be available at the police station for a week .
 The teams will be organized at the close of the week ending the period for sign up . The teams are expected to be announced at the end of the month .
 The series will open today, Octoj her 26, with an assembly program to be presented by Mrs. Mrs. Martha Washington .
 Ruth Townsend und Roland Darling are occupational information specialists at Northeastern University . Townsend and Darling work together on occupational health and safety issues .
 Once a month during the school year speakers will visit the school to present a total of 15 different career programs . Speakers will present 15 different careers programs .
 Students will learn about careers in such fields as office work, build-’ ing construction, electronics, engineering, beauty culture, education, nursing and medical technology .
 Send $1.50 for ITCH-AID Now . Don’t Put Off —Send $1 .50 for Itch-Aide Now .
 Winchester Police Athletic League Recreation Committee has changed its dance planned for October 28 fio November 3 . Winchester police Athletic League Dance will now take place on November 2 . Winchester Police Recreation Committee is changing its dance date .
 Be the Picture of a Well-Groomed Man. 9 Bedford St. at Rte.A Burlington, Maas. Burlington, MAas.
 VitoGRO COMPLETE NUTRITIONAL TREATMENT FOR GRASS . Builds deep roots to v vigorous and well fed during hibernation . Keeps grass greener far longer this fall — gets it green quicker next spring .
 Rosemary Ford Layzer recently attended the Alumnae Council Weekend, October 13 to 1 . Layzer attended the weekend at Wheaton College, Norton .
 Burrows attended the Council as a delegate from the class of 1937 . Burrows of 5 Oneida Circle, Winchester, attended the council in 1937 .
 Miss Hood attended the Council as the Regional Scholarship Chairman from the Boston Wheaton Club . Miss Hood of 6 Everett Avenue Winchester attended the council .
 She is a medical secretary at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston .
 Layzer of 2 New Meadows Road, Winchester, attended the Council as Reunion Chairman for her class . Layzer was Chairman of her class at the Council of Winchester .
 Responsible jobs — and important promotions — go to girls with outstanding Gibbs secretarial training .
 Garden of Eden Country Club it* being built in Wilmington with the opening date planned for next spring . A limited number of membership applications will be considered from surrounding communities .
 This is the full-service bank you can rely on . Whether you want to save, cash checks, or borrow — this is the bank . You can also use the bank to make money, check checks and borrow .
 Notre Dame jumps from third place to the top of the league by taking four points from Harvard . Harvard drops from second to third place in bowling league .
 Bowling for Notre Dame are Tony Bavuso, Sam Bellino, Dan Mistretta, Roundy Fiore, Johnny Dattilo, Tony Saraco and Ed Amico . The Notre Dame bowling team is ranked No. 1 in the league .
 Navy took second-plac California 3-1 in California . Navy remained in fifth place in the league .
 Maryland, in taking over Holy Cross from Holy Cross, went from eighth to seventh place . Maryland, Holy Cross dropped to eleventh place, while the latter team dropped to 11th .
 In the top ten Bob Fiore and Frank Gangi changed first and second places for the only change in that category . The only change was a change in the top 10 places .
 Frank Gangi took over from Moose Bellino by two pins in individual high three . Gangi beat Bellino two pins to take over from Bellino .
 First-place Notre Dame meets third place Alabama . Second-place California takes on third-place Harvard . Notre Dame takes on Alabama .
 Maryland 11 9 8126 Yale 9 11 8186 Bates 8 12 7958 Boston College 7 13 8156 Holy Cross 6 14 8109 St. Edward's College . St. Mary's College 8 12 8156 .
 Two Rode toGETHER starts at 9 p.m. ET on Nov. 1 . The series stars James Stewart .
 This week marks the halfway point of our first half of our bowling league . I Bowling League is now at half a season .
 Emeralds and Rubies roll off against each other this week, which should prove truly interesting . Emeralds vs. Rubies will be the first time the two teams have faced off each other .
 Top scorer for the evening was Gloria Monterisi of the Jades with a three-string total of 269 . She was the top scorer with 269 . The Jades won the tournament by two points .
 It is ususual that many of the girls, although bowling consistently, are not hitting the century mark . It is not unusual that many girls bowling consistently have not hit the century .
 Angie Dattilo was selected to assume the captaincy for team two, the Diamonds . Angie will be the captain of the team two .
 A friendly reminder to reserve Saturday evening, November II, for the fall social dance sponsored by the sports committee . The social dance will be held at the sports center .
 S RED AND BLACK SCARVES $4.95 YOUNGSTERS' NAVY HOODED SWEATSHIRTS Sizes 8, 12, 14, 16 — $2.95 SLEEPING BAGS FOR FALL CAMPING 11.
 Janet Niles, Sue Waldron and Gwen Eugley build shower from watering can, three ponchos, two saplings and twine . The group built shower from a watering can and three ponsons .
 This was the uniform of the old days of mass football with wedge plays, center rush, guards back and tandem plays . Award was given to the best player of all time in the NFL uniform .
 The ball was a lot bigger and heavier and a much greater premium was placed on kicking in those ante-passing days . It was a much heavier and heavier than the ball was used to kick the ball in the days .
 “Doc’ knew as a player, but he has known all kinds since, for he has been a close follower and a real student of the game . That’s the sort of football ‘Doc' knew . “ Doc’ has been close followers and
 He had no time for the game while studying dentistry at Harvard, from which he received his degree in 1898 .
 Winchester High School has been awarded a new Football Trophy at Winchester High . J. Churchill HINDER has been in charge of the new trophy for the past five years .
 Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Princeton and Penn were football power-houses . "Doc" missed a few of the big games that he missed in the days when the teams were big powerhouses .
 He saw many of the big names of football perform and through the years he has seen all kinds of football, college, professional and high school . He has also seen many big names perform .
 “Doc” followed the HarvardYale rivalry closely and was regularly a member of a group of enthusiasts who, each year the game was in New Haven, had a eserved car on a special train for the game . The night before the game, "Doc" went l
 Since his retirement “Doc” has missed few Winchester games or practice sessions . Winchester Fan "Doc’s" is a Winchester fan . Winchester fan is a member of the Winchester family .
 His loyalty to both has been constant and he i always ready to defend Winches ter football against all comers . He has been a constant supporter of both the club and the football team .
 “Doc’s” interest in local players hasn’t been cen tered in the stars, though he ha been quick to acclaim them . During the years "Doc's" interest has been in the local players, but he hasn't been able to find
 He’s watched the freshmen and the seconds and gotten a real kick out of seeing some of the less promising players at first develop into varsity performers .
 At the games he watches the blocking and tackling, the following of the ball and the carrying out of assignments . He watches blocking, tackling, and the following the ball .
 He notes the instructions the boys get at practice and watches to see how they follow these instructions in the games . He also watches the instructions he gets at practice .
 He has no excuse for the hoy who isn’t trying, but the boy who gives it everything he has, and loses, will never he criticized by him . The boy who loses, and doesn't he will never be criticized, will not he criticized .
 He knows that the stars are not always the ones who do most for team morale . That is why those who are giving the trophy in his name made outstanding loyalty, effort and team spirit, not stardom, the criteria .
 The trophy is a handsome black walnut shield with a bronze shield shaped plaque at the top on which is engraved the name of the trophy .
 Ranged below are 20 bronze rectangles on which will be engraved the names and years of the winners . The names of the 20 winners will also be engraved on the rectangles below .
 The winner will receive a replica of the bronze marker at the top of the shield, mounted on wood and engraved with his name . This trophy will remain at high school in the trophy case .
 Coach Henry Knowlton has been directing Winchester football since 1940 . The trophy will be awarded this year for the first time, the choice of the recipient, at the request of the donors, to be made by Coach Henry . The winner of the trophy is chosen by the coach of the
 Assisting him in the selection will be the members of his football coaching staff . Assisting them will be members of the . team .
 The permanent and individual trophies will be on display at the Star Office for a short time . The trophies will also be displayed in a temporary display .
 Four Dartmouth College sophomores pledged to frats at Dartmouth during the rushing period . Four Winchester sophomorettes pledged to Dartmouth frats during the rush period .
 Theodore L Freeman of 11 Lockcland Road, was pledged to Phi Delta Alpha . Dana J Kelly, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs. Kelly, was pledging to Phi . Delta Delta Alpha; Dana J . Kelly, Sr., pledged to Alpha Delta Delta .
 Dana J Kelly Eif 21 Mystic Avenue, Phi Gamma Delta; Peter E Luitwieler, son of Mr and Mrs. Luitweieler . Peter E . Luitewieler is son of Dana Kelly E. Kelly and Peter J Kelly . Peter Luit
 Clarence S Luitwieler of 89 Cambridge Street, Phi Delta Alpha; and Thomas H Sieminski, son of Mrs. Mrs. Sieminski; . Clarence S. Luitewieler, of . 89 Cambridge St, Phi . Delta Alpha, Phi Phi Delta . Alpha
 W inchester Senior Girl Scouts recently spent five days at Frost Pond, Jeffrey, N. H., as part of ninety-five teenage scouts . Half of the scouts will be chosen by their councils to attend the national encampment at Button Bay on Lake Champlain in Vermont next summer .
 Jenness Eugley accompanied the girls in this forerunner of training for encampment . The girls are preparing for encampments for the first time .
 The girls lived in tents, cooked with charcoal and kept clean with hand-fashioned wash stands and showers . The girls cooked and washed with charcoal .
 The game was a tough one for the Sachems to lose for after a shaky start they played Melrose better than ever . Melrose were beaten 2-1 by the home side at Melrose .
 Two questionable decisions hurt Winchester badly, and either called the other way could have meant a different hall of game . Winchester's decision to call the wrong way was a mistake .
 High School principal in Nashville, Tennessee, and teacher in Ohio . Lucille Carroll, a high school teacher in Wooster, Ohio, was a high School principal . Both women are married .
 T h c Blue and the Gray is an exciting narration of the Civil War enhanced by music of the era . Presented by the British Broadcasting Corporation . The Civil War is a thrilling narration of a Civil War era .
 Winchester had one 15-yard penalty while Melrose lost 45 yards to the officials . Winchester had a 15 yard penalty . Melrose had a penalty of 45 yards . Winchester was penalized 45 yards for a penalty .
 Melrose fumbled three times recovering twice, while Winchester fumbled twice, recovering once . Melrose recovered three times, recovering twice and recovering once each time .
 Melrose scored twice before Winchester could rack up a tally . Winchester scored a touchdown as the first half ran out . The Sachems appeared to be much better in the second half .
 Winchester's opening kickoff went only to the Melrose 41 . Winchester’s opening drive was only to a 41-yard by Melrose .
 The Raiders scored on the first sequence of plays, starting at their 41 . The Raiders made much of their yardage off the tackles and on reverse sweeps .
 A 20 yard romp by Hardy to the Winchester 39 got the Big Red away nicely . Quinn doing much of the carrying the Raiders moved steadily down the field to a first down at the Winchester 10 .
 Quinn in two rushes reached the Winchester one yard line and Cargill on a quarterback sneak got over . Quinn's two rushes were two rushes to reach the Winchester 1-yard line . Quinn was tackled on a second-half quarterback sneak to get over the field .
 Bellino on a fullback sweep got outside for 34 yards to the Melrose 36, and on the next play the Raiders were offside, the ball going to the 31 . The next play went to the 36, with the Raiders being offside on the play .
 Sachems Benincasa then broke outside tackle to cut back and reach the Melrose 20 where he was dropped for what appeared to be the end of the play . Melrose lost their first game of the season at Melrose Park .
 A Melrose boy recovered the ball after dropping it in the air . The ball squirted away to the Melrose 11 where a Melrose player recovered it . The incident happened in Melrose Park in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 The official ruled he had not blown the play dead when Benincasa was tackled and permitted the Raiders to keep the ball, a great break for them and a bad break for the Sachems . Raiders looked like they would score quite easily right then .
 Melrose move the ball rapidly away from their deep territory, and aided by a 15 yard penalty for roughness against Winchester had a first down at the Winchester 29 . Melrose moved the ball away from Winchester's deep territory and had a 15-yard penalty .
 Winchester took over at its 29. A holding penalty stalled the Raiders in turn and with fourth and nine a pass grounded a pass was grounded . Winchester took on the Raiders at their 29th and a holding penalty was turned down .
 Colliander hit Bellino for a first down at the Winchester 43 in the second quarter . The teams had just changed goals for the first quarter . Winchester had just finished the first half of the quarter .
 Winchester had only two line plays had gained only a yard . Colliander passed to Timpone, and a pass interference ruling gave Winchester a first down at the Melrose 39 . Winchester won the game at Melrose on Saturday .
 Rowe on fake kick and handoff reached only the Melose 33 and the Raiders took over . Rowe's fake kick was fake kick, handoff was only the 33 yards from Melose . Rowe scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Cargill lofted a pass out to the right which Bellino knocked from the Melrose receiver’s hands, saving the touchdown . Melrose scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Hardy went all the way, starting off to the right and cutting back nicely . Cargill, in two tries went to the 18, and from there Hardy went on to the try . Hardy went in to score two tries .
 Benincasa ran the kickoff back to his 36, then added four off tackle . Benincas added four of his 36 kickoffs .
 Bellino got outside to the right to the Melrose 34 and first down, first down . Rowe picked up six at tackle for Melrose, Rowe picking up six .
 Colliander hit Bellino for a first down at the Melrose 18, and the Winchester stands came alive . A try at center was piled up for no gain, but the try was piled down for a no gain . The Winchester stand came alive in the first half .
 Bellino on a sweep was knocked outside at the 11 and Benincasa broke through to first down at the eight . Bellino was knocked out of the 11 at the end of the first down .
 Bellino drives through to the one and then bucked over off his own right tackle . Bellino scored for Sachems in the first quarter .
 Melrose beat Melrose 16-8 at the end of the match . Captain Mike then swept over at right end for the added points .
 The Sachems contained Melrose in its own territory before recovering a fumble at the Melrose 25 just before the half-time . It was the first time the team had recovered a fumble from Melrose .
 With time running out Colliander tried a pass which was intercepted by Melrose at the seven . Melrose intercepted the pass at the end of the game .
 Bellino runs the kickoff back to the 30, then turned the corner for a gallop to the Melrose 46 . Bellino ran the kickoff for the 30-yard run to the 46 .
 Rowe picked up two at the line, and Benincasa was piled up at tackle for a three-yard loss . Rowe also picked up a tackle tackle for the loss of three yards .
 Benincasa twisted away from two tacklers, dodged another, drove into the end zone standing up for a great individual effort . Bellino had been held for no gain at center at center .
 Bellino rushed in the extra points on a sweep and it was all tied up at 16 . Bellino's extra points gave the game a 16-16 tie .
 Melrose got a big break when on the ensuing kickoff, the receiver fumbled at the Melrose 48 and the ball was recovered by Winchester . Winchester recovered the ball at the end of the first half .
 The referee ruled the whistle had blown and the Raiders retained the pigskin . The referee this time ruled the Raiders had won the game . The Raiders were awarded a penalty for not kicking off the play .
 The fumble occurred on the tackle and no one on the Winchester side of the field agreed with the call . The call was loudly booed for an appreciable length of time . Winchester fans booed the decision to award the fumble .
 Hardy, Umile, Quinn, and Quinn gain steadily the Raiders worked the ball to the Winchester 11, first down . The decision meant the ball game for the Raiders . The Winchester 11th down was the first down, and the Raiders had a first down.
 Another for Melrose Quinn picked up four to the seven and Umile drove over for the touchdown . Umile drives over for a touchdown for the second half .
 Hardy hit tackle for the extra two points, but a loosened helmet helped plenty as he was partially stopped by Benincasa just outside the goal line and met squarely at the line by Bellino .
 Mike tried a high tackle to push Hardy back but Hardy’s helmet came off in his grasp and he twisted away . The Melrose boy twisted away, just falling into the end zone for the two points that won .
 Richie Casalinuovo made a nice runback of the kickoff to the Winchester 45 . Winchester 45 went for a touchdown in the first quarter . Winchester had a 45-0 lead in the second quarter .
 Rowe took a pitchout to scamper to the Melrose 26 and first down . Bellino picked up four and Rowe took the first down for Melrose . Rowe took advantage of the pitchout and scamper scampered to score a touchdown .
 Melrose takes over at its 17 on the second play of the final quarter . With third and one Bellino was twice sent into the line and failed to make it, Melrose taking over at 17 . Melrose took the lead in the second quarter .
 Jim Menucci, a good defensive guard, also went out early in the game with a cracked bone in his hand . Menucci is a good guard, but also a good player for the team .
 Sutherland, Lomltn nielli, Lockhart, Holden, Holden; rt, Fucci, Delaney; re. Sutherland . Sutherland; rn. nielln. Lockhart; . Holden; . Fucci; . Delaney .
 Melrose S H X 0 0 24 Winchester 0 X 8 6 22 Melrose . Winchester S X 0 . 0 . Cargill, Hardy, Umile, Bellino 2, Benincasa 2 . Bellino .
 Town Bowling League last Tuesday night showed very little change in the team standings . Town bowling League continues to show little change this week .
 It still looks as though this is going to be a tough year to predict who will be the outstanding bowlers . It is still looking for the bowlers to be outstanding in 2015 .
 The team standings are also close and even the last three teams are likely to start moving up very soon . The last two teams are also likely to move up very quickly in the standings .
 W’inn is also starting with some new men so once these three teams start to click it could be a real close race between all 12 teams . W'inn is starting with a new team of new men .
 Winchester faced a Brothers-in-Law-1 28 20 8034 fourth down and 12 situations . 49er’s oo 26 8337 Passes Aid Sachem Score St. St. was inAtlantic Gelatin 28 20 8418 complete and Winchester faced .
 A pitchout to Bellino followed R Russo 105 by a long pass fell incomplete in A Anderson . Anderson was the only player to make an error in the first half .
 Bellino belted into the line, but J Canty 96. on second and third downs, the A Griswold 96. Bellino hit the line . Tofuri 98 hit the one foot mark, Bellino 98, Tofururi 98, and J Cant
 On fourth down with a short yard to go Bellino swept left nd simply ran away into the end zone without a hand being laid upon him . Bellino won't be laid upon by a hand to be laid on him .
 Bellino hit inside his own ight tackle and just failed to make it . Bellino missed the extra points that would have tied the score in the first half .
 The game ended soon after with Melrose once penalized for stalling to run out the clock . Melrose was penalized once again for running out the time .
 lland-Madc Florentine Leather Desk Appointment and Memo Pad . Shop Early for a CHRISTMAS GIFT for MOTHER or DAD .
 School Committee meets with executive hoard of Community School Association on protection of school children from fallout . School Committee this week spent a good deal of time with executive of the Association on the protection of children .
 The question was one of five items the Committee presented to the group, and was the one which stimulated the most expression . Commit tee that at the moment there, is no plan of organization for this very complex problem .
 Chidley Hall will be auctioned at 7.30pm on October 30 . Auctioneer, Ted Langdell of New Hampshire, will auction the items .
 Dessert and coffee will be served between 7:15 and 0:00m. Wednesday evening, November I 1, dessert and coffee .
 The subject were discussed without any clear answers forthcoming . We are introducing | subject subject to be discussed without clear answers .
 Community School Association members should return to their respective parents’ groups and formulate consen sus on what parents want most to have done . Selectmen should be ap proached on the subject of Civil Defense .
 Two school oriented groups also discussed school transporta tion, the pros and cons of the inschool banking program, the rea sons for further consolidating the present junior high level foreign language program before considering one for the elementary level .
 We are glad to announce that we will again have our vast supply of sample dolls’ clothes to fit all sized dolls at moderate prices .
 Ha old Pyne has fashioned attractive gifts in copper, many of which bear the Sachem seal . Many of the gifts are made of copper . Pyne is known for his work in the works of art in copper .
 Aram Mouradian will have Paklave (Armenian pastry) among the goodies at the Pantry Shelf . The Pantry will be open at the end of the month .
 Frank Hawkins will have beautiful and unusual hand-made colored glass for those of. you who wish to add a piece to your collection . Frank Hawkins is known for his unique colored glass .
 See the gaily decorated tree ornaments at the Christmas Decorations booth . See the decorations at the booth at the Holiday Tree Tree Store .
 The doors to Friendship Fiesta will re-open at 10m. on Thursday morning, November 2 . Friendship Fiesta re-opens at 10pm on November 2, 2014 .
 A coffee bar for your convenience and pleasure will be in operation until 11m. The bar will be open until 11.m.
 An old favorite chicken loaf with tasty cream sauce will be the main course . The recipe includes a chicken loaf and cream sauce .
 A children’s hot-dog lunch will be served from 11:30 to 12:30 in the old vestry . The event will be held in the former vestry of the Old Vestry .
 Robert White and her committee will provide gifts, grabs, food, games and movies at modest prices . Robert White's committee will also provide gifts and grabs for the event .
 Baby-sitting service will be in the nursery and checkroom service . Check-room service will also be supplied to guests .
 Reformation Sunday, commonly referred to as the birthday of the Protestant Church, will be observed next Sunday at Crawford Memorial Methodist Church . Crawford Memorial Methodists will meet at the church .
 Youth Choir will participate in the service for the first time this season singing, “Saviour, Hear Us, We Pray.” by Brahms, as a Prayer Response .
 The Prelude will be “Toccata’s by Frescobaldi and the Postlude, “Festal March” by Calkin . The Postlude will be "Festal Mar" by the composer Calkins . The Prelude is "Tocc
 Bird Field Trips To Sudbury will be presented by the Massachusetts Audubon Society this fall . Waterfowl will be available in the fall .
 The trips will be to the Sudbury Valley, and Mr Baird will give a short, intensive review of both local and migrant waterfowl . The trips are to be held in a short and intensive review .
 The fee for the two field trips is $5.00, or $4.00 to members of Massachusetts Audubon . Given as part of the Hatheway School of Conservation’s adult education program .
 Mr Baird is special assistant to Mr Allen H Morgan of Wayland, the society’s executive vice president . He comes to Massachusetts from Rhode Island where he was director of the Norman Bird Sanctuary .
 ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc. Inc. provides all-wheelwheeler and other parts of the world's largest car company .
 Children in large numbers are expected to fill the auditorium of the McCall Junior High School on Saturday, October 28, at 10:30m .
 This will be one of the most outstanding attractions coming this year to Winchester for children and is sponsored by The Fortnightly, Winchester Woman’s Club . Winchester Woman's Club .
 Chairman Fd McManus and hi committee have planned a galu evening for all in attendance . Chairman McMcManus said the event will be a 'galau evening'
 There will be three prizes awarded, one for the best woman in costume and one for best man in costume . There will also be a prize for best original costume .
 Music will be provided by Bob Fiore’s Tr.io, and dancing will be from 8m. till midnight . Music will provide by Trio's Trio .
 With the newly passed by-laws on dances, only two hundred people will be admitted .
 Next month’s dance on November 18 will feature the drawing of twenty 15-pound turkeys for Thanksgiving dinners to the luckynumber holders .
 There is a new committee for visiting the sick and shut-in worn en of the parish . There is also a new group of volunteers to visit the sick in the area .
 Each individual member is responsible for the dynamic society of the church today, he said . He stressed that each individual member was responsible for .
 Mr Kennedy returned at the end of August from an extensive visit to the South American countries . He has a stimulating presentation of what he saw and found there .
 His talk to the local high school group has come about through the public service interest of John J Spang of Cox Road .
 Her home is in West Berlin at Stauffcnburg Strasse, where she lives in an apartment with her mother . Her mother, Mrs. Mrs. Schauffnburg, lives in a West Berlin apartment .
 Ingeborg Vdn Klocke, her older sister, Marie Luise, 23, and her brother, Rudolf, 27, who is 27 and in the German Army .
 Her father lost his life while serving with the German Army during the war . Her father was killed in World War II in Germany .
 Her mother and her sister and brother had been evacuated during World War 2 . They were evacuated from the city during the war because of the bombings .
 Gisela was born April 24, 1944, and had not had her first birthday when she went to Berlin from the farm with her mother, brother and sister . She was born in 1944 and died at the age of 18 .
 She was taken in a baby carriage, but the others walked, 60 kilometers or about 36 miles . She was carried in a carriage, while the other walked, about 36 kilometers .
 Gisela went first to the elementary school which includes grades up to the sixth, then to the oberschule or gymnasium . Growing up in Berlin, or West Berlin, she went to the kindergarten or the gym .
 She had completed her 11th year in the gymnasium last April before coming to Winchester .
 When she gets back to Germany she will take examinations to see whether the work she has done in our high school will enable her to go into grade 13 . She will then decide whether she can go to grade 13 in grade 12 .
 If she is unsuccessful in her examinations she will repeat this year’s work in the 12th grade of the gymnasium . If she fails in her exams she will be repeating this year's work .
 In German schools pupils remain in their rooms and the teachers go from room to room . In the German schools, pupils stay in rooms and teachers go to rooms to teach .
 German is taught in all grades, also history, music, art, art and gymnastics . German is also taught in history, history and music .
 English, French and Latin courses begin with the seventh grade, and Latin, with the ninth grade . Commencing with the fifth grade there is English .
 From the first to the sixth grade the German school children have what they call Rechnen, which is sort of basic mathematics, followed by mathematics in the high school . In the German high school, mathematics is also basic mathematics .
 The mathematics instruction ditfers from ours in that it aims at an over all knowledge of the subject, though some branches of mathematics are emphasized more than others . Commencing with the seventh grade there is physics and from the seventh to the eleventh grades, chemistry .
 JOSEPH CONSTRUCTION 17 CHESTNUT ST., ARLINGTON — Ml 6-8315 24 HOUR PHONE SERVICE [ nro elementary school subjects | though general science would probj ably be a better name than biology .
 From the first through the eleventh grades all pupils are required to study religion unless the parents request in writing that their children be excused .
 After the 11th grade religion is optional and con«erns itself with the philosophy of the problems underlying all roliI gion . Religion is optional after the 11st grade .
 Gisela thinks her German schools are more strict than those in Winchester . She thinks that the tests are more difficult than those at her school in Winchester, England . She also thinks that her German school is more strict .
 Most tests are on the home work of the moment while in the German schools the tests cover the pupils’ knowledge of the entire subject to date .
 The schools in West Berlin are in session from 8 o’clock in the morning to 1 :30 in the afternoon six days a week .
 The school year is from April to April with five to six weeks vacation in the summer usually partly in July and partly in August . School year is between April and April .
 There is a vacation of a week or ten days when the school reports come out in October and there is a two weeks vacation at Christmas, starting December 23 .
 There is another two weeks vacation when the final reports come out at the end of school year in April .
 School children in Germany go to theatre because of special cards give them in school . Gisela likes to read in her spare time, and school children go to the theatre often .
 Gisela said the people in West Berlin took the partition of the city pretty much in stride . She said that the people of West Berlin did not take the partitioning of Berlin in any way .
 Recent developments have however increased the tension which has continued to mount . Recent letters have indicated that tension has increased .
 The 17-year-old German girl is in the senior Insurance Benefits Increased For School Pupils ompetitive bids by several companies, th<* town a student insurance program which increases the provision to $5,000 for all students .
 Accidental death is covered for $1,500 and a schedule of dismemberment benefit provides amounts tip to $7,500 . Dismemberment benefits are also covered for accidental death .
 The plan covers the students while attending school, during the hours and on days when school is in session, travel directly to and f mm the student’s residence, while the sured at town expense for football section of the policy .
 Many parents thought that the town was also paying for participating in and attendm* thc student , K)licyy . This wa ' n ,"" the school sponsored and supervised ae tivities during the regular school term, attending religious services .
 The policy has some of the usual limitations and exclusions of all insurance contracts . All parents of students in the plan should be familiar with the policy .
 There is no limit except the policy limit for X-rays if there is a fracture . If there is no fracture, there is also a limit of $5.00 .
 For any minor injury not requiring surgery, the medical care is limited to one doctor’s visit per day at the rate of $5.00 for the first visit and $3.00 . For additional visits, additional visits are required for minor injuries not requiring a surgery .
 For major injuries requiring surgery or hospital care, there is no limit except that of the policy . The policy does not apply to any of the injuries requiring hospital care .
 The Homefronters met at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Catee. The town wishes to emphasize that the student insurance is not an insurance policy .
 Following a delightful coffee hour, the meeting was called to order by our executive-chairman, Mrs. Mrs. Robinson . The meeting was followed by a coffee hour at the end .
 English IV, United States History, Fundamentals of Speech, French IV and Music Appreciation . French IV, English IV and English IV are required to read English IV .
 The Star enjoyed its visit with Gisela and hopes she will drop in often . If parents wish the student covered for all sports, they must have the student policy . In the case of Senior High football, the policy must be for the student .
 Rprl 8-tf for Senior High football with the student policy covering all other areas . Senior High has a policy of not allowing all students to attend football games .
 The ride to the aristocrat of nursing homes is certainly justifiable . Due to the company requirement that all football players carry the student policy, the tryout squad and the final squad were in .
 West Medford — HUnter 8-7117 Miss Bridie Burke, Resident Manager ii WHOLESALE PRICES ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW screen is self storing . West Medfords — H unter
 Flameless electricity is smart America's favorite way of drying clothes . That's why flameless electricity isn't your favorite way to dry your clothes .
 "Because that's the only way to get modern automatic convenience without flame and products of combustion," he says . "Because of that, it's not only that you can get modern convenience without combustion."
 That's the only way to have outdoors-fresh clothes in every kind of weather . That's how to keep clothes in all kinds of weather.
 Winchester residents will meet with residents of Arlington and West Medford at 8:00 a.m. to enjoy a program of song and inspiration . Winchester residents who are members of Park Street Church will be meeting with residents .
 Mr Thomas A Erickson, assist ant minister of Park Street Church, Boston, will be the speak er .
 Monmouth, by Charles B Flood The Minstrel Boy, by David Cort Second Semester, by Helen Swift Submarine Wolf pack, by Wil liam Hardy The Sudden Lady, by Marjorie Lowe Non-fiction The Ago of Reason Begins, by Will Durant .
 Those who can bring their papers to the church on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday evening are requested to do so . Those who have papers to be brought in will be asked to bring them .
 Last spring the young poeple collected almost ight tons of paper but to do this with small cars and station gons is a heavy job for a few . Those who can bring their dona tions to the church will help greatly .
 Those who cannot do this may 3end a card with full information as to address, etc. and their papers will be picked up on Saturday morning . Those who can't get their papers picked up by Saturday morning will receive their papers .
 Phone calls will be received at the church from 8 o’clock Saturday morning . Phone calls are expected to be received from 8 a.m. Saturday morning.
 The Methodist Church's youth program is self-supporting through paper drives . Through these paper drives, young people of the Methodist Church make their own program self-supported .
 WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkview 9-0949 Rev. Rev. David Wright will lead the charge at the Winchmer Church .
 There will be a Social Hour following the sei-vice in the Alliance Room . The epiphany Rrv. c hurch of the epiphany .
 Senior Choir rehearsal, at 75 Bacon Street, Wednesday, November 1 . 7:30m. Wednesday, Nov. 1 .
 How to avoid the m. intakes of the past will be brought out Sunday in all Christian Science churches .
 The divine method of paying sin's wages involves unwinding one’s snarls, anti learning from experience how to divide between sense and Soul .
 The Church in the Highlands is located on Washington St. Washington Street at Kenwin Road . The church is located at the intersection of Washington and Kenwin .
 Religion Classes for Hi-School Pupils each Monday at 7 for boys . Each Tuesday at 7 a.m. for girls . Classes for boys and girls will be held on Monday and Tuesday .
 Winchester Winchester PArkview 9-3000 mori-tf Sunday, October 29 . Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester, Winchester, VA, Winchester . Winchester is located at 36 Church St.
 Carlton Helgerson, PaBtor Baptistic Evangelistic Evangelist Evangelistic Non Denominatipnal 9:80m. ET .
 The film, “Martin Luther,’’ will be shown at the Second Congregational Church this Sunday night at 7:0Um.
 This is an excellent movie depicting the life and work of this leader of the Protestant Reformation . This is a great representation of Martin Luther .
 Everyone in the community is invited to attend this Family Night” activity at the church . The event will be held at a local church .
 They will return to the church for a attack supper and a short Devotional Service .
 This week’s picture shows the delivery wagon of Alexander MacDonald in front of his provision store on Main Street near the center railroad crossing . This week's picture is part of the Star's "Remember When" series .
 Next to the crossing at the corner of Main Street and the walk that led along the outbound tracks from Winchester Station to the center was the shoe store of James McLaughlin . The shoe store was located next to the tracks .
 It was moved to Thompson Street when the owner sold to Morris L Snyder, the present proprietor of the business . It was then moved to a new location on Thompson Street .
 Mr MacDonald’s market was well known in the old days . He continued in the provision business in Winchester for many years during the nineties and early nineteen hundreds .
 Older residents will recall ‘him as a tall bearded man, pleasant of manner with a good sense of humor,’ he said .
 He was active in hurch and civic work, liked to sing and had a good bass voice . He also liked to be active in his local community and was a good singer .
 After his days as a provision dealer, he was until his retirement Superintendent of Parks under the late George T Davidson . After his retirement he was . until his . retirement was until . his retirement .
 Many will still recall his tall figure and tan sleeveless leather jacket which he wore in cool weather . Many still remember him as a tall man with a tall figure .
 Whether the man on the delivery j art in the picture is Mr MaeDonj aid the Star can not say, nor could Roland Simonds .
 The driver of the car is pictured with a picture of himself . He hopes the picture will help identify the driver, and write in .
 1962 “calendar towels” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 Open Workshop on the topic of ‘Adolescents and Their Parents’ to be held November 9th at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center, 74 Fenwood Road, Boston .
 Henry Wcrmer, director of Child Psychiatry at Beth Israel Hospital, will he be the key speaker . Dr. Henry W Crummer will be the speaker .
 Graham Blaine, Preston Munter, Paul Walters, Shepherd Ginandandandes, Robert Reid, Donald Gair, Helen Wallach, Louis Mogul, and Shirley Weisenfeld . The film is based in New York City, New York .
 The program is being sponsored by the Massachusetts Mental Health Center Auxiliary .
 Preston Munter of Beacon Hill are in charge of the program arrangements for the event . The event will be held on Saturday at 7.30 p.m. ET .
 The meeting will be open to into rested people from all of the communities that the Mental Health Center serves . The meeting is expected to be held at the end of the month .
 Registration starts at 9:00m. and is to be followed by a coffee hour, the keynote address, group discussions in which all will participate, luncheon and panel discussion .
 The Second Congregational Church will hold its annual church fair on Friday . The church fair will be held at the church's home .
 On the different I Holiday tables will be found Christ| mas gifts, aprons, plants, baked j goods and jewelry .
 There will also | be a white elephant table and a taI ble of children’s items .
 There will be a “morning coffee,” | a snack table, and an afternoon tea . Come and spend the full day. j
 The doors will open at 10:00 m.m. and the activities will continue until after the supper . Activities will continue to be held until after a meal .
 Figure-skating classes will start again at the Boston Arena on Wednesday morning November 1 . Maribel Vinson Owen so devotedly taught for many years .
 Tommy McGinnis, who substituted for Maribel when she had to be away, is taking over the classes . He replaces Maribel who was away from the school when she was away .
 Storm Shield with over 12 yrs. manufacturing experience . Storm Shield is based on over 12 years of manufacturing experience with Storm Shield .
 Herbert Philbrick will be remembered by the many people who came to hear him speak .
 We thank Winchester Star for the splendid publicity it gave to the thought provoking evening . We thank the Winchester Star .
 Mr Philbrick said, “I am not worried about you people here, it is the ones not here.” He added that he is not concerned about the people not here .
 From this start and the realization that youth was being indoctrinated without an understanding of what was happening. "Youths were indoctrinating without understanding what it was happening," said the author of the book .
 The F.B.I. agent went "under ground" at night to learn all he could and find out who the instigators were in this world absorbing menace . He then did his regular work during the day, went “under ground” at night .
 The National Council for Soviet Friendship raised fifty million dollars in a year . The Council was founded by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 The word Peace, which we hear every turn, has one meaning for most Americans and another for men who in 45 years, now have control over one billion people . That word has double meaning, just as the word Peace has a double meaning for Americans .
 Fear, confusion, double talk and lack of awareness are rampant in the world . Fear and confusion, confusion and double talk are rampant, says CNN iReporter .
 Just one person in a group can lead toward socialistic ideas and undermine the whole structure . Just one individual in a church or organization can lead a socialistic idea, he says .
 Study, thought and reading can alert one and we list below some material for that purpose .
 Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr., Jr., were hosts to the executive board and their husbands . Sherman was the president of the board of trustees .
 This gave an op portunity for personal questions and Mr Philbrick had many thought-provoking answers . This gave him a chance to answer personal questions about his work .
 Malden Hospital Alumnae Association is holding a turkey . The renovated Red Barn Shop whist for tho benefit of needy nttrsand Gardens will have a grand and stude ""t nurses at K of C opening Saturday October 28 .
 Mary Frances Henry, Sally Brown, Natalie Mambuca and Sally Brown are among the students at the center of the program . The program is being held in New York City .
 Senior Girl Scouts at Frost Pond, N.H., make with twine .
 A special appeal to be launched during the Thanksgiving season will ask American Protestants and Eastern Orthodox church members for $979,380 to finance the 1962 Share Our Surplus Program . More than 20 million hungry persons overseas will rereceive life-saving U.S. surplus foods .
 SOS foodstuffs, wheat, flour, bulgar (a processed, quickly prepared wheat derivative), corn meal, powdered milk and cooking oils, are scheduled for distribution to the world’s hungry in 39 areas of Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America .
 Since 1952, SOS foods sent over seas by the churches have been given to disaster victims . SOS foods have been sent to widows, orphans, school children, hospital patients and the aged .
 Hundreds of thousands of church goers will contribute to the appeal at Thanksgiving Week Community Services . The Christian Rural Overseas Program of Church World Service will also contribute .
 Winchester Council of Social Agencies met recently at the Public Library . The president of the High School Guidance Department was presiding .
 The film was produced by the library library of the six New England states . The film features tension tension programs of the New England state .
 It showed the areas which should be covered by our library if we are to meet the needs of our community . It showed how much of the library needs to be covered in the library .
 The social agencies represented were the High School and Junior High School Guidance Departments, Public Welfare, Visiting Nurses, Hospital, Red Cross and the Library .
 Bradford Junior College, Bradford, has accepted an invitation from the college to serve* on the committee planning for the convocation to be held at the college November 3 and 4 .
 This conference is to mark Bradford’s inauguration this fall of a new plan of education . This fall will be the beginning of a lorg range program for the improvement of campus facilities .
 Several men and women of national prominence will speak or appear on discussion panels . The event will be held in Washington, D.C.
 As a friend of the college Mr Davis is at work on the public reitions sub-committee . He is also at work for the college .
 Mr Clarke has been with Dewey and Almy since 1960 as assistant to the vice president in charge of the Polyfibron Division . Mr Clarke is also the president of the United States.
 In his new post, he will be responsible for developing new markets for new products outside established product lines .
 Mr Clarke was formerly with Chemical Products Corporation, Providence, Rhode Island .
 He is a member of the Winchester Country Club, Agawam Hunt Club, Providence, and the Harvard Club of Boston . He is also a Harvard Club member .
 Gather up the children and come to Hadley Hall, Parish of the Epiphany . Have you ever been there? Call the children to join in .
 Do your Christmas shopping early while the small fiy are riding the ponies, viewing the movies or off in their own room to buy their own surprises with their very own allowances .
 What does the weather matter, good or bad there is fun for all ages and sizes . Good or bad, good weather matters. What does it matter? Good weather matter. Good weather matters .
 Christian Culture Lectures are sponsored by the Paulist Fathers of the Catholic Information Center at 5 Park Street .
 The lectures will discuss the intellectual and cultural problems facing the world today . Robert F Quinn, C.S.P. is in charge of the series .
 Monsignor George Casey, columnist of the Boston ‘Pilot, will moderate the lecture on October 30 . Monsigner George Casey is a former Boston "Pilot"
 Sonin-law of Mr and Mrs. M. M assachusetts with a degree Landscape Architecture and sonin-laws of the couple . M. assachusetts .
 Robert Smail, owners of the Art Gallery, has used his knowledge and his artistic ability to create and beautify both the inside and outside of his home .
 The Gallery has attracted thousands of visitors that understood or loved Fine Arts . The Gallery was founded in 1973 and is now based in New York .
 Country Prints by Robert Darr Wert, things for children, jewelry and many articles designed and executed for the Red Barn Shop and Gardens .
 Bettie Donald Corset and Maternity Shop will be in the Locatelli Building at 3 Winchester Terrace off Thompson Street . The new location of the Bettie Donate Corset store will be located in a new location off Thompson St.
 Opening day will be Thursday October 26 and everyone is cordially invited to drop in and say hello . Opening day is October 26 .
 The same personal service will, as always, continue to be our policy . Two roomy fitting rooms will add to customers comfort and shopping pleasure, says owner .
 PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 augl2-ti DRESSMAKING ALTERATIONS See this number jotting it down .
 PIANOS JUNK DEALERS Winchester and Woburn JUNk DEALER . Winchester JUNker's highest prices were paid for Rags, Puper and Metal Call Ed .
 Ride from Highland Avenue, Winchester to vicinity of Broad Street, j Boston, week day* about 8 a m , returning | 5m.
 Plano in stood condition nt :iM*nable price C.iII PA 9-3*27.27. Call PA 9.5946 ""
 1955 Chevrolet sport coupe VH, automatic transmission, radio, good condition . Automatic transmission and radio in good condition. 1955 Chevy Sport coupe .
 NEW: Lady's desk, $10; new upholststed Morris chair, $15; floor lamps $10 each . NEW: Antiques straight chairs, $8; mahogany straight chairs $8 . $10 .
 Angelina A. A.1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. Arlington, is located in Massachusetts .
 TeL WElls 50570. july 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants. TeLWElls . 50570 .
 1959 Renault Dnuphine, 18,000 miles, excellent condition, radio and heater . Radio and heater, good tires and good tires also available .
 Borgeson & Gustafson PAINTING & DECORATING Interior & Exterior . Free ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augl2-tf TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing .
 Set green velvet fiiH>r to ceiling draw drupes, 74x96 each drape, complete with rods, original cost $225 . Original cost was $225, priced fov quick sale, $66. For SALE, set for $66 .
 I vers and Pond piano; antique Jove sent and matching chair: library table . I vers piano, antique Joves sent and matched chair: Library table. I vers, Pond piano, Jove was sent to Jove and Pond .
 Full length ranch mink coat, $4,600, new; will noil for $1,200 . Full length Ranch mink coats, new and new, will sell for $2,000 .
 Solid rock maple twin-size bed . flat spring and Simmons inner-spring mattress. flat spring . Simmons mattress .
 Attractive room in private home near center, kitchenette if desired . Kitchenette in the home .
 A practical nurse or capable woman for the care of an invttlid woman three evenings a week . Needed to be able to care for a woman three nights a week.
 Young Indy for part, time work in Yarn Shop, knowledge of knitting anti-newlng require . Apply at 33 Thompson Street, Indianapolis .
 High school ifirl for two or three days a week from 3:16 to 5:00m.m. for 6-year-old boy . Wanted for 2 or 3 days for 2:16-5:00 m. week for boy .
 Experienced woman wants baby sitting, good references . Work WANTED POSITION WANTED . Baby sitting needed for experienced woman .
 Electric Sewing Machine Repair Service. Ma 3 tcr of Music, NO 2-9020. Ma .
 All makes inaluding Japanese manufacture, 36 years of prompt, courteous service . 36 years in Japan .
 Complete line of building materials for home nnd industrial use . NOrmandy 5-4520. Do It Youself LUMBER and Hardware .
 Wells 3-0052. aug7-tf IWISCELlantous WINCHESTER EMPLOYMENT — 10,00 to 12m., 4:00 to 9:00m. WElls. aug 7-tf .
 PLUMBING — Heating, Oil-burner sales and service . Call PA 93132. octl2-8t .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the U.S. and all Over The World can be mnde at tariff rates by calling your Authorized Travel Agent .
 Let ua know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out with you . Let us know our travel plans with us .
 Tickets are still available for the third season of Youth Concerts at Symphony Hall . The third season will be held in New York City .
 Harry Ellis Dickson, a membe of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and assistant conductor, has planned an interesting series of programs for this season . Dickson is assistant conductor of Boston "Pops"
 60 members of the Boston Symphony Orchestra will illustrate the difference between classical and modern music . The same program will he repeated on Saturday, November 11, at IIm., and will be repeated on January 6 und 13 .
 CARMEI.A MOLEA. and CARME.A MOLA.1K late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of certain instruments purporting to be the Inst will and codicil of said deceased by MARY LORRAINE FORGIONE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving
 Witness: John C I.eggat, Esquire, First Judge of $aid Court, this tenth day of October 1961 . Witness: Judge I. Eggat was Esquire and Esquire .
 ButterW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry .
 To all persons interested in the estate of RICHARD M BINSW ANGER late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 The executors of the will of said R|< Hari) M IlinSWANGKR have prroon ted to said Court for allowance their first account .
 If you object to the citation, you or your attorney should tile a written appearmice in said Court nt Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the tenth day of November .
 Witness: John C I.eggat, Esquire, First Judge ‘f said Court, this sixteenth day of October, 1961 . Witness: ‘F said court, this 6teenth day, this month, 1961.’
 Charles E. Young, formerly known as CHARLES E YOUNG, JUNIOR lata of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ALICE E YOUNG of Wincheater in the County of Middlesex .
 Middlesex, ss. Middlesex was the most populous county in the state of Massachusetts . Middlesex is the largest county in Massachusetts .
 To all persons interested in the trust estate under Article Ten of the will of WILLIAM A KNEELAND late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . For the benefit of FLORENCE L Kneeland and others .
 The trustees of said estate have presented to saici Court for allowance their fourth and fifth accounts . Trustees of the estate presented to the court for allowance .
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this . nineteenth day of October 1961. Esquire was Esquire and First Judge .
 Comfortable room in a new ranch home . Comfortable rooms in new home . John V Harvey, Register Register .
 Furnished apartment, flrepiuced living room, bedroom, kitchen, full bath, am) garage . For 'appointment please call PA 9-0441. For 'apartment'
 Prof eeslonal ollico space with purking on grounds, centruJ location . Call PA 9-5286.
 Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc. Call WElls 3-2334. aep21-tf WANTED .
 First floor has 3 largo rooms with modern kitchen and pantry . Second floor has three nice bedrooms, den, and modern bath . Third floor has a modern bathroom with modern bathtub .
 This duplex bus everything ; nice quiet neighborhood, good yard, good . yard, screens, storm windows, screened . porch, screened porch, oil heat, good closets, good closetets, parking, schools und so forth .
 Lovely, deep-apricot standards. HHJcrost 56621. HHjcrost . For sale: For sale POODLE PUPS. For sale .
 Autumn leaves raked up once a week can be composted and return to the soil in the form of mineral-rich humus . Leaves can be recycled into humus and composted into a composted pile .
 Edward J Duda, acting director of the Bartlett Tree Research laboratories, says it is wasteful . But it is not only wasteful, says Duda .
 Leaves from mature trees when turned to compost may be worth as much as $15 to $20 . Leaves from a single mature tree can be turned into compost and sold for $20 to $15 .
 In suburbs where leaf burning is permitted, burn only those infected with diseases . Burn only those known to be infected with disease .
 Never start a bonfire beneath a tree; the heat may scorch and kill the lower branches . The heat may also scorch lower branches of a tree .
 Go-carts that rake up leaves have removed the chore from this autumn task . Go-cart rake-up leaves has been replaced by go-cart raking leaves .
 These are acid and can be used as mulch for azalea, andromeda, laurel, rhododendron and other acid-loving plants .
 Dogwood Tip Dieback Due To Muggy Weather . Tips of branches dying back on many dogwood trees .
 It’s due in part to muggy weather, according to Roy C Beckwith of the Bartlett Tree Research Laboratories .
 This year's humid weather in summer and fall brought it on in quantity . This year, however, it was the worst year for humidity in the country .
 This infection is best controlled with a fungicidal spray in the spring . Fungalicidal spray is best used to control the infection .
 Pruning out killed tips now will prevent the infection from spreading into branches .
 To till persons interested in the estate of JOHN W THORNTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased. John W. Thornton was a widower .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by WINIFRED AMELIA THORNTON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-third day of October 1961 . Witness: "John C Leggerat"
 To nil persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M ALICE MASON late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . For the benefit of JOHN S MASON and others.
 The trustee of mid estate has presented to said Court for allowance its first and second accounts . Trustee presented to court for allowance for allowance .
 This twenty-third day of October 1961. Enquire, First Judge of said Court, this . morning, this morning, was the Judge of Appeal .
 The owner of a single residence building located at 76 Sheridan Circle, in a general residence district established by the Zoning By-Law, hereby makes application for permission to alter the aforesaid house for two family use .
 The zoning by-laws be amended by changing or altering the map incorporated therein . A portion of that certain district indicated and identified therein as a general residence district will be changed to an industrial district . The following described area will be . changed from a general . residence district to an . industrial
 I certify that the foregoing is u true copy of an amendment to the Zoning By-Luws adopted by the Town of Winchester, Massachusetts, at the Town Meeting of June 19, 1901, and approved by the Attorney General of Massachusetts on October 10, 1961 . I hereby certify that
 As a matter of course, hanks like ours make many types of loans at low cost . K wtmm i i i I i x| M . K .
 Life insurance policies, savings account balances, good marketable securities are acceptable collateral for loans here at low rates . Good marketable security is acceptable collateral .
 MASSACHUSETTS MEMBER FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORation . BANKING HOURS — 8 A.M. to 2 PAL Except Saturdays and Wednesdays . At Mt. VERNON STREet 35 CHURCH STRE
 Deborah Donovan, a senior is enrolled in the airline stewardess course . Deborah Donovan is a senior at the University of Washington .
 Deborah Wadsworth is in the medical secretary course and Ellen Lorraine De Vries is majoring in retailing . The two other students are in medical secretary and medical secretary courses .
 George Makechnie of 19 Percy Road, Lexington, was a former Winchester woman among the hostesses . He was a hostess at the Winchester Hotel .
 More coverage at Less Cost PA 9-3400 novl0-tf . John B MERCURIO “INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ”
 Some days the crisis is on, some days it's off, and some days things are just ordinarily dismal . Four Corners Shopping Center Woburn WE 5-2322 is on .
 One-third of the world is dedicated to destroying the way of life of another third, writes Peter Bergen . The exploitation of civil strife as a means to an end has elevated to the status of dogma, he says .
 Other articles in the past have set forth in similar detail the key cities of our strategic defense, the location of our atomic plants, and other vital data .
 In short, information concerning Russia that we can only obtain, piecemeal, in the most hazardous fashion (witness the U-2 flights) may be had by any interested Russian at almost any newstand at the cost of a current magazine .
 Northeastern president, Dr. Asa S Knowles and Governor V olpe introduce the Governor . Gov. V. Knowles: "I'm not going to be surprised, but I'm going to make a big mistake"
 William C. lute, university provost, presided. standing of what it means to each and every one of us. William C . lute . University provost .
 Let prove yourself worthy of our free society, and strive to build and maintain its values . Then let prove ourselves worthy of a free society . Let prove us worthy and maintain our values .
 It's the very foundation of our way of life, the means by which the wise men of our nation’s infancy managed to perpetuate the freedom they had won at such cost . The nation's first president was assassinated in 1968 by President George W. Bush .
 Subway is a place so crowded that even the men can’t all get seats . Daffy nit ions ions Colon — two periods going steady — are going steady . Subway is so full that it's so full it's impossible to see anyone else get in .
 "It works only because it has been cherished, upheld, and obeyed by generations of Americans who believed in it," says President Obama . "It's not only that it works but it works because it's been cherished and upheld by generations, says Obama .
 In short, survival of the ideal for which this nation stands is far from inevitable . Survival of this nation's ideal is not inevitable, he says . "Survival of this ideal is far not inevitable," he writes .
 It may survive, if only enough Americans care enough about it to cherish it, to uphold and obey and defend it . The U.S. House of Representatives will be a model for the future of the nation .
 "Now more than ever, when our sense of purpose, our vitality, and our creativity as a people is under challenge," says President Obama . "We are under challenge. And now more important than ever," he says .
 Passing time and inevitable ohan ges wrought by progress have proven the falsity of many key Marxist doctrines . But they have only added lustre to the sagacious wisdom and remarkable foresight of America’s founding fathers .
 As one step in the right direction let all of us get better acquainted with this remarkable document and seek to cultivate deeper underDough — a misnomer for money Dough sticks to .
 Nudist; — — — a person who goes coatless and vestless, and wears trousers to match . Nudists are also known as "nudists" and "nudeists"
 When they are married, their brides get the presents and the publicity . When they get married, they get the gifts and publicity .
 When they die, their wives get the insurance and the winters in Florida . And when they do, they get the winter in Florida, they also get insurance .
 PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Res. Res. res. is located in Pennsylvania . Fire, HAIL, WINDSTORM and BURGLARY FURS are included .
 A Hollywood producer’s wife wanted her portrait painted by a local artist . A local artist painted the portrait of a Hollywood producer's wife .
 The old Red Barn in Burlington has been renovated since the fire which occurred in September of 1960 . The re-opening of the Burlington Art Gallery on Bedford Street in Burlington will be held there on Sunday October 29 in the afternoon from 1:00 to 5:00m.
 The public is cordially invited to attend this event and the continuous exhibitions to be held during the year . The public will be invited to watch the exhibitions .
 The current exhibition will feature the works of eminent professional artists from the New England Artist Group . The exhibition is being held in New England .
 Otis Cook, Harry Ballinger, Robert Douglas Hunter, William Meyerowitz, N. A., Marguerite Pearson, Margaret Fitz-ugh Browne, Gunnar Bjareby, Marion Williams Steele, Don Stone and many others .
 Robert Smail purchased this property 17 years ago and 10 years ago made the barn into an Art Gallery . The guest books show an enormous interest in this gallery . Smail bought the property and made it into an art gallery .
 Smail and Roger Curtis both outstanding artists and teachers of art at the Gallery . Smail Smail is an outstanding artist and teacher .
 Special exhibitions will feature all Landscape, Marine and Portrait shows . Landscape and Marine exhibitions will be held in London .
 Bazaar Committee of the Women’s Alliance of the Winchester Unitarian Society heads for almost a year . Unitarian Bazaar committee headed by Mrs. Mrs. B. C. Bazaar .
 Wednesday, November 15, from 2.00m. to 9:00m., and Thursday, November 16, from 10:00 m. to 5:00 p.m. The event will be held on November 15 and 16 at 2pm to 9pm .
 Pre-school children will he cared for in the Nursery during the daytime until 5:00m. on both days . Nursery will be open to children from 9am to 5pm .
 There will be plenty of opportunity for refreshments and sociability . Besides all the beautiful things for sale at the fair tables, ’ there will he plenty of . opportunity for . refreshments . The fair will be held in New York City .
 Rev. Robert A Storer, the minister, and the men of the church will serve supper at two sittings, 6:00 m. and 7:00m.
 Their culinary ability and masculine efficiency have been demonstrated and need no further comment . The pair's culinary ability has been demonstrated by their masculine efficiency .
 “Also in the Gourmet Room” on Thursday you may have luncheon served by Mrs. Mrs. Gourmet . Also in the gourmet room’s “Gourmet Room,” will be served by a guest .
 All sorts of delicious baked goods to delight the eye and tickle the palate will be found at “The Gingerbread House, under Mrs. Mrs. Gingerbread .
 For an added treat to take home, visit the ‘Sugar Plum Tree’ for home-made and penny candy . The Sugar Plum Tree is located in downtown Chicago .
 Mr Lufkin is known to Winchester audiences, having given a talk on ‘Abraham Lincoln in Boston’ to the Society last year .
 Mr Lufkin is president of the Bostonian Society and treasurer of the Lincoln Group of Boston . He is curator of the Medford Historical Society and a member of the Civil War Study Group in Winchester .
 His illustrated lecture makes a tour of the Boston Peninsula as it developed from 1630-1880 . The Boston Peninsula was developed in 1630 to 1880 .
 The subject seems particularly timely in view of the extensive Boston re-development projects currently underway .
 Mr Arthur Keehn extends a cordial invitation to attend to anyone interested in the subject, or in the Winchester Historical Society .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . Your old sfovfeds worth OFF cn this VVnirlpirlpccI Gaslfencfe FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 Unusual prescriptions calling for rare drugs or in difficult to dispense forms present no problem to us . TALL ORDER: Rare drugs or difficult forms are not a problem for us .
 Designed with all controls grouped efficiently on the top of the range . Give it a slim, trim, squared-away look . Designed with . all controls . grouped efficiently . on top of range .
 Other features include smokeless broiling, oven light, surface light and smokeless ovens . $349.50.
 Francis Smith of 1 Wolcott Terrace, was recently honored for her outstanding achievements in work for blind persons . Francis Smith was honored for his outstanding achievements for blind people .
 On October 18 she was awarded a plaque by the Mater Dei Guild of the Catholic Guild for All the Blind at a morning ceremony at the Woodlavvn Golf Club, New ton .
 Smith recently completed 36 years of volunteer reading to blind students . Smith was dean of volunteer readers in this area . Smith has spent 36 years in volunteer reading .
 She was one of the first persons to respond to an appeal for volunteers to read to blind students attending local universities . The appeal was advertised over a quarter of a century ago for volunteers .
 Thirtyfive of the current clients are students registered at schools and colleges in this vicinity . The clientele is students registered in this area .
 For the past five years this program has been under the administration of the Catholic Guild for All the Blind . The program is now being run by a nonprofit known as the C.G. for the blind .
 When the Guild, at the request of the United Community Services, took over this activity; Mrs. Mrs. Smith was the first woman to volunteer for the Guild .
 In this time she has contributed over 1,100 hours of volunteer reading . She has contributed more than 1,000 hours of reading .
 Smith has for many years transcribed text books into braille specializing in foreign language books . Smith has transcribed braille text books for braille .
 Hundreds of blind men and women have been able to take advantage of the rich educational opportunities this area offers . The blind are able to access the rich, educational opportunities in the area .
 Winchester United Fund campaign completed enrollment of volunteer workers this week . Campaign chairman says Winchester campaign workers have been trained up to help .
 Also this week, the local campaign began with solicitation of small business firms . The local campaign begins with solicitation for small businesses .
 Solicitors kits have been distributed through residential captains . This phase of the campaign begins November 3rd . Solicitor kits will be distributed to residents of all ages .
 This year’s Winchester committee is considerably larger than that suggested by Boston United Fund headquarters . Committee is to give more effective coverage of all phases of the once-a-year effort .
 Much of the paperwork involved has also been streamlined to relieve the load on solicitors and administrative workers . Much of it is also streamlined to ease the burden of the legal process .
 Changes are based on recommendations made by Herbert Bixj ler, 1061 Winchester campaign general chairman . Changes were made following recommendations from 1061 campaign chairman .
 Local campaign headquarters is at the Red Cross building, as in the I past . Local Red Cross headquarters is in the building of the I.E. building .
 The Red Cross staff this year is giving additional assistance with clerical and certain administrative details . The staff will also assist with additional assistance in the event .
 General chairman Sullivan provided the following list of committee chairmen and district directors . Sullivan also provided a list of committees chairmen, district directors and directors .
 Residential chairman, .lames Quine; small business chairman, Bennett Wightman; administrative chairman, John Harrison . Public Relations chairman, Edward Crabtree; training chairman, Herbert Bixler; clubs and organizations chairman, Margaret Way .
 Scouts of Dark 500, Den I delivered the goods to stores and businesses around low n by Saturday morning . FUND, continued to page i) 1 Nil hi) 1*1 Nl) DOS I hKS were delivered to stores around low- n by these Scouts .
 Officer Anthony Pronski halted traffic momentarily while the line marched . The line marched acros* Main Street .
 Left to right, William Everett, Ernest CrabUcc, Jack i'upudiuia, Juiin Uccello, Wuyue Padula, Peter Knight. The event was held in honor of William Everett .
 The Boston consulting engineering firm’s announcement was made by Harrison D Eddy, Jr. The Boston firm's announcement comes from Harrison D. Eddy .
 Eliassen was head of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He was active in teaching and consulting work, llis research in the fields of water treatment .
 He has served as a consultant to the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, the World Health Organization in Geneva, the United States Publie Health Service and the Department of Defense .
 Rolf Eliassen Associates, Inc. consultants to chemical, textile, paper, petroleum, and petroleum industries on problems of industrial wastes . He has also been President of Rolf Eliassen Association of Winchester, Mass., of Winchester, I Mass., .
 From 1942 to 1946 Rolf Elias1 sen served in the Army’s Corps of | Engineers, attaining the rank of major . Elias was born in Germany and died in 1946 .
 He is a member of the Board of Consultants to the Lake Tahoe Area Council . He continues to serve as a consultant to several governmental and international agencies .
 The Lynch Junior High School Building Committee will seek additional funds to complete the building . The Board of Selectmen has set Monday, November 2U the Monday after Thanksgiving, as the date for the special town meeting .
 It has been reported that some $11,000 will he needed in addition to the $9,<mo remaining in the budget frohi the original appropriation voted by the town .
 The additional amount to complete the school must come from the town’s Excess and Deliccticy Account since money can not he raised at this time bv taxation . The additional money must come out of the town's Excess & Delichetic Account .
 Clerk at Xcno’s Market thwarted an attempted holdup in the parking lot of the market last Friday evening shortly be ore 8 o’clock .
 The dome light of the car came on and he saw a man crouched on the floor of the back seat compartment . As he did so the dome light came on, the car's dome light turned on and the man was crouched .
 As the light came on and he saw the man “Randy” asked him what he was doing in his car . The man said the man was Randy, who asked him if he was going to do anything in the car .
 “Randy” slammed the door and ran back into the market, taking the store money with him . Instead of complying with the holdup man’s order, "Randy" slammed the store door and went back in .
 A call was sent in to Police Headquarters and Sergeant Andrew Crawford with officers Roland Roy and Andrew Crawford . Officers Roland Roy, Andrew Crawford, and Roland Roy were called to the scene .
 Archie O'Connell, William Haggerty, John Reardon and James Flaherty rushed to the scene . Archie O’Connell, . William . Reardon, William . Haggty, . and James . Flaherty, . Archie . O Connell and William H
 A woman customer entered the market parking lot shortly after the attempted holdup . She saw a short man run through the lot in the direction of Oak Street . A short man was seen running through the parking lot .
 The Police combed the surrounding neighborhood but were unable to locate any suspicious persons . The Police are unable to find any suspicious people .
 Mr Kazazian believed the holdup man to be 30 to 35 years old, dark complexioned and wearing a dark coat .
 Two Winchester boys were among the seven Belmont Hill School seniors to receive letters of Commendation from the Scholarship Corporation . The letters are based on the National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Tests given to juniors in over 15,000 High Schools last spring .
 Daniel F Barnard of 16 Taft Drive and Robert F Stewart, son of Mr. and Mrs. Stewart Stewart, were winners . Daniel Barnard and Robert Stewart were winners of the award . Robert Barnard was born of Daniel F. Barnard, Robert F. Stewart of 16
 25,000 high school seniors who did well enough on the test to be awarded this recognition . The students who received these letters are part of a group of students who were awarded the recognition .
 The 10,000, semi finalists who qualified for the final stages of the competition constituted less than 2 per cent of all high school seniors .
 John H Lyman, President of Geartronics Corporation of Woburn, named VP Of Metal Trades Association . Lyman elected vice presi dent of the National Metal Trade Association .
 The 61-year-old association is primarily engaged in the field of labor-management relations . Composed of more than 1500 manufacturers, in the metal working and reJatecLimiustries .
 Lyman is a past president of the association’s Boston Branch . He has served as a national director and also on many national committees of the organization .
 Clark presents gift to retired physician Milton J Quinn at a dinner in his honor . Friends and former associates of the medical profession held dinner in honor of Quinn .
 The League embarked on a two-year study of the Merit System in Massachusetts . It found administrators of a service are the real key to the success of that service .
 The Massachusetts Civil Service League looked at the merits of the ‘merit system’ in Massachusetts . Leagues throughout the state cooperated in a major effort to determine what the merit of the system is .
 10,000 copies of the State League's booklet are now being distributed . The result is a scholarly and comprehensive booklet .
 Medical Staff of the Winchester Hospital gave a Testimonial Reception and Dinner at the W inchester Country Club in honor of Dr. Quinn . The reception was held on October 25 .
 Milton J Quinn had retired on September 22 after 3(i years of practice in Winchester . He had retired from the sport in September 22 .
 “Prayers for Peace” will be the special observance in the First Congregational Church at both the nine-fifteen and eleven o’clock services next Sunday morning .
 People of the Church and of the Community are invited to turn to spiritual resources and look again at the heritage of faith upon which this nation was founded . Believing that fear is not the answer to these days of tension, the people are invited .
 "In these days when civilization itself hangs in the balance the urge is upon us all to unite in turning minds and hearts toward every constructive and deepening of the hospital," he said . The hospital gathered to pay town one year ago .
 Quinn, who had servI William J Speers, Jr., Jr., president ed as president of the medical staff . Quinn had served as president . Speers was president of medical staff. Quinn had also been president of hospital staff .
 I 0 0 hospital trustees, expressed chief of staff, and chief of its medical service, as well as president of the Middlesex East District Medical Society . I 0 Hospital Trustees, expressed Chief of Staff, Chief of Medical Service, and Chief of Hospital's medical service .
 The Quinns’ departure from Winchester to retirement in Nashua, New Hampshire, was lamented by newspaper headlines lamenting the Quinns' departure . Quinns had been practicing medicine in Winchester for decades .
 Nelson Fontneau, who led the group in a succession of song parodies appropriate to the occasion, is credited with the group's success .
 Reese E James, hospital administrator, told the group of the heip I the best wishes of the trustees to the Quinns in retirement, and thanked Dr. Quinns .
 Dr Quinn received an engraved Paul Revere bowl from the Women’s Auxiliary to the Middlesex East District Society in grateful recognition for all he had done for the organization .
 Richard J Clark, president of the medical staff, presented a large engraved Paul Revere bowl as a gift from colleagues .
 Quinn then thanked the staff, spoke about his years of pleasant association with the hospital . Quinn then told of his plans for retirement in Nashua .
 He was reminded that he was voted unanimously an honorary member of the staff of the Winchester Hospital, and will always be welcome Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Francis Smith Receives Honor at its meetings and functions, resource of peace . Francis Smith receives honor for his role in the nation's service .
 Following the singing of “Auld this Sunday the ministers of the | chief of staff will lead the congregation i Dr. j Lang Syne,” and the taking of Church will lead .
 Richard Sheehy spoke of Dr. j Quinn's early years of practice in to Dr. Quinn's first years of medical practice . He also spoke of the photographs to be presented in a special “Prayers for Peace”
 In this connection the second of the two articles in the warrant for the special town meeting will seek permission to transfer the sum of $3,500, appropriated at the 1959 annual meeting in connection with the Wadleigh School and School Administrative offices .
 The Selectmen have not as yet received from the School Building Committee the exact amount that will be necessary to complete the new school . The new school has been in use since the beginning of the school year last September .
 The building is also housing the offices of the Superintedent of Schools . The school is located in the state of South Carolina . It is also housed in the building as a school .
 The School Building Committee is preparing figures for the coming town meeting . They have been urged to include all necessary items to complete the building and furnish it properly . This to enable the town to have the benefit of state aid in connection with the expense .
 Additional hooks for the library, science equipment, furnishings for the teachers' and School Committee rooms and racks for the storage of lumber and metal for the woodworking and metal working shops .
 It is also possible that some changes will have to be made in the school ventilating system . Additional work will be done on the school playground, it is reported .
 Winchester Lions Club Sponsoring “What My Eyesight Means to Me” Police Institute Graduate Sgt. Sgt. John Sutter graduated from the Institute of Police Institute . Sgt. Sutter is a graduate of the Police Institute of Technology .
 43 law enforcement officers from five New England states and Maryland received graduation certificates from the New England Police Institute . John P McHugh of the Winchester Police Department was one of 43 officers to complete a week-long course in "Police Interrogation"
 The operation of the traffic lights it the intersection of Cambridge and Wildwood Streets, for which the Board of Selectmen has been asking the State Department of Public Works for several years, finally began this week .
 Previously the lights have been operating there merely as warning flasher beacons . Previously they were used as warning beacons, but now the lights are on display .
 Experts from across the country served as guest faculty members . They taught the psychology and methods of questioning suspects, witnesses, juveniles, and victims . The event was held at the University of Columbia University .
 Boys and girls in grades one through six are eligible to participate in the contest . The contest will run from November 1 through December 4 .
 All essays must he in on or before December 4, and may be left at Star Office .
 Essays must be submitted on 8V& x llin. paper, written in ink and on one side of the paper only . Essays should be submitted by 8V and llin on 8X llin paper .
 William C f’usack of 2 Lakeview Road is serving as chairman of the judges, the others being Mr Robert Nyere of 4 Squanto Road and Mrs. Mrs. Nyere . William C. f'usack is the others . Mr Nyere is the chairman
 The boy and girl adjudged winners of the contest will each receive as a prize a fine Raleigh bicycle .
 The bikes are being donated for the contest by Peter Marchesi, through the Cott Beverage Company . The contest is being held in New Jersey .
 The bikes will be on display next week in the windows of Hevey’s Pharmacy . They will be awarded just before Christmas .
 Winchester has responded to WGBII's appeal for help in rebuilding the station destroyed by fire October 14 . Winchester is planning a community-wide drive for funds to rebuild the station .
 "The value of the educational station to Winchester is well known to all," says Winchester resident . The value of Winchester's educational station has been well known for Winchester .
 Many informative, musical and dramatic programs are followed with great interest in this community . The many informative and musical shows are followed by great interest .
 An immediate response to the educational station’s appeal for help is imperative . The temporary, emergency arrangements for operating the station cost more than the normal operating expenses . The emergency arrangements cost more .
 Please give generously to keep WGBH and Channel 2 in our . August 13, 1951 . Give generously to help keep the station in our history .
 Since that time observance and the sermon will be Winchester, as did Dr. Winchester . Winchester was Winchester, and since then, Winchester has been Winchester .
 Roger BurQuinn’s many friends chatted with the Board has continually sought directed to this theme. goyne, who opened his office in this him long after the dinner . goyne .
 Lights, continued on page 4, including agents from the United States schools and homes .
 Contributions may be sent immediately to Stathe United States Treasury . WGBII Channel 2 at Camclass Bridge 42, Mass. bridge 42, was in the United States .
 Austin Broadhurst Trustees F*aul F Avery Shailer Avery C linton W Bennett James W Black ham . Treasurer RALPH W HATCH A ssistan t T reasu rer NELLIE L .
 Area parties are designed to introduce Matrons from all departments and laboratories in their particular town . The Newcomer becomes oriented more easily into her community .
 Technology Matrons Association is made up of the wives of faculty and stuff at M.I.T. and its associated laboratories . The Technology Matrones Association is a group of women at the university .
 In earlier years the Matrons was a small group which met for social purposes, only . The Matrons were a social group, only meeting for the social purposes only .
 The Matrons' eligible membership now numbers over 2,000 . The Institute's objectives are to foster friendly relations, to share mutual interests, and to furnish effective service .
 She has asked each sponsor to arrange for an informal gathering of the Matrons in her community .
 Leo L Beranek entertained the Matrons at a morning coffee on Wednesday, November l at her home . Leo L. Beraneka, 7 Ledgewood Road, entertained the matrons .
 A young man, once a resident of this town, has lectured up and down the Eastern Seaboard on a subject of which many of us read but know little else about . He is a former resident of the town, and lectured on the subject .
 It is the only bulwark between the integrity of the U.S. judicial system and the invasion of foreign power under the guise of the In ternational Court . The U.N. is a bulwark against invasion of the judiciary by foreign power .
 Any action to eliminate the amendment would seriously impair the sovereignty of our coun try by vesting potential power over fully domestic matters by a foreign tribunal . A foreign tribunal should not be given the power to decide on matters in the UK .
 All members are urged to let nothing interfere with their attendance at this meeting . All members should be seriously urged to attend the meeting .
 Receiving awards were Helen Rideout and Rose Reardon, president of Malden Auxiliary, also department historian . Genevieve Waldon was secretary of Stoneham Auxiliary .
 These ladies are to be congratulated for their work, and it is hoped more from this district will get such an award next year .
 Herman F Pike opened her lovely home on Arlington Street Thursday, October 2G, for the first fall meeting of the Winchester Garden Club . Herman Pike is the owner of the home where the club meets .
 November meeting will be held at the home of Mrs. Richards . Robert Richards will be guest speaker at the meeting .
 The December meeting will be an innovation, in that the program would be a tour of members’ homes, which would be decorated for Christmas, and that this meeting would be opened to guests .
 Mr Allgrove gave an interesting background on how terrariums came into existence . He also gave an account of the terrarium's origin .
 They were used to bring back tropical plants to the homeland after a voyage . The plants were brought back from a voyage to bring them back to their homeland .
 Mr Allgrove started in making terrariums shortly after World War II . He had made them for pleasure since he was a small boy .
 While giving his lecture, Mr Allgrove made a terrarium . He lectured as he worked on the terrarium in his work .
 "The members found him a most interesting and informal speaker as well as most instructive," he said . The members of the audience found him most interesting, informal speaker .
 The first group ikeeting for all j hospital volunteers, sponsored by 'the Friends of the Winchester Hospital, was held at the Wyman School on Tuesday evening, October 24th . The first ikeete for all hospital volunteers was held .
 Robert Grenzeback, chairman of volunteers, introduced the three speakers for the evening . The event was held in a bid to raise funds for the next year .
 Mr Reese James, hospital administrator, spoke of the volunteers from the administrative point of view . He said the volunteers are volunteers who help the hospital .
 He mentioned the beginnings of the Winchester Hospital in 1912 by volunteers and their continued work through the years as directors, members of the medical staff, building committees, fund raising committees, and members of Winton Club, En Ka, and the Friends .
 All of these make up a j team to provide the best medical care possible . The team includes a team of doctors, nurses and nurses .
 Mr James spoke of the prestige of being a volunteer and the ingredients that make a good one, interest, understanding, willingness to accept responsibility, tact, judgment and consideration .
 He also explained that with volunteers it is quality not quantity to look for . He said with volunteers, quality is not quantity but quality .
 Miss Marjorie Snyder, director of nurses, stressed volunteer’s role as part of the patient care team .
 Each member of this team must understand her duties and responsibilities and work with the others for the complete satisfaction of the patient . The team must work with each other to ensure the patient's complete satisfaction .
 Richard Clark, president of the medical staff, brought greetings from them . Richard Clark: "I am happy to be here for the first time in my life"
 He briefly mentioned the beginnings of Social Service work . He spoke of the tremendous changes that have taken place in volunteer services since that time .
 Clark spoke particularly of the sanctity of personal and professional relations of the patients . Volunteers especially must respect the confidences they may see or hear from patients .
 He stressed the mass psychology of a pleasant greeting, a cheery smile, and a silent tongue . The psychologist stressed the importance of a positive greeting .
 Clark also brought the appreciation of the medical staff for the work being done by the volunteers .
 Grenzeback summarized the program with the words quality, responsibility, and dedication . The program has been described as 'quality' and 'responsibility'
 A brief question period concluded the first and most successful meeting of volunteers of the Winchester Hospital . Winchester Hospital volunteers met for the first time in a year .
 Mrs. Winthrop Knox Jr., will open her home at 1 Curtis Circle, on Friday, November 17 . Mrs. Knox Jr.'s home will be open to the public for the first time .
 Mrs. D Reid Weedon, Jr., is in charge of refreshments . Mrs, Philip Parsons Jr., decorations; Mrs. Philip Parsons, decorations, decorations . Mrs. Weedon Jr., Mrs. Parsons and Mrs. Parson are also in charge .
 Parsons shows how different candles may be used with flowers to enhance the beauty of both . Parsons showed how different candle candles can be used to enhance both beauty and beauty .
 Don Orione “Friends’* Formed The Winchester friends of the /JeJefte i “OINK of a MNir’s”
 Angelo L Maietta is chairman of this committee, assisted by Leonard Barbo, Police Chief Joseph Derro, Mr and Mrs. Joe Derro . Angelo LMaietta was chairman of the committee . The committee is also chaired by the police chief and the mayor .
 Orione Home for the Aged. i Discount on Christmas cards up Leo Barbo, to make plans for a to December I at the Winchester fiesta to be held later in the Star. Orione home for the elderly .
 Donald W Kitchin of 1(> Chesterford Road drove to Pocono Manor, Pennsylvania Sunday for the annual meeting of the conference on Electrical Insulation of the National Research Council . Donald W
 Senior Scientist at Simplex Wire & Cable Co. of Cambridge presented an irivited paper which he prepared with 0.5% of the time .
 Mr j Kitchin has been associated with the National Research Council ' since 1929 .
 Winchester Art Association announces its second meeting and lecture of the year on Tuesday, November 7, in the Rich Room of the library, at 7:15 . Winchester Art Club invites all residents to become members .
 In keeping with this year’s theme, Jane Miller, start* lecturer at the famed DeCordova Museum, Lincoln, will lecture on the development of the Community Art Center .
 She will bring with her works from the children and adult classes to illustrate one phase of the museum’s activities .
 As a lecturer, she follows a family tradition; her parents are well-known travel lecturers . Much of her own travel experience has been in their company . Her parents are also a well known travel lecturer .
 Robert Grady's paintings and woodcuts will hang in the North Reading Room for the month of November .
 Mr Grady studied at the Massachusetts College of Art, at the Academie Colarossi, Ecole des Beaux Arts, Paris and the Cranbrook Academy of Art .
 DeCordova Museum in Lincoln, Gallerie de France in Paris, Library of Congress in Washington, and Boston Museum of Fine Arts in Boston .
 Mr Grady now teaches drawing and watercolor at the School of the Museum of the Fine Arts in Boston .
 He also teaches the Wednesday morning class of the Winchester Studio Guild . The Winchester Guild also teaches a weekly class of artists .
 Donald Van Roosen, in arrangements for this meeting and the exhibition . Donald van Roosen is in charge of organising the meeting .
 A0IN YOUNG TENDER LAMB hen it comes to meat there is NO substitute for quality . A0in you young tenderler lamb hen it's no substitute to quality quality .
 NUT BREAD V 49* JELLY ROLL \7 4* 4* $ e af. ° °d s Pe cial SLICED Swordfish Mowtell P Slide .
 SUE 41c GIANT SIZE 79C BETTY CROCKER MUFFIN MIXER MIXERS ORANGE DATE RAISIN 33c pkg.
 LUX FLAKES LARGE SIZE 34c . GIANT SUE SlC BETTY CROCKER MUFFIN MIX MIX BLUEBERRY 39c pkg. Lux FLAKs 34c LUXFLAKES 34c GIANT .
 Archie T O’Connell, veteran patrolman of Winchester Police Department, made his final tour of duty Sunday night . He retired after a service record of 17 years .
 Greer Co. Co., of Wilmington, manufacturers of processing equipment for the food industry, was elected president of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts of Massachusetts on Thursday, October 26, at the 46th annual meeting at the Statler Hilton Hotel in Boston .
 He was appointed June 16, 1024, and went on duty June 22 of that year for the usual probationary period . O’CONNELL was appointed in 2010 . He is now in charge of the National Guard in Florida .
 During his years on the force he served under four chiefs, William I McIntosh, William H Rogers, Charles J Harrold and Joseph J Derro . He served under the chiefs of the Northern Ireland Police .
 Most of Officer O’Connell’s service has been at night, and he was known as a fearless officer . He was held in respect by those who liked to give a cop a hard time .
 Chief Derro commended for his part in the apprehension of intruders at Lynch Junior High School . Years ago he captured a “lone wolf’’ housebreaker and his moll .
 Born in Winchester October 8, 1896, Officer O’Connell is the son of the late Edward and Catherine O‘Connell . Officer O'Connell was born in Winchester .
 Graf Waldersee makes six round trips between Hoboken, N. J., and Brest in Fiance, France . Graf is based in Brest and travels from Hoboken to Brest, Fiance .
 Officer O’Connell and his wife Lucy make their home at .30 Lincoln Street . O'Connell and Lucy live in the same home .
 Mr Greer was a member of the finance committee from 1948 to 1951, serving as vice chairman in 1951 . Widely known in Winchester, he was also vice chairman of the Winchester City Council .
 He served as selectman from 1951 to 1953, was chairman of the board in 1953 . He was also on the insurance committee and insurance committee .
 He was a member of the fiscal survey committee from 1956 until it was dissolved in 1960 . He served as chairman of the group for three years .
 Mr Greer is vice-president of the Wire Belt Company of Winchester . He is also director of the Winchester Trust Company and the Boston Filter Company .
 He has been a director of the Cambridge YMCA and first reader of the First Church of Christ Scientist in Winchester . He has also been director of a Cambridge YCA .
 Winchester Wellesley Club held its fall meeting in the charming home of Mrs. Mrs. Wellesley . The meeting was held on Thursday evening, October 26 .
 Miss Molly Hodge and her committee served a delicious dessert, with coffee, af| ter . The president, Mrs. Mrs. Hodge, served the dessert .
 The entertainment of the evening was provided by two members of the club, Mrs. Mrs. Barbara and Mrs. Martha .
 Carr has a fascinating collection of baskets from all sizes and kinds from many parts of the country . Carr's baskets are from all over the world, from many different countries .
 Many of the shfe had on display and explained their var ous oi igins and uses and the difTer ent methods of construction . Many of these shfe were on display .
 Stone has done a great deal of restoring of antiques and is an expert in that field . Stone has restored many of the world's finest antiques .
 She had on ex-hibition several period chair which she had renewed, many trays of all sizes and shapes and most interesting collection of old hand-decorated fireplace bellows many of them French in origin .
 It is indeed an art to take these love ly things of another era and re store them to their original beauty as Mrs. Gwyneth Paltrow .
 This will be an evening meeting planned for the benefit of the mothers who are unable to attend afternoon meetings . The meeting will be held at the end of the afternoon meeting .
 The faculty will be in their homerooms to talk to the mothers from 7:00 to 8:30m. Mothers will be able to hear from the mothers .
 Bernadette Moriarty of Arlington will give a demonstration on Christmas decorations . Moriarty will demonstrate how to decorate Christmas decorations at home .
 Mr Cornoni is a member of the Cambridge Rotary Club, Cam bridge Chamber of Commerce, Am erican Welding Society, Nationa Metal Trades Association .
 He i also a member of the Wincheste Country Club, on the Board of Managers of the Middlesex County National Bank, and a director of Caravan Society for Crippled Clients .
 Robert Francis DeRoehe of 14 Walnut Street, Wakefield, and Margaret Ann Coburn of 3 Albamont Road. Robert Francis deRoehem of Wakefield . Margaret Francis Coburn from Wakefield and Robert Francis Francis Deroehe . Robert Francis .
 The teaching staff of the George Washington School were entertain ed at a luncheon Thursday, Octo ber 26, by the members of the Mothers’ Association for that school .
 Mary Ciroli opened her lovely North Border Road home for the event . The event is enjoyed each year by teachers and mothers alike .
 Barbara Hancock, Miss Angeline Hamilton, Miss Penelope Potter, Miss Phyllis Roberts, Mrs. Barbara Hancock and Miss Angelina Hamilton . Mrs. Hancock: "I am happy to be here for the first time since I was born"
 I School of Police Administration is being conducted with the cooperation of the Committee on Law Enforcement Education, New England Association of Chiefs of Police, Inc. The school is being held in conjunction with the committee on law enforcement education, the Committee of Law Enforcement and the New England .
 The school is being held at the ohn Hancock Building, Boston . Chief Paul J Lynch, Wilmington, Wilmington; Chief Merritt J Wenzel, Wakefield; . among those attending from surrounding communities .
 Chief Roland E Ellis, Reading, Reading; Chief Malcolm J MacEacheron, Burlington; and Col. Bernard C Vacon, Stoneham; . Chief Bernard Vacon is Stoneham . Chief Roland J Ellis is Reading chief .
 Chiefs from Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Maine and Vermont also in attendance . Chiefs from other states also attending the event .
 The party was really held to acquaint the trade and the press with the unusual facilities that are a part of the corporation’s fine new display headquarters .
 The party was pleasingly informal with plenty of good food i and good fellowship . It was an informal affair .
 A Dodge station wagon, driven by leorge E Jay of 25 Stoddard Road, Woburn, and a Pontiac sedan driven by Salvatore Bonasera of 88 Sheridan Circle, were in collision .
 A dog ran into the path of a wagon in Woburn, Massachusetts . The incident happened on Main Street . The dog was hit by the wagon, police say .
 In an attempt to avoid striking the animal he made a quick stop and his wagon was hit in the rear by the Pontiac . The Pontiac hit the wagon in a rear by hitting the vehicle .
 The dog was taken to a veterinarian before the police arrived . Whether the dog was injured is not known as he had been taken to the veterinarian .
 Plans are in full swing for Wyman Parents Association’s Con tinental Capers scheduled for this I* riday evening, November Wyman School .
 Roger Carpenter and his famous dance group, the Meltones, will again this year be the feature at' traction of the evening . The Meltones will again be feature at the event .
 This or chestra will entice you to the floor with their toe-tapping rhythms . Whether your taste in music favors the con ventional or the unusual, this is music for you .
 Robert Tesar and her dance committee guarantee a gala eve ning in a colorful European atrno sphere . The event will be held at the end of October 31 in Paris .
 "Evening in Paris" takes place at Wyman School Friday eve ning . The show is a French-inspired fashion show .
 A new supervisory examination was held last Saturday at the Winchester Post Office to establish new registers for postal personnel for promotion to first line supervisory positions at the local office .
 Assistant Postmaster Alfred Barnard was in charge of the examination . The examination was held for the first time in Winchester, Winchester .
 The examination was open to all regular employees with at least five years postal experience . The exam was open for all regular postal employees . The examination will be open to anyone who has five years of postal experience.
 Eaton’s Ko-Rec-Type enables you to correct mistakes in typing without erasing . The Ko-rec-Type can also be used to correct errors in writing without errowing .
 The first assembly of the year at Wyman School featured Halloween fun and safety in an appropriate play in which a Halloween pumpkin and a black cat, each found a friend . Kirsten Travel Agency 29 Thompson Street, Winchester — PA 9-5410 Wyman Halloween
 The program concluded with a selection, played by the Rhythm Band . It was given of course on October 31st and the class was so well entertained .
 Announcer, Kathy Mahoney; Reader, Thomas Raleigh; Pumpkin, Billy Hudson; Kitten, Mary Tambone; Woodcutter, Steven Spang; Carpenter, Robert Stevens; Little Boy, Granville Harris; Little Girl, Patrice Duffy; Farmer, Richard Murphy
 Adult Education Association in Massachusetts will hold its annual conference on November 3 and 4 at the New Ocean House, Swampseott, Massachusetts . Adult education conference will be held in Swamp Seott, November 3-4 .
 Danny McGee and Marty O'Donnell scored touchdowns for the Sachems . Choo Choo scored a total of two touchdowns . Danny McGee also scored touchdowns .
 Outstanding players of the day were Peter Mawn, Jim Mumma, Tom Martin, Brian Collins, Sal Pizzano, and Eddie Gravalese . The day was held in New York City .
 The only touchdown was made by Choo Choo Collins on a sixty yard run aided by a key block thrown by John Martin, who took three men out of the play .
 Player of the game award would go to Peter Mawn who put in his best performance . Mawn sparked up the entire Sachem defense to a point where they were infalliable .
 Other players that were outstanding were Steve Waters, Larry Keppler, Peter Grant, Paul Eaton, Ed and Dave Choate, Paul Blanch and Paul Collins .
 Next Sunday at 1:45m. one of the biggest games of the year will take place in Woburn . Next Sunday's match will be the first of the 2014 World Cup .
 Winchester and Woburn have identical records and have played almost evenly against the some opponents . Winchester has played almost equally evenly against some of their opponents . Both Winchester have identical record of six wins .
 Everybody associated with Pap Warner is grateful for the wonderful support that the townspeople have given us this year and are expecting the biggest turnout yet . Pap Warner will be celebrating his 80th birthday this year at the end of October .
 Mary Jane Anderson is engaged to William Errico, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs. John S Anderson of Niles Lane . Mary Jane and William Anderson are engaged to each other . Mary J. Anderson is the daughter of John Anderson and L. William Anderson .
 Joseph L Mullen of 8 16 Main Street announced the engagement of their daughter, Anita Louise, to Lieutenant Joseph P Mi rabile, son of Mr and I Mrs. Mullen . Anita Louise is engaged to Lt. Joseph Mi Rabile .
 Nicolo A Mirabile of Medford was pictured at a tea held recently at the home of Mr and Mrs. Nicolo . A tea was held recently held at a home in Medford, Massachusetts .
 Miss Anderson is a graduate of Winchester High School and Lowell Academy . She is a native of Lowell Academy and Winchester High .
 Mr Errico is a graduate of Winchester High School and attended Wentworth Institute . He is also a graduate from Wentworth School and Wentworth High School .
 Ernest A Roberts, director of sports information at Dartmouth College, will be the feature speaker at a meeting of the Mystic Valley Dartmouth Club to be held on Wednesday evening, November 8 .
 A social hour will be held from six to seven o’clock, followed by a steak dinner . A steak dinner will take place at the end of the evening .
 Motion pictures of all Dartmouth games played to date this season will be a feature of the evening . The Dartmouth men's football team will be represented at the event .
 Director Roberts will give a first-hand report on some of the “behind-the-scenes” activities . He will also discuss the outlook for some other athletic teams . Roberts will also give an insight into the outlook of the other teams .
 This will provide a real treat for alumni in the area who are unable to attend as many athletic contests as they would like . Alumni from the area will be able to attend events like this .
 He is chairman of the Boston Football Writers’ Association and a director of the U.S. Basketball Writers' Association . He is also a member of the United States Basketball Writers Association .
 He is a charter member of the College Hockey Writers’ Association, and is a member of U.S.G.A. golf Writers' Group . He is also a charter .
 He served on the staff of the Boston Globe as a sports editor prior to being elected to his present position at Dartmouth twelve years ago .
 Miss Kathleen Kelley, 2 Marchant Road, has been selected as one of the outstanding Catholic youth in the Woburn Deanery . Miss Kelley has been the selection of Miss Kathleen . She has been one of many outstanding young people in the area .
 A plaque was also pretraining project on the use of the discussion method in stimulating I sented to Mrs. Mrs. Giffer .
 Eleanor Giannotti will describe the work of | chairman at St. Mary's College of Medicine . She will also describe her fine work as adult CYO sues, and will describe her work as an adult .
 Anyone interested in attending elected youth council officer in should register with Kathleen Helocal CYO group for three conseffttrty, conference chairman and conference chairman . Winchester High School, has been awarded a Youth Council Officer award for three years .
 Kathy and 5-5400, Ext.6. ton Public Library, by phoning KE 1 Congratulations, Kathy . Boseutive years .
 Ross Hair Styling Salon for II lopipson / iSHH) Ross Hair Stylylist Salon . Street P A 0-27 P> Women’s S 0. 0.
 This week in first-place team standings are the Jades, captained by Ann Caggiano, and supported by Gloria Mbnterisi, Mae Rotondi, Vi Bruno, and Bette Cammarata . The Jades are the first-placed team standings .
 Each bowler performing extremely well enabled Lhi.^ team to score four points and thus take the lead from the Emeralds. Emeralds .
 The Emeralds lost three points to the Rubies in the most exciting match of the season . The Rubies beat the Emeralds 2-1 in the first round of the tournament .
 The Rubies are captained by Rose De Teso, and supported by Virginia Macinanti, Jennie Amico, Anita Dollotr, and Mary Fiorello . They are currently in second place, behind the Jades, who are in third place .
 Terry Nappa bowled a three string total of 290 bowled by bowler . The bowler bowled the three-string total . Nappa is the latest bowler to bowled in the spotlight this week .
 Terry also takes the lead in high average, and bowled the high sing le of the night with a score of 3 04 . Terry also leads the high average in high averages .
 The bowling team was fortunate to have two fine workers, Secretary Grace Del Solio and committee member Cusi Fiore, who, although they do not bowl, are doing a splendid job maintaining a well-organized league .
 Winchester Little League Board of Directors will meet on November 9, 1962 . Meeting will be at Unitarian Church Hall for nomination of officers for 1962 .
 A 51-year-old Melrose man in the center was arrested last Friday afternoon on charge of shoplifting . Officers Mario Buzzotta and James Cogan arrested the man in Melrose .
 He appeared in the Woburn Court Saturday morning and was given a suspended sentence . He was given the suspended sentence after pleading guilty to the charge .
 Police say they found some of the articles the man had picked up on his person and others in the trunk of his automobile . Police say the man picked up the items on his own and others were found in his trunk .
 Winchester High School Field Hockey team has record of three wins, three losses, and one tie . Winchester has won three games, losing three and losing three games .
 The team, under the leadership of co-captains, Carole Lawson and Jane Hess, defeated Newton 2-1, Lexington 3-0, Belmont 4-1 and tied Arlington 1-1 .
 LincolnSudbury defeated Winchester Winchester 3-2 . Lincoln scored twice in the last four minutes of play . Winchester scored two goals in the final four minutes .
 Trieia Buros, Debbie Harrison, Carole Lawson, Betty Bixler, Joanne Hess, Jackie Cartier, Jane Hess, Martha Dodge and Martha Dodge . Martha Dodge, Patti Tofuri, Nancy Carter, Joyce Pettingell, and Marie Scall
 Winchester will play Milton Academy tomorrow, Concord on Tuesday and Newton South on Thursday . Winchester will also play Concord, Concord, Newton South and Milton Academy on Tuesday .
 Mothers’ Association of the George Washington School will sponsor their annual open house for all parents on Thursday night, November 9, at 7 o’clock .
 This informal reception is given to acquaint parents with the classroom techniques employed in teaching their children . The reception is also given to acquainted parents with teachers .
 All of the children have prepared special work directed to their fathers . They are eagerly awaiting their reactions .
 This inspection opportunity is especially apt this year coinciding as it does with National Education Week .
 After the classroom visits refreshments will be served in the auditorium .
 DINNERS CROWN ROOM • TERRACE LOUNGE • LION & UNICORN ROOMs Anytime you're eating out . DANVERS, MASSL On Rte. Head F OR — T\um 0 mnt Quality Courts
 Meredith Cooper of Winchester died early Friday af ternoon at his home after several months illness .
 He underwent syr gery at the Winchester Hospital during May and June and had been critically ill for some time .
 He was born Aug., 1911 in Montpelier, Vermont . He grew up in East Haven, Connecticut, graduating from Hillhouse High School .
 He received his Bachelor of Arts degree from Yale in 1932 and his Master’s Degree in 193d. He was awarded his Master's degree in 192d.
 He began teaching as an assistant at Yale in 1934 . The next year he taught junior high school English at State School in Meriden, Conn. He was an assistant teacher at Yale, Yale and Meriden .
 For two years, 1936-37 he taught History at high school in East Haven, Conn. He also taught history at East Haven High School .
 Mr Cooper married Mar garet Turton of Meriden, Conn, in 1938 . Mr Cooper came with his wife to Winchester in the fall of that year .
 He entered the School Department here in 1938 as a teacher of Social Studies in the high school . He was made head of the department in the fall of 1955 .
 He served as faculty advisor to the Student Council and had also been publicity director for the high school . He was also faculty advisor for the student council .
 He was “Larry” Cooper to everyone, and his legion of friends was numbered from persons of all walks of life . Cooper was ‘Larry’ Cooper’ to everyone . He was a popular high school teacher and principal .
 He was known and esteemed as an able teacher, a hard working, self effacing friendly citizen, a fine husband and father . He was also known as a hard-working, friendly citizen .
 He was a Former president of First Congregational Church Men’s Club and of the New’ England Association of Social Science Teachers . He was also a former president of the First Congregation Church Men's Club .
 He had been a town meeting member for Precinct 5 for the past eight years . He had served on the town’s Youth Activities Committee from 1956 until its discharge in 1961 .
 Mr Cooper leaves his wife, two sons, Robert, a sophomore at Brown, and Richard, a student at Winchester High School . He also leaves his father in East Haven, Conn., and a sister, Mrs. Mrs. Cooper .
 A private committal service was conducted last Saturday afternoon at East Lawn Cemetery in East Haven, Conn., by the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister . Lister's funeral was held in New Haven, Connecticut, on Saturday .
 A memorial service was held Tuesday afternoon at the First Congregational Church with the minister Dr. Wesley A Mallery . Dr. Mallery was associate minister of the First . Mallery's funeral was held at the church .
 Daniel C Dennett (A tribute by Principal W How|nrd Niblock) read at an assembly of the Winchester High School student body . Principal W. How |nrd . Niblock, read at assembly of Winchester High school student body.
 Daniel Clement Dennett was dean of Winchester’s medical men at 93 years . He died Sunday morning, October 29 at his home after a long period of failing health . Dennett died at 93 .
 Herbert W Smith was a salesman for Cody Distributing Company of Dorchester and a resident of Winchester for the past 20 years . He died early Saturday morning at his home after a two-year illness .
 He was born July 12, 1902, in Roxbury but spent his early life in Medford . He was married there to Viola L Forshner of Medford Aug., 1923 .
 They came to Winchester after their marriage and had lived on Middlesex Street . They had lived there during their en tire residence in town . They moved to Winchester when they married .
 Mr Smith was a very successful salesman for the Cody Distributing Company for the past 13 years . Mr Smith previously had been associated in a similar capacity with the Boston office of the Budweiser Company .
 Services were held Tuesday forenoon at the Costello-Moffett Funeral Home . Funeral services were held at the funeral home Tuesday .
 Louise Ann leaves a sister, three bfrothers, and three brothers . Louise Ann also leaves behind her grandparents, Mr and Mrs. Iannacei; also her grandparents .
 Funeral services were held Wednesday forenoon at 11 o’clock ut the Lane Funeral Home with Rev. Rev. John Lister . Lister's funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. ET .
 He was born May 29, 1868, in Westbrook, Me., and graduated from Deering High School in Portland, Me. He attended Western State Normal School before beginning the study of Medicine .
 He studied at Portland School of Medical Instruction and was graduated from Bowdoin College Medical School . He is a father of two .
 He first practiced in Bradford, Me., leaving to become a voluntary assistant at the Massachusetts (general Hospital) in the nose and throat department . He was a volunteer assistant at Massachusetts General Hospital .
 He was licensed to practice in Massachusetts in 1897 . He was appointed as house officer at the Carney Hospital in South Boston .
 He joined the Massachusetts Medical Society in 1898, and soon after came to Winchester to establish himself in practice . He was the founder of the Winchester Medical Society .
 Dennett never hesitated to use the newer adjuncts of medicine as they developed . He appraised each carefully and applied those that merited use with professional skill .
 He was one of the earliest users of X-ray and was especially interested in the field of eye, ear, nose and throat . He was also an early inventor of medical imaging .
 Winchester people had their first glasses from him and returned to him regularly for the care of their eyes . Generations of Winchester people have had glasses from his glasses .
 Dennett was the oldest member of the Middlesex East District Medical Society . He was present at the society’s 50th anniversary celebration .
 He was also a principal speaker and chairman of the committee in charge of arrangements for the 75th anniversary program . He was still active at the society’s centennial in 1950 .
 Dennett was for two years on the editorial staff of the Portland Daily Express . He was on the paper's editorial staff for two more years .
 His frequent letters to the Star and the metropolitan press reflected his fearless devotion to principle . He commanded a virile and facile pen, and his frequent letters reflected his courage to stand by principle .
 "Courageousness often led him to support causes not generally popular, but he never dropped them for that reason. Keenly interested in town affairs, this same courageousness often left him with the courage of his courage .
 He loved the out-of-doors and wrote sym pathetically of the Maine Woods, of the old logging days on the Kennebec River and of the fishing camps at Moosehead .
 Some of his writing on death, life and human nature was especially sensitive . Many commended his study of "The Old Clock" in his pamphlet of essays .
 Dennett’s gardens were things of beauty under his skillful care, and he was happiest when sharing them with others . Dennett was a master gardener who cared for his gardens .
 Dennett enlisted in the Medical Corps and was first assigned to the Camp Dix Base Hospital in the department of head surgery . Dennett served in the Army Medical Corps in New Jersey .
 He later was transferred to Camp Crane in Allentown, Pa., awaiting overseas assignment . His overseas assignment did not come before the cessation of hostilities .
 Dennett married Elizabeth Goodwin Redfern, a native of Winchester, in 1959 . She died April 13, 1959 . Dennett was married to Elizabeth Goodwin .
 One of the doctor’s two sons was killed in World War I . The second, and younger, Daniel C Dennett, Jr., died in Africa in a plane crash while serving with the State Department .
 The doctor leaves three grandhildren, Cynthia, Daniel and Charlotte, all of Winchester . He also leaves a sister, Miss Abbie Dennett, of Portland, Maine .
 Private funeral services were held at the late residence on Tueslay with the Rev. Rev. The Rev. the Reverend Rev. Michael O'Connell .
 We are all aware that we cannot express adequately in words our sense of loss at the passing of one who has served us and the community of Winchester so faithfully and well as Mr Cooper .
 "No man exemplified better the qualities of integrity, compassion, sincerity and dedication to teaching as a profession," says John Sutter . Sutter: No man exemplifies better than him .
 He served 51 s head of the history department of the high school for the last seven years . He has also served as head of history department for the past seven years.
 Last year he received the signal honor of being elected head of the New England Association of Social Studies Teachers .
 As a town meeting member for three terms he practiced democratic responsibi lity . "He never shrank from stating his opinion in the public forum," he said .
 The school administration never had a more loyal and helpful co worker. The school was never more than happy with the school administration. It's a sad time for the administration to let go of a loyal, helpful co-worker.
 Teaching has lost a great teach er, and we have lost a real friend, says the author . May the inspiration of his life strengthen us that we may carry on his work with the same integrity and dedication .
 He was bom July 1893, in Winchester and grew up in town, attending the Winchester schools and Winchester High School . He was born in July 1893 .
 As a young man he was a sales man for the Barta Press, then own ed by the late Louis Barta, former ly of Winchester . As a . young man, he was also a sales . man .
 Mr Donaghy was a 32nd degree Scottish Rite Mason . He was a life member of Aleppo Temple of the Shrine . He also was a member of William Parkman Lodge and a life
 He was also a member of the First Congregational Church and a former member of Winchester Post, 97, the American Legion, During World War I he served overseas .
 He leaves his wife, the former Bertie Taylor; a daughter, Joan, of Boston; a son, Arthur R Jr., of Sandy Hook, Conn., and two grandchildren, Paige Ellen, and Gretchen Taylor Donaghy, of Stoneham .
 Service were held Monday afternoon at the Eastman Funeral Home with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister attended the service . Lister's funeral was held at the funeral home .
 John Snook, Jr., of Reading, former pastor of Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, officiated the service .
 Mabel Premont died Friday, October 27, at the Holy Ghost Hospital in Cambridge after a long illness . She was the wife of Arthur Premont, of 21 Eaton Street .
 Premont was a lifelong resident of Winchester . Premont attended Winchester schools . He was particularly active in the affairs of the Sodality of St. Sodality of St. Mary's .
 She leaves her husband, two sons, Archie, of Malden, and Joseph, of Somerville; two grandchildren and two great-grandchildren . She leaves behind a brother, Omer LaForte, formerly of Winchester .
 The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the Costello-Moffett Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at St. Mary's Catholic Church in Dublin .
 He was born June 4, 1902, in Athol and for a time had a Ford sales and service agency in Winthrop . For a time, he was a Ford dealership .
 During World War I Mr Totman served four years in the U.S. Navy as a shipfitter . He served in the United States Navy during the war .
 Mrs. Amy Purslow Totman is survived by a son, Glenn R Totman of Billerica, six grandchildren; two brothers, Clarence D., of Irvington, N. Y., and Herbert L Totman, of Athol . Mrs. Totman also has six grandchildren
 Funeral services will be held Thursday afternoon at the Lane Funeral Home with Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister will also be remembered for his work in the field of medicine .
 Miss Helen Maria Twombly was a member of an old line Winchester family . She died October 29 at 93 Wildwood Street .
 Miss Twombly was the daughter of W’illiam A., and Malvina (Fuller) Twomly . She was born in 1926 .
 Her grandfather, Samuel Twombly, was a Selectman and prominent citizen of the town during his lifetime . Her grandfather was Selectman of the Town during his life .
 Miss IVombly was born March 15, 1879, in Winchester, and spent her entire life in the town . She attended Winchester schools and Winchester High School . She was born in 1879 and attended Winchester school .
 Miss Twombly was the last of her immediate family, her brother, William A Twomly, Jr., having died December 19, 1960 . She was last family member of her brother William Twomley Jr.
 After cremation burial burial will be in the family lot in Wildwood Ceme tery . After the funeral burial, the burial will take place in a family lot .
 Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club has relatively low top scores and relatively low scores . Unusually keen competition, relatively low score scores . As usual two secconsistently leads to unmaketions .
 Miss Catherine E Hargrove died Wednesday, October 25, in Wilmington . She was a native of Winchester and spent her early life in this town .
 Much of her adult life was spent in Woburn, she having been a resident of Wilmington for the past 14 years . She has lived in Wilmington for 14 years.
 Tickle-um Theatre Marionettes by Gordon Bennett of Sturbridge . The Fortnightly attended the show . The audience was filled .
 The second part of the program was a variety show featuring wellknown ‘Cartoon’ characters . Two monkeys on roller-skates proved especially popular .
 The proceeds will swell the Fortnightly Philanthropy Funds, which will be used largely for local charities this year . The funds will be spent on local charities .
 With eight tables, both sections working against an average of 63 match points . LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESCRIPTION .
 The high “batting averages’ ranged from .563 to .621 contrasted with last week’s high of .670 . The high "batting average" was last week's high of last week .
 As far as we can recall, no pair has ever reached .750 during our two years’ existence, although a few have come rather close to that figure . No pair have ever reached that figure in our history .
 Audrey Glavin and Ellen Scho field, 71, in the North-South field . Audrey and Ellen Glavin field .
 East-West Ted Atkinson and Gerry Barrett, 71% Mr and Mrs. Herbert Wood, 67 % James Byrne and Robert Has kell, 64% East-west Ted Atkinson .
 Darrell Roots, one of the few remaining weak no-trump and short-club openers, dominated the entire field . Dick Smith, 66% H Morgan and F Gove, 65% Gove .
 “Miggs’s” will accompany Darrell as far as Bermu da, where they expect to participate in some of the Bermuda Bridge Sectional events . On his coming trip to South America, "Miggs" will join Darrell .
 Darrell Root, 78% Ralph Atkinson and Fredna Perkins, 77 Richard Herlihy and Edward Sullivan, 75% Gertrude Cox and Jo Dingwell, 72 B Haigh and S Leven, 70 East-West Jean Roundey and Philippa Young, 74 Helen
 It therefore has become incumbent on the writer once more to dig up something of value .
 The weekly examination and correction of fifty or more ‘traveling scores’ is really quite revealing as to bidding and defense, as well as to the personalities involved . The weekly exam and correction is quite revealing .
 There also is the palliative effect of mentally reconstructing certain scores to determine how many points might have been gained on low boards with different or correct line of bidding, lead, play or defense .
 One group of players take in enough tricks for a game or slam, but fail to bid it . Those who bid the same hand to the hilt are invariably set . The most revealing of all is when one group of all players fail .
 The defense, in the latter case, for some reason or other seems to become inoculated, and tightens up considerably . The defense seems to be inoculated .
 An unusually large number of possible slam hands showed up in both sections of this week's traveling scores .
 The 27 hands have a sand-papering effect on the scoring, accounting for the low winning scores and small winning differentials . Representing over half the boards played, these hands have an impact on the scores .
 With this mass of pyrotechnics, it seems rather difficult for the nonparticipant to pick out a hand with a lesson or otherwise worth discussing .
 It is not often that miserable hands which, at rubber bridge would be only too quickly passed and discarded for the next deal, become of enough importance to determine the actual winners . Pass-Out or Open is open or open .
 This does decry the importance of every hand, but to realize that such rubbish as contained in Board 22 Section B could have any effect whatever on the ultimate standing is not generally appreciated .
 The writer and his partner recently were the victims of such a hand in another event . They ended up in third place instead of first for a swing of ten points on a board average .
 At one table West became the bidder at one no-trump making two for a top . West reached that bid with a third-hand 12 -point diamond opening and a one-over-one spade take-out .
 At the other two tables East arrived at three no-trump in spite of only 21 high-card points in the combined hands . East was pushed to sacrifice by interference bidding, down one .
 The effect of these three bids presented one NS pair with 3 match points, four others with % point, and penalized two others at 2 and 3 points respectively . The reverse was the case for East and West .
 Located in the strategic position, it is easy to see what the effect could be on the relative standing of the first four or even five top positions .
 West East 10 5 * K J 6 2 K 8 4 3 ¥ 6 - K J 10 9 2 ♦ Q 7 6 K J * A 10 5 2 Parkhurst Tea Mrs. Parkhurst tea .
 Warren D Wells, fourth grade teacher at Parkhurst School, on Friday, November 3, at 3:30m. Warren Wells will be remembered for his role in the Parkhurst community .
 This will be a social tea to have mother and teacher meet and become better acquainted . Mother and teacher will meet in a bid to get better acquainted. The tea will be held at the end of the evening .
 Gilbert Hood, 6 Everett Avenue COFFEE TEA Lights to have the Department of Public Works authorize regular traffic lights there . Gilbert Hood: 6 Everett Ave. Lights to be approved .
 For two days, the lights are to operate on a time standard, with certain times allowed for red and green lights . The lights will operate on the time standard for two days starting Wednesday .
 The lights will remain green on Cambridge Street except when a car approaching the intersection causes them to change to red for a passing . After these two days the lights will be on trip control, with the lights remaining green .
 Precinct 1, David Burke; Precinct 2, Philip Ives; . Precinct 3, Leroy and William Martin; . Leroy Martin;. Allan Simmons; . John Broughton; . Ralph Norton, Jr., Jr., and j Arthur Carr.
 Winchester had a very quiet ITalloweeh Tuesday with a minimum of complaints received by the police and no false alarms . Winchester police received no complaints from the public during the day .
 Boys were reported throwing pumpkins at a house on Wedgemere Avenue, and on Highland Avenue the police were called to disperse a group of boys who refused to move for a woman .
 apparatus called via police radio to put out burning leaves at Copley and Warren Streets . Ten minutes later apparatus was called to put them out . The leaves were put out by police .
 Mike Brink was a star lineman at Winchester High School . He is the son of Captain and Mrs. Brink . Captain Mike is a former star football lineman .
 Second Congregational Church Booths, Snack Bar, and a “New England Boiled Dinner’* at 6:30m. at 6.30m . Booths will be available at 6 p.m.
 Stamps Dk w ^ t a ,5 Finast Donuts — Cinnamon Extra Stamps p ^ of ‘Finast Cinnamon Buns’
 Only through educating ourselves on communism and how it operates can we hope successfully to defeat this insidious threat to our freedom .
 There is, we suppose, always the danger of misunderstanding by the pupils, or over-enthusiastic presentations of communism by teachers .
 An increasing number of organizations have been urging the public schools to include specific courses on communism in their curriculums . Inc. Inc., in its October issue, finds that in recent months an increasing number have been .
 The American Bar Association has passed a resolution asking the teaching of communism and demanding the “highest quality” of instruction . The resolution was passed by the American Bar .
 The American Legion has been working with the National Education Association to provide a model course for such a study in the public schools . The Legion says the study will be a model for the American Legion .
 President Kennedy had indicated his support of her and urged her to carry on . Peace Corps, no less a personage than President Kennedy, had indicated their support for her .
 Margery is of course the Smith College Magna Cum Laude . She aroused the resentment of Nigerian students and others in that country by certain statements she made .
 M e can of course forget the fact that it isn't cricket to read other people's mail . M ecan forget the . fact that cricket isn't a cricket to watch .
 The statements made by the young Peace Corps member were unfortunate, to say the least . The fact that they were written without thinking isn't really much of an excuse, it's not really an excuse .
 There surely is no less thoughtlessness now in these days of the atom bomb and deficit spending . The atom bomb is no longer thoughtless now, it's thoughtlessness .
 Let’s grant for the sake of argument that Margery should have known better . But aren’t the times and customs of today equally to blame with the thoughtlessness she admits?
 Statesmen and people in high places fail to think of how their remarks can sound to the other fellow . Nor are they only statesmen and . people in . high places who fail to . think of what their remarks will sound to other fellow. people .
 Bovs and girls of today freely discuss matters that their fathers and mothers would not have dreamed of talking over in mixed company . Girls of today can freely discuss issues that their parents and mothers wouldn't have thought of .
 In the case of Margery Michelmore, her freely expressed opinion of sanitary conditions in Nigeria got her into a mess and did not help the cause she was espousing . Michelmore's freely expressed opinions in the case got her in a mess .
 The whole business could not have happened years ago, because there were such things as amenities then, and gilds didn't write their hoy friends about going to the bathroom, on postcards or anywhere else .
 Miss Michelmore was as much the victim of the times she lives in as of her regrettable thoughtlessness . She was also as much as a victim of her thoughtlessness.
 Magna Cum Laude graduates of leading colleges should he be sufficiently intelligent to profit by their mistakes, he says .
 Margery's trip to the World Cup was a lesson in international tact . She was in the middle of the world for the first time .
 The Star learns that a movement is afoot to do something about the old Shore Road Athletic Field . The site has been an eyesore for some time now .
 Situated beside Skillings Bypass on the way into town it does not create a favorable impression to the passer by . Situated as it is beside the Skillings bypass .
 The proposal has been made that the field he transferred from the jurisdiction of the Park Department to the School Department to he used as a >itt* for junior high athletics and physical education . There is a real need for such a field .
 The increasing size of high school teams and physical education classes have made clearly apparent the lack of room for all wanted outdoor activity at Manchester Meld .
 This fall an attempt was made to use Shore Road for junior high school football activity . The attempt had to he abandoned because the field in its present condition is unsuitable .
 A complete resurfacing job must be done before it can safely be used as a playground or athletic field . The job is required before a playground can be safely used as an athletic field or playground .
 Shore Road was constructed during the days of the NR A on a site that had always been swampy . Shore Road is located in a swampy area on the north side of the road .
 Informed persons always felt that the construction plan was faulty and subsequent events have proven them right . The construction plan has been faulty, and it has been proved right by the construction .
 The field continued to settle after construction until at one time there was a slope of several feet uphill from the center of the football gridiron to the westerly goal line .
 The turf was always slippery and treacherous and the field was finally abandoned when rival schools refused to play there . The field was abandoned after rival schools refuse to play in the field .
 Since that time it has been idle though playground space has been badly needed by the School Department . The playground space is badly needed for the school .
 An investigation by those who should know reveal that the settling is over, and that drains, resurfacing and fencing should make it very suitable for playground use . It is going to cost some money to fix the field up .
 The Star has been told that it is planned to have an article in the warrant for the annual town meeting to transfer the land to the School Department and fix it up for the use of the junior high .
 The money at the market in question was being taken to the night depository of a hank . The money was taken to a night-depository of the money .
 escort docs not guarantee complete safety it docs act as a strong deterrent for those with anti-social ideas . escort escort is not a guarantee of complete safety, but it's a deterrent to those who want to take part in the escorts . escort escorts are an escort escort service that
 There is something about that stalwart man in blue coat and brass buttons walking beside the store man that gives the would-hc robber pause . The store man is a stalwart store man who has been a hero for decades .
 Police escorts are available for all store keepers who are going to the hank with sizeable deposits . The police escorts will be available for those going to hank .
 It is understandable that some business men hesitate to avail themselves of this service, hut they need no question of police feelings in the matter .
 Your little brush with a would-be holdup man may not turn out as well as that one last Fridav . It may not be the first time you've been held up by a man you've seen .
 Herbert K A Driscoll last week-end we commended him upon the interest that . the . hoys and girls ot his Immaculate C onception Parish are taking in the Parish Bugle and Drum C orps and drill teams .
 He agreed when we said the teenagers must give a lot of time and effort to practice and drilling with these crack organizations . But he took exceptions to our subsequent remark that their drum corps and drill team activity keeps the youngsters off the street .
 Me like to say that we are keeping our hoys and girls busy in their free time, giving them something constructive to do, rather than in preventing them from doing something, even though that something is not a good activity in which to engage . Me likes to say: "We are
 Psychologically this approach to the youth problem is much the better, even though both have the same end in view . Psychologically, this approach is much better than the approach to youth problem .
 Coming To Winchester MM ' ft jgfe. scribe, or plan to issue, separate materials on communism for use in the social studies curriculum .
 The approach also ranged from apparently well documented scholarly teaching to at least one example of ultra right wing instruction .
 The approach to the problem is from an objective investigation of the conflict between communism and free world ideology to the idea of social welfare measures as a part of the threat of communism . In other words the approach is to investigate the conflict of communism and the free world .
 Apparently the Times said nothing about a left wing approach to the teaching of the subject which at least ought to he as had as an approach from the right .
 In Massachusetts for the past nine years a special division of civic education has provided instruction concerning communism to undergraduates in teacher-training colleges .
 Louisiana is reported to have acted with the greatest enthusiasm in planning to introduce special materials on -the subject . North Carolina, Georgia, Virginia, New Mexico, South Dakota, Kansas, Minnesota, Utah and Iowa .
 Heidi {played by Mary Wadsworth i and goal IVter (played by Brian MacDonald} rehearse on a sunny hillside with live goats, will also appear on the stage of the W inrhester High School, Fridav . High School . Heidi and the goats will rehearse
 December 1st, against colorful Swiss mountain scenery painted by the children in the play . The children painted the colorful mountain scenery .
 The Community School Association is presenting this well-loved story, along with lively versions of “Robinson Crusoe” and “Midsummer Night's Dream” all three are produced by the Children’s Theatre School of Winchester .
 The emphasis in this study is focused on the weaknesses of the State Personnel system . The emphasis is on suggestions for strengthening it so that it will work more effectively .
 First, a review of all available literature on the history of the merit system was made . Interviews with specialists in public administration were also conducted .
 An examination of all known reports in the field of public personnel systems done since 1926 was made . Then an examination was made of the best known reports done by public personnel system .
 League members analyzed replies given by all State Departments, Agencies, and Institutions during a “Self-survey’s” conducted within the government in 1960 . League members also analyzed replies from all State departments, Ag agencies, and institutions .
 Information about personnel administration from other states was gathered . It was either because their problems were similar to those of Massachusetts or because of their existing personnel program .
 The Merit System organization and administration in Massachusetts was examined . Next, laws, rules, regulations and reports were examined .
 Interviews with people of varied backgrounds were conducted . Interviews included those with local officials, legislators, taxpayers, employee representatives and members of the League .
 From this great mass of informational chaos, the League began to build a book . From this mass of information chaos, it began to be a book. The League is now building a book about the book .
 The findings were then summarized, and recommendations for improving the Commonwealth’s Personnel Program were made .
 The section on “Recruitment for the Public Service” is of special interest to Winchester people . The local Civil Service Committee of the League did all of the research for this chapter in collection of material from other states .
 Eugene Rochow and Miss Grace Wills devoted countless hours to this part of the project . Eugene and Miss Wills dedicated countless hours of time to the project.
 This is about the sixth year of this kind of program at the High School . The program is about a sixth year at the high school .
 For many who are going right to work after High School here was a chance to assess their present plans in relation to the scope of total possibilities . For many of those going right into work after high school, the event was a good time to assess plans .
 To those who plan to go for one to even six or seven years of study, here are guidelines for their present and often changing thinking . To those planning to study for one or even six years, here were guidelines .
 For the sophomores, here for the first time was the working world staring them in the face right within the confines of their own High School . For the freshmen, it was the first experience for them . It was a first time for them to see the world of work within the
 This all-school assembly is the first of a series of career meetings sponsored by the Northeastern group which run through the year . The rest of the meetings will be on special fields of work and open to those interested in the specialty .
 Mr Darling did for them in a staccato yet very comprehensive way was to show them the whole job picture . Mr Darling's job picture was to be shown to the public in a comprehensive way, Mr Darling said .
 Speaking to those going on to :lo on ( Jctober 26, the 02 S School enrollment put their books, out of their minds and focused on a job for all of them — a job . Further education .
 The film he showed to the group was prepared by many local firms and local branches of national firms . The film was prepared for the group .
 It gave students rapid glimpses into the tremendous present-day job picture . It ran from insurance to store buying and decorating, general business and secretarial .
 Mr Darling reminded them that coming to the high school later in the year are special programs on the subjects of office work, electronic plant jobs, jobs with the federal government, nursing, engineering, teaching, medical technology, business administration, and beauty culture .
 The assembly was sponsored by the high school guidance department members, Miss M Constance Trickett, Bernard J Silva and John J Stevens .
 League booklet is unique in that it is the only comprehensive study of this kind made by an organization in Massachusetts . It is now available to the public on Massachusetts Personnel Administration, it is required reading .
 Storing H-bombs 1,000 times more powerful than the single A-bomb that destroyed Hiroshima, preparing continent-smashing missiles that cross vast oceans in 15 minutes, man appears able to protect himself against everything hut his own intelligence .
 His food, his bones, his very genetic substance have been poisoned and assaulted by radioactive fallout . His food and bones, he says, were poisoned by the fallout . He says, "His food, the bones, the very genetic . substance have ... been poisoned"
 On the brink of genocidal nuclear war, his will is imprisoned by a futile nuclear arms race . Increased “security” through more deadly weapons actually increases the horror and likelihood of war, he writes .
 Mr Cousins’ hook is nonetheless a gripping review of man’s insane modern war machine . If too long and quite labored, Mr Cousins' hook is still a gripping .
 Mr Cousins confronts us with the 20-megaton H-bomb, containing the explosive power of a mountain of T.N.T. four times the height of the Empire State Building . Mr Cousins .
 This bomb is capable of incinerating an area from Brooklyn to Bridgeport, Ct., killing all within its scorching radius, hurling human missiles and shards of glass for thousands of miles .
 Cousins writes, would seriously injure people even on the outer fringe of a 2,000-square-mile area . Cousins writes that such an attack would be a serious injury . Cousins: "It's not just a small town, it's a very dangerous place for people to live in
 An actual nuclear attack, however, would scarcely be limited to one 20-megaton bomb . An actual attack would be unlikely to have been limited to a single nuclear bomb .
 There is not enough manufactured oxygen for deep underground shelters, which, in any case, are not beyond reach of nuclear explosions .
 Existing shelters, equipped with air vents, would be turned into hot-air furnaces in a nuclear attack . Only one-third of attacking missiles need get by our anti-missile installations to annihilate us .
 Man faces a threat to survival not only from potential nuclear attacks, but also from other threats to survival . But man faces a bigger threat than a threat from potential attacks .
 Human life is imperilled by radioactive fallout from nuclear tests already suspended, says Cousins . Strontium 90, which retains 50% of its energy after 28 years, is still a threat to life .
 Cousins writes, now' now' contains detectable traces of leukemia-inducing genetically crippling radioactive Strontium in his bones . Cousins writes: 'Now' contains traces of cancer-strontium, which can cause leukemia, and 'now'
 Average diet of Americans will contain over 50 Strontium units, or 17 over the safe limit . By 1956, even with no further nuclear tests, the average diet will contain more than 50 units . Even if no more nuclear tests are carried out, Americans will still be eating over 50
 Cesium 137, also present in existing fallout, is assaulting human genes with gamma rays, and will result in malformations and stillbirths . The same issue will also affect human genes, and could lead to stillbirth .
 Cousins argues that the nation-state, as presently organized, can no longer protect our lives and freedom, but is in fact the prime source of the tensions and anarchy that threaten nuclear holocaust .
 Cousins writes that we as nations are powerless to defend ourselves unless we unite and submit to a higher authority than our own conflicting wishes . Like the frontiersmen of old, Cousins writes, we are powerless in the war of old .
 Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typngrahpiral errors in advertisements . Will publish without charge in the next issue, or republish that portion oi the advertisement which is incorrect .
 District Attorney Ted Kennedy reflects badly upon the judgment of Winchester’s administrators of public schools . Kennedy reflects on the judgment by Winchester's administrators .
 Misuse* of school assemblies for politi-| cal publicity may set a precedent to be repented at leisure . Misuse of school assembly for publicity could set precedent .
 "I do not believe be has a consuming or expert interest in Latin America or Winchester high school students," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I do believe he is conducting an unannounced campaign for higher public office. I do believe that he is doing this unannounced," she says .
 He is using a saturation technique of personal appearances where a smile and a handshake can mean votes . Mr Obama is using the saturation technique to win back votes .
 A national news magazine devoted a couple of columns to his hopping around . Minors traditionally receive special attention in this case .
 In view of recent news disclosures that must he piling up the public legal business at his office, I wonder how he finds time for these extra activities . The president's office has been accused of piling up public legal work at his .
 If school officers permit disguised politicking at high school assemblies with required student attendance, other candidates for election ought to have a chance to lecture on travel and adventure under similar arements .
 The assembly is a sign of Winchester educators’ personal endorsement or intimidation . Otherwise it seems fair to infer that this assembly is an endorsement of intimidation . Winchester educators' personal endorsement of or intimidation may be a concern .
 "We would like to express our sincere thanks to the Red Cross Blood Bank for coming to us in our hour of need"
 Winchester Lodge of Elks have made donations of blood to the Blood Bank . Winchester Lodge is affiliated with Winchester Elks, the members of which have made blood donations .
 "Once again, our sincere thanks to the Red Cross for their fast response and eagerness to help," says CNN.com.com .
 Herbert A Philbrick gave a speech at the High School auditorium on October 19 .
 The treatment which you gave the talk indicates that you are doing and will continue to do your part to insure that people do not just go away and casually forget what was revealed about the urgency of the situation which we face .
 All of us are tempted to feel that things cannot possibly be so bad as we are told they are . In this connection, it was indeed thought-provoking to hear Mr Philbrick mention issues which have been raised from time to time by organizations such as the House Un-American
 Philbrick says circumstances are indeed what groups like these have been saying they are . The group says circumstances in large measure confirm that circumstances are what they're saying .
 Carol Y McRae 20*1 Pond Street 1 not because they’re not welcome in the United Fund . Carol Y. McMcRae is a mother-of-two .
 Some day enough of us will support the United Fund generously enough, and refuse other appeals steadfastly enough, so that there will he only one appeal . The United Fund is running out of funds to raise money for the U.N.
 Seven per cent is th United Fund’s cost of collection and administration, a remarkably good record in comparison with other drives .
 Your conscience can clear regardless of your re sponse to other appeals . Do that, give generously to your church, and your conscience can he clear .
 Herbert E Bixler 31 Fells Road is located on the campus of the University of Baltimore . There are college ipecifie difference | a student within four or five I weeks; 2. students within four to five weeks of college; . 1. students in college within four
 Unitarian Bazaar Nov. and 16 The annual Unitarian Fair, thif year’s version being the “Storypreferred lists. I member; and ,n ■ addition, Unitarian members .
 When the United Fund solicitor is greeted thus at he door of an obviously prosper>us home he is saddened at the lack of understanding of what the United fund is .
 He knows it is not stinginess but lack of understanding that brings about the inedaquate response . Some people (fortunately now a minority) produce .
 The true widow’s mite, of which there are always many, is heartwarming and inspiring . The response of a generous and responsible person whose contribution increases an important sum of money, is inspiring .
 Strategy, skill and luck make this an exciting battle game for all ages . Use the use of strategy, placing sufficient fighting strength in the right place, at the right time, together with the element of skill, luck .
 On October 31, 1961, the Russians exploded yet another in their series of nuclear bomb tests . The tests were the first in a series of tests to take place in Moscow .
 The implications of this activity as they affect the future lives of our children stagger the imagination . It is not only possible that children will be affected by this type of activity .
 A primary grade "tea" was held solely for social purposes in Winchester . Yet on the same day at a school here in Winchester a primary grade “tea” was held for the social purposes .
 Instead of using the hour for a constructive meeting of parents and teachers for the purpose of improving the children’s home-school relationship, the precious time was wasted with small talk and refreshments .
 Reports of community-school organizations show little sense of urgency to improve schools . Perhaps this affair was an isolated case, but many of the reports of the various community schools appear in the Star show little .
 Winchester Community School Association should join the National Congress of Parents and Teachers in order to equip our children more effectively for their future in this uncertain world . I think that it’s high time the Winchester Community school Association joined the national Congress .
 St. Mary’s Mothers’ Club will be held Wednesday evening, November 8 . The club will meet at the end of November 8, at St.Mary's Mothers' Club .
 Don't forget the date, all the committees planning this big event have been most active . Don’t forget the dates, all committees planning the event are most active.
 The major award is a $200 lady's wardrobe, winner’s own choice for any season within the year . The winner's own choice is from Neal's of California .
 Penny tables, home made articles, toy tables, toy table for hildren and refreshments . Children's activities will be held at the event .
 The Parent-Faculty Advisory Council’s activities For the present , school year on the evening of Oc tober 25 in the senior high school auditorium . This and otner | admission stimulating comments .
 Knowles stressed that education is undergoing a revolution, propelled by the critical age in which we live and the increasing trend towards urbanization . Knowles: Education is becoming a revolution .
 Education is becoming a part of national defense . Urban institutions are cast in larger roles, particularly with the expansion of public colleges . Public colleges are becoming more important in national defense efforts .
 Urbanization has become so influential in educational trends that in ten to fifteen years community colleges in various urban areas will be created . Community colleges will satisfy the demand for higher education in these areas . Urbanization will be so influential that community colleges could be created in urban areas .
 Knowles’ belief that colleges will let the two-year colleges do the experimenting; with the fouryear colleges concentrating on junior-senior and first-year graduate work . Knowles: Colleges will expand to such a degree that they will let two year college students experiment .
 Big schools should concentrate on professional and graduate level, it was stated . Furthermore, it said that the big schools should focus on the professional level .
 Knowles also expressed a desire to have government-supported international universities in this country . Knowles said he wants government-backed universities in the country .
 Knowles referred to the Boston area as richly endowed with a great concentration of institutions of higher learning . Knowles refers to the area as "richly endowed" with institutions such as colleges .
 Even here, responsibility for success rests primarily with the individual student . Even if a student is successful, responsibility rests with the student .
 Mr Silva offset a number of rumors with facts and figures about Winchester High School . Mr Silva said the school is a 'great school' and a 'good school'
 Rumor number one maintains that school and college* admission is decreasing . Rumor: College* admission admissions are decreasing .
 71 f r r of the graduating class in 1955 went on to higher education, with 75 '7 for the class of 19(51.7) in 1955 .
 Mr Silva stated that it is rumored that a large percentage withdraws during the first year of college . Mr Silva said that it was rumored that many of the students withdraw .
 A third rumor claims that an increasing number of students in grades 9 to 12 transfer to private schools . The rumor also claims that students in grade 9-12 transfer from schools .
 Simple figures show that 5.8% of the class of 1953 left and 5.9% of 1949 class left . Simple figures .
 Mr Silva disclosed that presently there are no real prob lems with college admissions, since colleges judge students on idivid ual bases . He said there are currently no real problems with college admission .
 In fact, the class of 1961 was the best group with respect to college admissions . Class of 1961 had the highest percentage of college admissions in history .
 Seventy-five percent continued their education — 50% of them in a four-year college . The majority of those students continued their studies .
 Erieson, chairman of the ParentFaculty Advisory (’ouncil) suggested that the audience divide into two groups to meet with Miss M Constance Trickett and Mr Silva .
 A group question and answer period closed the evening’s activities with parents anticipating future meetings in which to discuss important school matters .
 This week's picture is of the old Winchester High School on Church Street, known during its final years as the Prince School . This week’s picture is part of the Star's "Remember When" series of photos .
 This building stood opposite Rangeley on Church Street at School Street, School Street . School yard extended through to Dix Street, with a small grove of trees at the rear .
 The town had a high school from its incorporation in 1850 . The actual high school rooms were on the upper floor of a large center school on Church Street opposite the Common .
 Children from primary schools old enough to go to grammar school went to this building . Children from the primary schools  went to the building . The building was built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In 1865 it became necessary to have better and more commodious quarters for the high school . The plot of land described above was purchased next to the then James Converse house .
 The old building stood well above the street and was reached by a flight of granite steps at the southerly end of the lot on Church Street .
 The buliding served as a high school for nearly forty years, or until the present McCall Junior High School was built for the high school . The current McCall junior high school is now McCall High School .
 The Prince School was used as a sixth grade building for children from all over town . The name of the school was changed to the Prince School after Frederick O Prince, a prominent old time citizen and school committeeman .
 The old Prince School was abandoned as a school building after 1922-24 . It continued to house the office of the Superintendent of Schools for a time .
 Eventually it was torn down and its site is now occupied by the homes of Dr. and Mrs. Mrs. of the Dr. Dr. George and Dr. Geraldine . Eventually the site of the building was demolished .
 On making | Thursday, November 16, the hours are from 10:00m. to 5:00 m.m. on November 16 .
 Don't fail to fail to bid in the silent auction held at the Art Gallery . Paintings and other ‘ohjets d’art’ made by some of our own famous craftsmen .
 Bouldin G Burbank will be glad to show you both used and new clothing . All in excel lent condition and some in latest styles .
 For decorations and flowers, vis it “House and Garden” in the Michel son Room . For decorations, vis . it ‘House and . Garden’ in the ‘Michel son Room’ for decorations .
 At "The Work Box" you will find household items and an especially fine assortment of hand-made ap rons, always in demand . The Work Box is a great place to pick up your favorite items .
 Ralph D Larson hopes you will not fail to find ‘Ye Okie Curiosity Shoppe’ The White Elephant table was known as the more prosaic White Elephant .
 A good place to find that unusual gift you may be seeking is the Christmas table, where Mrs. Mrs. Smith sits on the table .
 The fair will be open at 2:00m. Wednesday morning . The opening of the fair is scheduled for 2:30m. on Wednesday .
 Robert H Gregory will prepare a Workers’ Lunch, which will undoubtedly be most welcome . The Workers' Lunch will be served by Robert Gregory .
 After the close of World War 1, November 11 was celebrated for some time as Armistice Day, to observe the end of hostilities and the hope of establishing a permanent peace . The Commonwealth of Massachusetts by His Excellency John A. Volpe Governor .
 The Declaration of the Declaration of Independence was published on October 6 .
 Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov8-tf .
 Spurious h rep laced living room, dining room, modem kitehen wtih breakfast area, lavatory and lavatory . Panelled breezeway on first floor .
 Euch apartment lias a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area . The apartment has two bedrooms and one bathroom, plus two bathrooms .
 Ruth C PORTER CO., Realtors 38 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1 SI 0 Gertrude It.
 Florence M Salyer, PA 9-3355 Florence M.Salyer was born in Winchester, Pennsylvania, in 1966 . Florence was born into the town of Winchers, Pennsylvania .
 Several new homes in choice locations neuring completion . Several new houses are being built in choice areas .
 Three chambers, 2Vz ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage . Two car garage, two-car garage .
 Three bedrooms, IV 2 ceramic-tile baths, lovely family dining room, good living room with fireplace .
 Garrison Colonial in woodsy section with 2 Mi baths, three bedrooms, den, screened porch, two-car garage . Brand-New Garrison Colonial has three bedrooms and three bathrooms .
 Seldom available but always in demand English brick Colonial Colonial Colonial . English brick colonial Colonial Colonial.
 Sailing, swimming or skating at edge of property; close to Country Club, Boat Club and transportation . Close to country club, boat club and transportation. Close to the property .
 Large fireplaeed living room, heated sun room, built-in kitchen, two large bedrooms with room for more, lMi tile baths, two-car attached garage, dressing cubicles and shower in basement .
 Exclusive Brokers BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 24 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 A TRULY FINE FINE COLONIAL .
 Some of the features are a first-floor den, step-down living room, modern kitchen, four master bedrooms and 2 Mi baths . Four master bedrooms, four bedrooms and two baths .
 Garrison Colonial as modern as tomorrow and completely equipped for easy living . Eight-Room Garrison Colonial Colonial .
 Five bedrooms or four, or four and a den, 2 Mi ceramic-tile buths, punelled gume room with fireplace and two-cur garage .
 Guaranty Fund Surplus Other Reserves $263,417.46 160.718.06 131.775.07 . $ 564,910.59 $6,752,207.31 .
 Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street To Aid With Dance Newsy Paragraphs . Ralph R Macaulay, Vacuum Cleaner Sales and Service. Stanley E Neill Elizabeth A Kehoe Anne G Shaw .
 John J Griffin elected vice-president of the Freshman Class at Boston College, Chestnut Hill .
 The police made a total of 24 ambulance trips during the month of October . Most of the trips were for private calls, police say .
 John F Hogan, Jr., of 38 Salem Street and Emily H Marks of 32 Foxcroft Road have been drawn by the selectmen to serve as traverse jurors, commencing December 4 . Between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf
 Nancy C.uciirtillo, Carolyn Marchesi: Beverly Robbins, Jean Ann Titilah; Carol Gilbcrcrto. director. Beverly Robbins; Beverly Robbins: "I'm a great writer"
 Paul Wilson Sullivan, assistant editor of the Star, has been ill at his home for the past two weeks . Sullivan is expected to return to his desk on Monday . Sullivan has been sick at home for two weeks and has not returned to work .
 Any one who may have a copy and has no further use for it will confer a real favor if he will leave it at the Star Office . The book will be returned to the star office .
 Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000.tf Mr and Mrs. Fitzgerald . For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel . Co. Fitzgerald fuel Co. Phone Fitzgerald . Fitzgerald Fuel Company .
 Ralph CL Norton of Middlebury, Vt., spent the weekend in Winchester with their son, Ralph G Norton, Jr., of Holton Street and his family . The Norton family was in Winchester, Vermont, to celebrate Ralph's birthday .
 They came down from Vermont for the II arvard-I)artmouth football game . They came from Vermont to watch the game .
 Officer John Farrell of the Police Department has been at the Winchester Hospital following an accident in which he was involved ast week . He is reported to be getting along satisfactorily .
 We will deliver. fe2-tf. fe3-tf . fe22-TF .
 Marion L McNevin of 6 Garden Street, Woburn, was in collision on Main Street at Canal Street with a Ford driven by Arthur Raby of Marcel inc, Saskatchewan, Canada . Marion McNevin was driving on Main St at Canal St, Wobshire .
 McNevin told the police she was parked facing south and was pulling out into the traveled way when the collision took place . McNevin said she was pulled out of the travel way when she was hit .
 Three new tiers of bleacher seats have been built in front of the east stand on Manchester Field at midfield for the use of the Winchester football players . Winchester players will be using the new seats at Manchester Field .
 This will obviate the danger of players tripping over the old sideline benches . It will not interfere with the view of the fans in the stands . This will not obstruct the view from the fans who are watching the game .
 Police Athletic League Recreation committee will sponsor a dance to help the Muscular Dystrophy fund . The dance will be held at the end of the month . The event is a fundraiser for the Police Athletic . League .
 The Winchester High School dance will be held on November 3, 1961 . The Winchester dance will take place in the Winchester High school Gymnasium .
 The wasting and resulting becomes more and more apparent in the patient and confines him to the wheelchair and eventually to his bed . Over a period of years the wasting becomes more . apparent in a patient's life .
 All proceeds from the dance will be donated to the Muscular Dystrophy Fund .
 Contributions that were given on October 9 will be used for the many patients who are sent to summer camp from two to five weeks . It is the only opportunity they have to leave the confines of their homes .
 George Denham will disc-jockey the dance . Free records will be given to the lucky winners .
 Firelighter Herbert O’Donnell struck two cars in the middle of the night . O'Donnell was struck by two cars on Tuesday night . Firefighters say he's not worried about his safety .
 Firelighter O'Donnell was hospitalized as the result of the Lynch Junior High Notes . Thanks to Mr and Mrs. O’Donnell, O‘Donnell was able to stay in the hospital .
 Rolland Robison and his helpers had a wonderful time at the square dance last Thursday . Rolland and their helpers, all those who attended the dance had a great time. Rolland
 Mr Meurling was in top form in the classroom . Even teachers showed they could shine in more than classroom subjects .
 A reminder to all parents that open house will be held Wednesday, November 8, at 7:30m. Open house is scheduled for November 8th at 7pm .
 Come and meet the teachers, see the new building, and find out how well you’d score with the new curriculum . Visit the new junior high building .
 Voluntary dues of 50c per family will be received at the time; and refreshments will be served in the cafetorium following the evening program .
 Governor Volpe Governor John A Volpe will be keynote speaker at the 96th annual Ladies* Night dinner program of the Boston Baptist Social Union on Monday, November 6 .
 The president of the Union, Lewis Foster of Lloyd Street, will act as toastmaster and will introduce the Governor .
 Joseph E O’Donnell, pastor of the First Baptist Church, will be among the head table guests . The event will be held in New Jersey .
 Firefighter O’Donnell was on the way to the Winchester Hospital to pick up his wife, who had been a patient at the hospital and had been discharged . The left front tire of his Dodge sedan blew out while he was headed north on Highland Avenue .
 The blowout caused the car to swerve sharply through the southbound lane and leave the road, striking a tree . The car was struck by a tree in front of the residence of William J Canniff at 85 Highland Avenue .
 Firefighter O’Donnell pinned in the wreckage, which was on fire when police arrived . The car was completely demolished and the car was demolished . Firefighters were pinned to the wreckage .
 Desk Officer John H Boyle had been notified of the accident at headquarters . He radioed Officers Robert Baird and David Boyle in a patrol car .
 Officer Mario Buzzotta, in the department’s ranch wagon, hastens to the scene of the accident . Officer Buzzotta rode in the station's ranch wagon .
 Officers Baird and Boyle radioed for the fire department rescue truck and the police ambulance . Both made quick trips to the scene of the crash . Police say the crash was caused by a single-vehicle crash .
 Officers Baird and Boyle extricated Firefighter O’Donnell from the car . He was removed in the ambulance to the Winchester Hospital, where he was treated by Dr. Dr. David O'Donnell .
 He sustained severe face lacerations and X-rays disclosed a possible lacerated liver . The victim sustained severe facial injuries and sustained a possible liver injury .
 Fire Chief James E Callahan hastened to the hospital as soon as news of the accident reached him . Fire Chief Callahan was on duty at the time of the crash .
 The Fire Department is instituting a new static pressure test for all fire hydrants in town . The test will be conducted by the Fire Department of Fire Department .
 This is an entirely new test and should not he confused with the old flow test or flushing of hydrants . This is a new test . This should not be confused with old flow tests or flushes of hyrants . The test is a completely new type of test .
 The purpose of the test is to get the various hydrant pressures to make sure that the hydrants are delivering sufficient water for the pumping that may be necessary . The test is designed to make the necessary pumping of water necessary .
 A representative of the Water Department will accompany firefighters on testing trips so that if any defects are found they can be remedied immediately .
 A total of 2700 postmasters from all over this country, Hawaii, and Alaska, were in attendance . Postmasters from Hawaii, Alaska, and Hawaii also attended .
 Mr A Robert Tonon of 53 Lawson Road was recently re-elected to the Board of Directors of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts for a three year term . Mr A
 Winchester Hitfh School will he held at 7:45m. November 2, Open House . Winchester hitfh school will open house November 2 .
 November 3, Friday, 7 :30m.m., Family Nifrht Film Program, Rich Room of the Public Library . Film program will be held at the Rich Room .
 Saturday: Children’s Film Program, Rich Room of the Public Library . Saturday.: 15.15m. Saturday.:15m., Children's Film Program. Saturday: 15m.
 Winchester Jnycees Meeting, Winchester Red Cross House, 7 :30 m.m. November D, Thursday, Thursday . Winchester Jnnycee meeting will be held in Winchester, Winchester . Winchester meeting will take place at 7:30 a.m., November D .
 November 1ft, Friday, and Saturday November 11, No Library Film Program . November 1 ft, Friday and Saturday, Nov 11, November 11 .
 Gr«>esinger of the Animal Rescue League will talk on her experiences placing pets by radio . She will talk about her experience placing pets on the radio .
 Parish Players present English mystery, “A Murder Has Been Arranged” in Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church . November 16, 17, 18, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Saturday .
 Friendship Guild of the First Congregational Church will meet at 8m. in Chidley Hall . Tuesday, Tuesday, November 28, Tuesday .
 Troop 9. extend cordial invitations to the mothers of all the girls to attend . Troop members, friends *nd the girls of Troop. 9 .
 John McHugh to conduct the investigation . McHugh is working on several possible leads . He has been assigned to investigate the case .
 The proprietor of the store was a victim of hold-up men at his home . Back in 1957 the proprietor was a store owner who was held up at home by hold-ups .
 He and members of the family were tied to chairs and the store receipts which he had taken to his home were stolen . He and his family had been taken to the home and the receipts were stolen from him .
 A daughter and a son were born last Saturday night at Winchester Hospital . Paul Mahoney announced the births at the Winchester Hospital, Winchester .
 They were rushed to the Winchester Hospital and had their babies within ten minutes of each other, occupying the same room and having the same obstetrician, I)r.
 Paul Edwin LaJoie Jr. announces the birth of their first child; a daughter, Pamela Jean . Pamela Jean was born October 11, 1961 at the Winchester Hospital .
 C ONION THINS Monday l uesday and Wednesday Speeial, Noveinbe itive Chicken Breasts ilive Chicken Legs . PLEASE SEND ME A ONEY YEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR ADDRESS .
 Civil Defense Directors and Building Inspectors today invited to join members of Boards of Selectmen, City Councillors and Mayors at an afternoon Civil Defense conference to be held at the John Hancock Hall in Boston .
 Massachusetts Senators Leverett Saltonstall and Ben A Smith in cooperation with Governor John A Volpe and Massachusetts Civil Defense Director John J Maginnis . The bill was passed by the Massachusetts legislature .
 Congress appropriated $201) millions, but we have a duty to make sure they are spent wisely . Congress has a duty of making sure the money is spent wisely, says Sen. Tom Coburn .
 Martha Bond is a sophomore at BaldwinWallace College in Berea, Ohio . She has recently been pledged to Zeta Tau Alpha sorority . She is a junior at Baldwin Wallace College .
 Perkins Rond, is congratulated on being coinmfssioned ensign in the Naval Reserve by Capt. Aiblison J Becker of It (Aiblison of It)
 Tiring ceremonies held September 29 at the Naval SeTiool of Pre-Flight, Naval Air Station, Pensacola, Florida .
 The commissioning ceremonies’ came after Ensign Becker successfully completed the 16-week pre-flight course . Becker completed the course in 16 weeks .
 He will next move to another base in Pensacola complex for training leading to the gold wings of a naval aviator .
 Massachusetts Civil Defense Agency to protect the public against uninformed or unscrupulous shelter dealers will be intensified in a series of educational meetings throughout the commonwealth next month .
 The meetings will be open to town and city assessors and building inspectors, architects, engineers, builders and others in the shelter business .
 The nature of the radiation threat, methods of coping with it and the basic standards for shelters will be outlined by Civil Defense specialists . Civil Defense experts will discuss the nature of radiation threat and how to cope with it . The radiation threat will be discussed at the start of the week .
 The Massachusetts Civil Defense Agency is meeting with shelter builders in Massachusetts . John J Maginnis said he believed most builders in the shelter business were anxious to give their customers full dollar value in protection .
 The nearest locally scheduled meeting is at Newton on November 6 at 9:30m. and 1:30 m. at War Memorial Building, Commonwealth Avenue, and Walnut Street .
 The Committee's first formal meeting of the Fall season will be held during the week of November 5 .
 It was originally planned for Wednesday, November 8 but, due to the intangibles of the hostess’ business commitments, the week is set . Secretary John Hogan will notify the members of a definite date for the meeting .
 It has been planned for some time that the hostess for the November meeting would be Mrs. Barbara Bush . The November meeting will be held in New York City .
 Dan Gaynors' spacious playroom where we have already enjoyed such warm hospitality, we will first conduct a business meeting . In the spacious play room, we'll first conduct an informal business meeting.
 Small sub-committees, composed of four members each, will report on the work they have done in all districts of the Town during the vacation months . Then we will hear from the small sub-comittee, made up of just four members, about their constructive meetings .
 The December and January j meetings, will also be house meeti ings, the hostesses who have al| ready offered their homes to be announced later .
 HS&M tailoring every model in classic natural lines that stay in style . 'HS&M plans it that way,' says designer .
 The 18-school Middlesex Cross Country League Championship is held at the Hood Country Club in Melrose, Melrose . Last year’s meet was at the same club as last year's meet .
 Favored Beverly came through for the second straight year by winning the varsity race with the low score of 4*1 points . Beverly was the team that won the race . Beverly's win was the second consecutive varsity win for Beverly .
 Bill Norris of Beverly A fra in was individual winner of the race followed closely by teammate Tom Page . Tom Page of Beverly, California, won the race for teammate Bill Norris . Bill Norris won the individual race .
 Winchester moved four men in under twenty, with Steve Dee going all out for the Sachems . Steve Dee came in 18th, coming in under 20s, with Winchester moving four men .
 Three other Winchester runners all came within ten seconds of Steve; Frank Johnson 16th; Jack Scherban 18th; and Dean Anderson 19th . Dean Anderson came 19th in the same time .
 Winchester finished 3rd in the JV race . Winchester came in 3rd . Winchester also came 3rd with their varsity counterparts . Winchester won the race .
 Beverly placed two of their men first and second, and had a team total of 22 points . Beverly again showed the individual and team strength by placing two first and two second . Beverly also placed two men first, second and third in the team .
 Neil Kirkpatrick ran in the top 10 throughout the whole race and was able to hold his position by coming in 9th in his best race of the season . Kirkpatrick came into 9th place in the race .
 The other scorers for the JV were Richard Amoroso 22nd, Gerry Hills 24th, Don McClellan 29th; and Joey Ruma 34th . The other JV scorers were Gerry Hills, Don McIlroy and Don McCallan .
 The girls inter-mural sports pro| gram at the McCall Junior High j School is being conducted by the newly-formed Girls’ Sports Association .
 The officers for this year are president, Virginia Williams; vice president, Nancy Petri; secretary, Judy Carucci; and treasurer, Christine Richardson . Virginia Williams is the president of the Women's League of Nations .
 The fall sports program features field hockey for grades eight and nine and soccer for grade seven . Field hockey for grade eight and ninth grade seven will be offered in the fall .
 The varsity team for grade nine includes Barbra Morton, Irene Lynch, Sally Mullare, Nancy Long, Barbara Bund, Ginny Williams, Gail Bairstow, Sharon McCuddin, Lynn Cochran, Sue Porter, Carla Hutzenlaub, Lynn Keppler
 Already in full swing is a junior high school bowling league consisting of fifteen teams . The bowling league will be held at 15 different schools .
 Currently holding the highest string averages are Lori Bradlee, Nancy Clark, and Caroline Root . Nancy Root holds the most string averages .
 Leading the cheering section at the football games are Mary Ford, Katie Coakley, Nancy Petri, Debbie Nelson, Linda Colliander, Sally Hoyt, Karen Horley, and Jane Lynch . Leading a cheering section is Mary Ford .
 The girls are currently working on forming a Pep Squad for the game on November 10th, versus the new Lynch Junior High School . The game will be held at Lynch Jr. High School in New Jersey .
 Jane Lynch, an eighth grader, is currently serving on the Jan Jordan Fashion Council . Jane Lynch is a junior high school group sponsored by the Jordan Marsh Company .
 McCall Junior High School ninth graders attended Merestead Field Hockey and Lacrosse Camp in Camden, Maine . The camp is a field hockey and lacrosse camp .
 The girls spent a week being instructed by the top American and British players and coaches . They spent the week being taught by the best U.S. and British coaches .
 In the group were Lynn Keppler, Charlotte Dennett, Judy Carucci, Sally Mullare, Barbra Morton, and Sue Porter . The group was organized by Carol Dennett and Carol Denny .
 I ferb \\ ood. vice president of tin* Ha he Huih ! .eagiie, presents championship trophy, presented championship trophy to team sponsor .
 Tom Ford, Ed Cutting, Ed Walsh, Tom Walsh, Joe Curran, Ron Frikson, Kevin W iggin. Tom Gustin. Tom Ford. Ed Cutting . Ed Cutting. Tom Walsh. Tom Curran. Tom Cutting. Ed Walsh. Mr Walsh .
 Picture snapped at graduation and award exercises Tuesday night, October 24, at George Washington School . George Washington graduations were held Tuesday night .
 Babe Ruth League Mothers’ Committee at refreshment tabl. at graduation and award exercises October 24 at Washington School.
 Conches Don MacElwee, Bill Sipp, and Ed Gravalese are work ing hard with the team to ready them for Sunday’s opener at Needham . Winchester at Woburn Conches don’t expect to be the first game of the season
 The YW is offering a unique ski package program . The package includes four ski conditioning classes, two dry skiing lessons and two outdoor lessons .
 Two indoor dry skiing lessons will cover the selection, cost and care of equipment, technique, and study of ski areas and where to ski at home and abroad .
 Can he be taken at any time during the 1961-1962 ski season . Can be taken during the 1960-62 skiing season .
 Mr Jenni operates this ski area, and either he or one of his instructors will give outdoor lessons . He or an instructor will give these outdoor lessons.
 For additional information, call the Boston YWCA at KEnmore 67940 before it snows .
 Dahli Hi is the theme of this year’s gala dinner dance sponsored by the Tufts Medical Faculty Wives . Dahli hi is a theme of the gala dance held at Tufts University .
 At 6:30 on November 4 members and their distinguished husbands will gather for this annual affair . The annual affair will be held in honor of members of Congress .
 In the past this group has contributed furnishings and equipment for the use of the medi1 students . The group also contributes furnishings to the school .
 Send $1.50 for iTCH-AID Now — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc., Inc., Labs Fifth Ave., Brookfield, Conn. Don’t Put Ofl* —Send $1 .50 for iReport.com: Do you know a
 Babe Ruth League held its Annual Awards Night at the George Washington School on Tuesday . It was the league's first Awards Night .
 Coach Henry Knowlton showed films of the Lexington and Melrose football games, which the l>oys found most interesting .
 Cubs were the league champions this year . Awards were then presented to the Cubs, who were crowned champions .
 Jack Marascia, John Cus sen, Davis Blanchard, Steve Ka jander, Eddie Cutting, Kevin Col lins. Kevin Collins. Jack Marasia. Steve Ka-Jander . Jack Cussen . Jack Marasmia . John Marasc
 Tommy Ford, Dick Rowe, Jeff Peckham, Kevin Wiggin, Joe Cur ran, Charlie Tarbell, and Ron Erik son. Tommy Ford was a member of the band .
 Vice president Herb Wood and player’s agent Charlie Walsh pro seated the awards . The awards were presented at a private ceremony in New Jersey .
 The Carl Morton Memorial Trophy is awarded to the league champion . Lester Gustin, the Gustin Corporation as team sponsor, is also a sponsor of the Carl Morton Trophy .
 The 15-year-old boys who were graduating from the league were then presented with their trophies . The boys were presented with the trophies .
 Winchester Harriers hung up their fourth straight win of the season by defeating Haverhill 1-7 . Phi Sachem Harriers won the match in 43rd straight game .
 Haverhill had one of their top three runners of last year, George Skafas, returning but, he proved to be no serious threat . The Sachems took the first three places and six out the first eight .
 Jack Scherban, Steve Dee, Dean Anderson and Dean Anderson all ran excellently . Although Jack and Dean ran out of the running, they all ran well .
 Scherban turned in the fastest time in two years by running the course in 17m.s. again . Scherban completed the race in a time of 17ms.
 Harrington led a string of Winchester runners, McClellan, Keane, and Amoroso over the finish line . The First Fifteen Finishers; 1. and Roger The First 15 Finishers .
 Sullivan also presented to Mr Ben Wild, treasurer, a substantial check from funds raised by the mothers of hoys in the leugue . Sullivan presented the check to the treasurer, treasurer and treasurer of the hoys at the school .
 Pa perm ate, Sheaffer’s, Parker, Esterbrook, and Scripto pens and fillers available at the Sitar office, 3 Church Street .
 Winchester Harriers suffered their second set-back of the season as Waltham team nipped the Red and Black 27 28 . Winchester Harrier suffered second set back of season as a *fired-up"" team nip the Red . and Black Harriers .
 Winchester went into this meet with four straight victories against one defeat while Waltham was undefeated . Winchester was undefeated in four straight matches . Winchester had one of four straight wins against one loss . Winchester won the meet by one defeat .
 The meet was split up into two heats, varsity first and then junior varsity . The meet is split into two heat heats, with each heat taking on two teams .
 Sixteen runners lined up for what was to be the fastest and most exciting race of the season . Race was the start of the fastest race of all season .
 Waltham posed a serious threat when they took over the first three positions early in the race . Four Winchester runners followed close behind with four Winchester runners following close behind . Winchester runners were also close to the top three positions .
 Steve Dee took over the first position with an excellent half-time of 8m. Winchester looked set to win the match .
 The speed of the race started to make itself felt on the local team . Two of the Waltham boys forged ahead and went on to win 75 yards ahead of the nearest Winchester man .
 Winchester had next three runners, Frank Johnson, Steve Dee, and Jack Scherban in 3rd, 4th, and 5th . Winchester had the next three runner-up spots, with Frank Johnson and Steve Dee in third and 4th .
 Belmont High eleven comes to Manchester Field to keep a Middlesex League en~ j gagement with the Sachems . Winchester has another busy afternoon in store for its football j forces Saturday .
 Coaches generally rate Belmont as tough this year, despite its I record of three wins and three losses . Belmont has a record of 3 wins and 3 losses . Coaches say Belmont is tough, but Belmont doesn't have a bad record .
 The Red and Blue absorbed its worst heating of the season from Melrose, losing to the Raiders . The Raiders beat the Raiders in the first round of the 2014 season .
 Winchester’s rugged course proved to be too much for the Waltham JV . The Red and Black won their sixth straight by a score of 23 32 . Winchester JV won the match by 23 32 at Winchester .
 Kevin Kiley ran his best race of the season as he took the top honors with a time of 18m.s. Kiley's time was the fastest of all season's time of the year .
 Winchester Harriers end their dual-meet season with a win over Wakefield . The Harriers defeated the Wakefield team on Friday, October 20 . Winchester won the season finale by defeating the team at Winchester .
 This meet was very important to both clubs as it would decide second place in the Pilgrim Division . This meet would decide the fate of second place . Both clubs were playing for the first time this season .
 Approximately fifty runners left the starting line in what was to prove to prove the fastest race on the home course in five years . Approximately 50 runners from the start line in the race .
 Steve Dee broke away from the group and was closely followed by Martino of Wakefield and Bucko Johnson of the locals . Steve Dee was the only person to break away from Steve Dee's group .
 Passing the half way mark Winchester had one, two, and it looked as though there were going to be some outstanding times for the 2.2 mile course . Winchester was one of the first to reach the halfway point of the race .
 Steve and Bucko battled for first position all through the second half with Martino holding a close third . Martino was a close second place in the table with Steve in third place .
 Winchester’s Jack Scherban and Dean Anderson held the fourth and fifth positions . Phil Gallagher and Dave Bird finished the scoring for Phil Gallagher .
 Bucko won out over Steve* covering the course in the excellent time of 16m.s., 16 seconds off the course record set by Ken Brown in 1956 . Bucko beat Steve* by 16 seconds .
 Steve was only two seconds behind Bucko, coming in with the time of 16m.s. His time was only 16 seconds slower than Bucko's .
 This was one of the fastest local times on the course since 1956, the year Winchester won the New England 1.1.5m race . Winchester had won the race in 1956, when they won New England's New England title .
 Winchester is the stronger than Winchester, both offensively and defensively, according to the video . Winchester is a strong contender for the title . Winchester will be the first team to win a state championship in a state tournament .
 Winchester averages slightly better than 25 points a game against the teams Winchester and Belmont have met in common . Belmont’s average is 17.5 points per game . Winchester averages 17.9 points per match against Belmont, while Belmont averages 17 .
 Both teams have shown a good scoring potential, but their defense has not been too stout . Both sides have shown potential, however, with plenty of potential to score .
 Saturday's game looms as another of those closely contested affairs with the breaks likely to enter largely into the final decision . Saturday’s game is likely to be another closely contested affair .
 Winchester’s chances will be improved if Tom Mooney, first string center, and Jim Menucci, reserve lineman, are able to play . Winchester's chances will improve if Mooney and Menucci can play in the game .
 Mooney and Menucci are strong defensive players for Reading . There were plenty of times against Melrose and Reading when a stouter defense could have helped them win .
 Alabama, California, Notre Dame and Navy in that order occupy the first four places in the standing's's .
 A week ago Alabama was fourth, California second, Notre Dame first and Navy fifth . Notre Dame was first in the rankings .
 Frank Gangi has been replaced by Hob Fiore in the individual high three department . Gangi replaced in favour of Fiore by Fiore after Gangi's departure from the club .
 Tony Saraco has been replaced by Bob Fiore in the individual high singles singles . Bob has replaced Saraco in the high singles team . Tony Fiore replaces Saraco as the head coach at Wimbledon .
 Alabama vs. California, Notre Dame vs. Georgetown, Harvard vs. Navy vs. Harvard . Alabama vs California is Alabama's most important match .
 Alabama 17 7 10.149, California 17 7.059 Notre Dame 17 7 . 9,017 Navy 17 7 9,906 Harvard 16 8 9,900 Maryland 14 10 9,691 Yale 12 12 9,751 Penn 12 12 . Army 9 15 9,857 Holy
 As a whole, the night was a drop from the pace that has been set in the past weeks . The night was the first time in six months that the pace had been set .
 Vin Balestricr of Reading can't quite reach pass from John Colliander to Rich Rowe . Reading-Winchester football game, Lennis Timpone is the other Sachem . Reading beat Winchester 24-24 at Reading on Saturday night .
 Gelatin 34 22 9,854 K of C 33 23 9,391 Post Office 30 26 9,683 Bro.-in-Law 1 29 27 9,346 49’ers 24 32 9,695 St. Louis-area residents are the largest in the country .
 LADIES’, MEN’S, CHILDREN’s — $5.95 to $35.00 NEW-TYPE STEEL POLES — $12.95 SKIS FOR EVERYONE, 4ft. to 6ft., 9in. to
 Muriel Crosby, assistant school superintendent in Delaware; Betty Lou Pagel, co-ordinator of elementary grades in Cheyenne, Wyoming . Louise Lackemann, school prin cipal in Denver, Colorado, also on the list .
 Captain Mike Bellino swept over from the six yard line to score the equalizer after a last ditch passes had set up the tally . Sachems’ cause looked all hut hopeless when a clipping with only minutes remaining in the final period forced them on .
 Other elieor leaders an lift to right, Pat Sexton, Dobbv Price and Debbv Nichols . Other leaders were given a lift by the crowd .
 Samuel Reid’s lovely home i Second High on Salisbury Street was the setting j Frank Brennan for the fourth annual banquet of the Roaring Twenties Bowling Club .
 Members of the team who attended the dinner were Adele Ack erman, Mary Brennan, Ann Cum mins, Ann Dean, Betty Farley, Maxine Glynn Mary Keith, Betty Kirk, Dorothy MacDonald, Trudy Mainberger, Marion Manoli, Dolly Pasquale
 Bridgewater Slate College . Playing For Bridgewater . Playing for Bridgewater . Bridgewater .
 iucliester High is home at 2o > Washington Street, and is a up h on lore at Bridgewater . A series of penalty set set them hack to kick away the ball . Hob i.i. high is a former university football team .
 Reading had a 12-6 lead at the time and the Rockets were sniflfing victory as Gerade ran back Bellino’s punt to his 36 . Gerade, a workhorse all afternoon, was as good a back as Winchester has faced .
 Reading forced a fumble on the first play from scrimmage with the Rockets recovering back on their 24 . The Sachems, however, refused to be counted out, and forced a Reading fumble .
 Gerade was brought down for a five yard loss on the Reading 19, and kicked immediately . Gerade kicked immediately, his hurried boot going outside at the Reading 33 . On the next play Gerade had a five-yard loss, kicking immediately .
 Colliander took to the air at once, hitting Donlon at the 24, and then Benincasa for a first down at the 17 . The game was the first of its kind for the first time in a series of drives .
 A pass completed to Bellino actually lost yardage hack to the 20, and another pretty toss down field was dropped by the receiver . Bellino's pass was actually a pretty toss that actually lost yards .
 Colliander again dropped back and this time hit Timpone who was finally downed on the Reading six . Facing third down and 13 long yards to go, he dropped back again and again dropped down .
 Captain Bellino swept right for the score, going over standing up standing up . With the Winchester stands in an uproar, the Winchester stand-in stands in uproar .
 Bellino on a repeat of his scoring play, Bellino might have made it . A successful conversion would have given Winchester the game the game . Bellino ran for the goal line marker .
 He lost his footing and was stopped short yard from pay dirt . Instead he attempted to cut in lost footing and stopped short of pay dirt in the first place .
 The game was in doubt all the way after the first quarter when Reading looked good to knock the Sachems completely off the field . The game ended in a 1-0 victory for Reading .
 Gerade busted through for six, then took a flat pass from Meehan out to the left, driving straight down field to the Win Chester 39 . Gerade ran for six-yards, then drove straight down to the win Chester 39. Gerade scored six points .
 Meehan again went to the air hitting Ken De Cicco at the 16, the Reading end going into the end zone for the easy touchdown . The Reading end went in for an easy touchdown with a touchdown .
 Winchester couldn't go anywhere after the kickoff, and Bellino got off a beautiful kick of 50 yards . Bellino kicked the ball outside at the Reading 12 . Winchester couldn’t go anywhere, and the ball went to the outside .
 The Sachems forced Reading to kick, but once again the local boys couldn’t mount an offense . Reading was forced to kick .
 Facing fourth and seven situation the Sachems tried a fake kick and a fullback trap up the middle . It was the first time they had used a trap in the middle of the field .
 Reading staged a steady march, sparked by a 12-yard pass from Meehan to De Cicco . Reading won the game 1-0 thanks to a 12 yard pass from the defender .
 Nowell saves a possible score when he dropped De Cicco at the Winchester 35 . Nowell saved a potential score by dropping the ball at Winchester 35. Nowell: "I'm not a golfer who doesn't want to drop a shot"
 Gerade drove through to the 26 for a first down and Newell reached the 17 . Newell made it to the 17 and Gerade made it through for a touchdown . Gerade then drove through for the first down .
 A long pass intended for Gerade in the end zone fell incomplete . Gerade was stopped by Benincasa at the 13, and a long pass failed to fall incomplete .
 Sachem stopped Meehan on a quarterback sneak and Winchester took over at its nine . Wheeler reached the nine off tackle, but with fourth and two the Sachem front wall stopped the quarterback sneak . Winchester took the lead at the end of the clock .
 Rowe picked up good yardage, but Winchester was called for illegal procedure . The ball went back to the four, and the ball was eventually returned to the field . Rowe was called off for an illegal procedure on the field, but it was ruled out .
 Bellino in two tries reached the 14 and then hoisted another fine boot up the field with Benincasa dropping the Reading receiver on the Reading 20 . Bellino scored two tries for Reading .
 Johnson ran the ball back to the Winchester 22, as the first quarter ended . Bel lino’s hurried boot traveled only to the 40, and Johnson ran it back . The first quarter of the game ended with a touchdown .
 Joe Dattilo came up with the pigskin at the Sachem’s 15. Swift picked up seven, but here the Rockets fumbled . The Sachem's 15.5-6 win over the Rockets ended in a fumble-filled game .
 Winchester picked up four in three tries, and Bellino was forced to punt . Benincasa dropped Gerade at the Reading 45, with Winchester scoring four tries .
 Bill Branley picked off Meehan’s toss at midfield and got all the way to the Reading 15 . Gerade picked up four and then, with a six point lead, the Rockets went to the air .
 Colliander sneaked for four yards to the 11, and Bellino on sweep left was knocked outside it the eight . Bellino was knocked out of the eight on a sweep left, and Colliandander made it four yards .
 Reading were penalized half the distance to their goal-line, the ball being placed clown at the four for a first down . Reading was called for a personal foul and was penalized for a second down .
 Benincasa picked up a yard and then Bellino swept right for the equalizing touchdown . Bellino scored the equalizer for the first-half quarterfinal score .
 He tried a sweep again for the extra points, but was stopped short of pay dirt . He tried to sweep again again for an extra point .
 Gerade ran the kickoff back to the Reading 41 from the 19, and then swept to a first down at the Winchester 30 . The Reading quarterback also ran a first-down from the 21-yard line .
 A 15-yard holding penalty stalled the Rockets and on fourth down Gerade was stopped at the 31 and Winchester took over . Winchester had a 15 yard holding penalty and a fourth down stop Gerade stopped at 31 .
 Here Bellino got around the corWinchester 0 6 0 6—12 Reading »; o 0 6 — 12 Touchdowns; .
 Bellino kicked 40 yards to the Reading 21 . Benincasa and Colliander were dropped for losses and Bellino had to kick, his boot traveling 40 yards .
 Benincasa made a fine driving run back 20 yards to the Reading 46 as the half ended . A clip on the play put the ball hack on the 10, and forced Gerade to kick .
 Winchester worked the hall from its 30 to the Reading 26, an 1 1 pass from Colliander to Rowe kept the drive alive . Winchester came out after the half to win the match .
 Colliander was hit and jarred loose from the ball on what looked like a pass attempt, Reading taking over at the 30. Another pass was squarely muffed by the receiver deep in Reading territory, for a break .
 Swift gets through for a first down at the 42. Gerade picked up four and Swift got through for the first down . Gerade picks up four, Swift picked up another first down for the 42nd down. Swift got the ball back on the field .
 Gerade made another first down at the Winchester 47 . Gerade and Johnson reached midfield and Johnson made it to midfield .
 Swift advanced to the Winchester 44, and here the Rockets were fortunate to recover a fumble back on the 47, but it was a fumble that led to a fumble in the end of the first half . Swift advanced from the 44 to the 44, but the Rockets advanced to a score of
 A forward lateral reached the Winchester 35, Johnson bucked to the 32 and Gerade to the 29. Johnson buckled to the . 29. Gerade was the first to reach the Winchester . Winchester 35 .
 Cootey, in two tries reached the 22, and here Winchester was penalized for a personal foul, the ball being placed at the seven yard line . Winchester was awarded a penalty for a tackle on the line-in-action after a tackle by Winchester .
 Gerade from the quarter back slot rolled out to the right and went over standing up, the Winchester defense again being caught out of position . The Sachems piled up a buck for no gain, but on the next play Gerade went over for a touchdown .
 Reading elected to have Gerade sweep left for extra two points . Reading captain was hit hard at the goal line by Erskine, being knocked outside short of the line . The Reading side won 2-1 at Reading on Saturday night .
 Winchester had the better of the going during the remainder of the game, though a 15 yard penalty for clipping on a pretty Bellino runback of a Gerade punt didn’t help . Winchester was penalized for clipping a runback on a Bellino punt .
 Winchester had one last chance when Bellino intercepted a lofty Meehan pass at the Winchester 30 . After the Sachems scored they had one final chance to get back on the scoreline .
 Mike had to wait for the ball and was caught from behind at the 36, before he could get going . The final whistle blew after the next play .
 Reading completed five of 11 passes for 64 yards, with 39 of those yards coming on the first touchdown play . Reading completed a total of 11 of his 11 passes, including five passes .
 Winchester — Le, Donlon; It, It, Nowell, Whittaker; lg, McNeill, Chane; c, Nibh>ck. Winchester — Winchester . Winchester — . Le, It,. Nowell; It; Nowell . Nowell: Now
 Eleanor Shaughnessy is one of the assisting teachers in the Team Teaching Group in the 4th, 5th and 6th grades at the Parkhurst School this year . She says she hopes to continue to be a teacher at Parkhurst .
 Before her marriage she taught in Rockland and at the Garfield Junior High School in Revere .
 She and her husband, Joseph, also from Point of Pines, live in Melrose . They have two sons, Joel, a senior at Melrose High School; and Dana, an eighth grader in the Lincoln School . She and Joseph, who incidentally comes from Point Pines
 Shaughnessy does volunteer work in the coffee shop of the Melrose Hospital in Melrose .
 Winchester’s Opponents Belmont, 12; Concord, 6 Wakefield, 6; St. Francis, 6, Wakefield and St. James, 6 . Winchester's opponents Belmont and Concord have won 12 games .
 Rosamond Wells is one of the assisting teachers in the Team Teaching Group in the 4th, 5th and 6th grades at the Parkhurst School .
 Wells' first teaching post, though she practice taught at Parkhurst last year . Wells first teaching job, though it was her first time teaching post .
 Two years ago she returned to college and received her Bachelor of Science in Education from Tufts . She returned to Tufts two years ago and is now a graduate of Tufts University .
 They have two daughters, Judy and Debbie, in the eighth grade of Lynch Junior High School; and Debbie in the fifth grade of the Wyman School . They also have Judy in eighth grade; Debbie in fifth grade at Wyman school .
 Wells still finds time for her Girl Scout work, but has had to sacrifice a lot of other activities . Wells still manages to be a Girl Scout . Wells says she has to sacrifice her other activities to keep her busy .
 Hand-Made Florentine Leather Desk Appoint men l and Memo Pad . Shop Early for a CHRISTMAS GIFT for MOTHER or DAD .
 Mae Serieka, David Saliba and John Hogan must go a large measure of the success of the evening . Mae Seriella, David Serieka and David Salba are among the stars of the night at the event .
 Sue Winn, assisted by Betty Hill, Mary Doherty and Lilian Roy, engineered a smoothworking combination of cars and passengers . Sue Winn and Betty Hill helped create a smooth working combination of vehicles and passengers.
 Kevin White is a young and able official in charge of that important department of our State government . Kevin White has been described as a "young and able"
 His talk was non-partisan (not by design, of course) but set up that way because of the nature of the subject which was “Improving the Quality of State Government.”
 The Secretary’s hearers most interested was hisreport of the ‘Committee of Eight’ which he appointed soon after he took of fice .
 Secretary White explained in incisive, legal terminology the law on such matters as it now stands and some of the solutions which have been suggested for correcting abuses of the law .
 STOP FOR THE DAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION SERVICE on all CHRYSLER BUILT CARS . ROCKFORD MOTORS, Inc. Inc. offers a stop-for-the-day service service .
 The two members of the General Court who were present contributed questions . The answers to the questions served to further explain the important subject under discussion .
 Lexington Democratic Town Committee invited those in attendance to present at the next of the four meetings in this series at Muzzey .
 Friendship Guild of the First Congregational Church, will meet on Tuesday evening, November 28, at 8m. in Chidley Hall . The Friendship Guild will meet at 8:30 a.m.
 The girls will have an actual Court of Awards, a fire lighting ceremony, a display table and will serve the refreshments . The event will be held in honor of the girls .
 Many of us have daughters already in scouting and many have daughters to enter in the very near future . Many of these girls are already in scouts .
 The Friendship Guild also would like to extend invitations to the mothers of all the girls to attend wih us, as well as members and friends . The friendship Guild also wants to invite mothers and friends to attend .
 On October 24, a tea wan held for teacher and parents of children in the kindergarten class at Noonan School auditorium .
 Miss Minetta Jurgenson, school principal; Mrs. Baugher, kindergarten teacher; Miss Min Minettetta . Miss Minettina Jurgenenson, principal, and Mrs. Jurgensenski, principal; .
 John F Collins, president of Noonan School Chapter of Community Schools of Winchester, and Mrs. Mrs. John F. Collins are pictured at the school .
 Baugher prepared a delightful program by playing a tape recording of each child’s voice singing his favorite song or reciting a poem .
 Miss Minnetta Jurgenson and Mrs. Bird, adorned an attractive table at the table at which Miss Minnie Jurgen and Mrs Bird, were seated .
 Only a few of the many available pieces are illustrated . Include To Visit Parents Ann Davies Nicholson (Mrs. Davies Nicholson)
 Tomas G., Ill., will arrive from her home in Washington, D.C., early next week to visit her parents, Mr and Mrs. Tomas G. Tomas . Tomas G.'s parents will be at their home next week . Tomas will be visiting his parents in Washington .
 William W Davies III, 11 Sanborn Street, will attend the Opening Night performance of the Vassal* Centennial Opera, “Command Performance,” on November 17th at Kresge Auditorium in Cambridge .
 Mr Nicholson will join the family in time for the Thanksgiving holiday .
 Phychologist Views Teen Ayers . In this are only about a dozen people who is and every one of them is in their wav did Dr. Ayers.
 Palubinskas kept an overflow crowd which included Police Chief Derro and four members of the school guidance department hanging on her words . She described with rare wit, perception and much sound information a remarkably graphic picture of many of the things we deal with when trying to understand and plan for
 The meeting was planned by the Mental Health Association to stimulate interest in recreation planning for local teen agers . The meeting will be held in conjunction with the event held in the U.S. state of the year .
 Community planning is a form of community planning in the UK . It aims to highlight some of the pitfalls to keep in mind where community planning is concerned .
 "If we step in with a perfect program they will not like it too well because we’re doing the thing hardest to revolt against. And in the same way “if we stepped in with . a perfect . program they . will not be happy with it,”
 She exhorted parents to try and find the mean between not intruding on the teenagers but being reliably there when needed . She said parents should try to find the best way of dealing with teenagers .
 Musical Moods was presented in the high school auditorium by the Winchester Junior Circle of Florence Crittenton . The Winchester J.Cittenton Junior Circle presented the musical in October .
 Richard T Preston, Ways tnd Means chairman, welcomed the audience and introduced the opening act, which was the Four Rascals Barbershop Quartet . Richard Preston was the chairman of the Ways andnd Means .
 The Four Rascals are the top barbershop quartet in New England . They were honored with the award last Friday .
 They then demonstrated how harmony was created in barbershop singing by adding each additional voice until true harmony is attained . They then demonstrate how harmony is created by starting with the lead man .
 They then presented several orig i n a n a 1 numbers, accompanying themselves instrumentally . The group then played instruments .
 Theodore von Rosenvinge, president of the Winchester Junior Circle, drew the lucky number for the door prize . The lucky number was the number of a door prize drawn .
 Mr Gerald O’Neil of 2 Alden Lane won an expenses paid ‘Evening for Two’ at the Terrace Room of the Hotel Statler Hilton . Gerald O'Neil was delighted to win an expenses-paid evening for two at the hotel .
 Show Toppers are a group of six highly talented young singers . They have won great acclaim at the Statler Terrace Room during the last three years .
 They presented Vignettes of Broadway, accompanied by the music of Ruby Newman . Ruby Newman.
 The Show Toppers presented a highly polished performance of a calibre seldom enjoyed in Winchester . Ruby Newman and Lee Daniels are a welltrained, talented group under the guidance .
 Tunes from "My Fair Lady, "Pajama Game," "Sound of Music" and many other Broadway hit shows were sung with skill and obvious enjoyment .
 The Show Toppers have been tabbed “the best in Boston,” and by the audience’s reaction, they certainly lived up to this high praise last Friday evening .
 Proceeds will benefit the Florence Crittenton Home . Teenagers who want adult will reject it from a parent hut accept the same thing from someone less personally involved .
 She suggested that community planners lean heavily for advice from those who handle this age every day — the schools . Community planners should lean heavily on schools, she said .
 Palubinskas answered questions such as what is a normally rebellious child, and what do you do if you do need special help . Palubinsas: What is a normal rebellious child? And what are you doing if you need special assistance?
 In speaking about non-conforming children she asked the group to examine the reasons a child is nonconforming and let many of them stay that way .
 On the subject of consulting a psychiatrist on a small problem, she quickly dispelled the worry she believes some to have that they’ll be put immediately into five years of analysis . She said she doesn’t want to be put into five-year analysis .
 James B Willing, opened the meeting by reminding the group of the short history of the four-year-old organization . The purpose of the organization is to improve community understanding of mental health . The meeting was adjourned in March .
 She spoke of the Children’s Clinic in Lexington, which is co-sponsored by Winchester as a branch of the Mystic Valley Mental Health Association . Winchester is a branch .
 She equated mental well being with emotional well being or happiness, something we all would like to have . Mental well being equated to emotional well-being or happiness .
 Coffee was enjoyed before the speaker by the more than fifty interested people in attendance . The speaker was greeted by more than 50 interested people .
 Shih of the Chinese Christian Church of New England will speak Sunday morning at 9:15 at the Chapel Service of the Senior Forum at the First Congregational Church .
 Shih’s subject “This Is A Friendly World” will reflect his findings on a recently completed round the world trip . Shih visited East Berlin, Israel, Formosa, Bangkok, Singapore, Manilla, Hongkong and Japan .
 Shih visited many Chinese congregations, especially those served by former students of his . Shih had opportunity to see first hand many factors bearing on world tensions .
 Shih adopted an 11-year-old Chinese boy, a refugee from Communist China . The boy is now a part of the Shih household in Boston’s Chinatown .
 Joan McClennan and Natalie Palmer will be the chaplains for the service . Joan McClenna and Natalie Palmer will be the Chaplains . The service will be held at 9 p.m. ET .
 Forumites are urged to complete their work projects and bring in their earnings by this week end if possible . Linda Carter and Jane Hood, cochairmen for the Work Day for Christ, have requested that all Forumites complete their . work projects . The Forumites will be asked to complete
 The committee of mothers who served the October Forum supper consisted of Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The committee served the dinner at the Forum in October .
 2 Pairs for $5.95.95 Colors — Cinnalnrk and White Sd&t'DtnoU 3 WINCHESTER TERRACE PA 9-1191 Hadassali Membership Tea .
 Chapter of Hadassah, recently opened the first meeting of the year, by thanking Mrs. Mrs. Hadasah . Chapter of hadassah .
 Herbert Land of Reading was gracious to host the Membership Tea at her home . The tea was held at the home of Herbert Land .
 This marks the 50th Anniversary Golden Jubilee Year of Service for Hadassah . This marks 50 years of service for the organisation .
 Albert Steigmann of Win Chester gave a warm and inspiring talk on Hadassah’s outstanding humanitarian service in healing, teaching and rescue .
 Alfred Haaxma of Wakefield, life membership chairman, honored the many new life members . Life membership chairman honored the members of the society .
 Joseph Leavitt of Wakefield, on behalf of all the members of the members, spoke of Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth, who died in hospital last week .
 Robert Friedmann’s many untiring efforts and presented her with a lovely gift . Friedmann was presented with the gift of Mrs Friedmann .
 Hadassahs Hospital’s new quarters officially opened June 6, 1961 . Mr Leonard Gelfand of Stoneham, kindly showed a film, “Fifty Miracle Minutes”
 Republican Town Committee meets at the town hall in Brookfield, Connecticut .
 Former member of the local Republican Town Committee spoke of increased interest by the government and public in Civil Defense .
 She showed illustrations of typical family fallout shelters which might he built . She also showed illustrations .
 She explained what “fallout” and “radioactivity” actually is and how we can protect ourselves from them . She also explained what "fallout" and "radioactivity" are and how to protect yourself .
 Among the many items of business discussed was the possibility of having George Lodge, for mer Undersecretary of Labor, speak to the group .
 The banquet program for the organization is scheduled for Friday, November 17, at 6:30m. in the Sheraton-Gibson Hotel, Cincinnati .
 Elected to the Army’s Advisory Panel on the Reserve Officers Training Corps this year . Elected for the panel on the reserve officers training corps .
 Knowles is also on the National Advisory Council of the National Society of Scabbard and Blade . Knowles: "I'm a great writer. I love the art of artistry and design."
 Knowles has under his supervision a Department of Military Science that directs the training and education of students enrolled in the largest voluntary Army R.O.T.C. unit on a single campus in the country . Knowles' department is responsible for the training, education of those enrolled in
 Area residents are among students representing 14 states and five foreign countries enrolled in the largest class in the 50 year history of Wentworth Institute . H Russell Beatty, Wentworth president, made announcement today .
 Enrollment increased 1 1 per cent to 2000 students in the two year industrial and engineering technology programs . President Beatty said students increased to 2000 in two years .
 Among the eleven Winchester students enrolled at Wentworth, three are preparing for careers in Mechanical Engineering Technology . Three of the eleven students are preparing to be Mechanical Engineers .
 The Winchester Police Relief Association has announced that a seven-act professional bill this popular day evening, high school commencing H Elliott is has been booked for . Party, to be held Tuei I November 7, at the I memorial auditorium .
 Ruby Newman’s Orchestra will perform . Proceeds will go to help swell the Pojlico relief fund treasury . Ruby Newman's Orchestra will play at the concert .
 Anden’s Performing Poodles recently featured with the Liberace Show Pat Theriault, Wizard of the Banjo Paul Winik & Edna Mae, Delightful Dancers General Grant, Modem Deception ist Vicki Taylor ami her boy friend
 A cordial invitation is extended to all adults in Girl Scouting in Winchester to attend a combined Fall Council and open Board Meeting, at the Girl Scout Cabin on Monday evening at 7:30m.
 The Program Committee will meet at the Girl Scout Cabin on Tuesday, November 7 at 9:30 a.m. The program Committee w ill meet with the Girl Scouts on Tuesday .
 Ilsons has been a proud and reputable Winchester firm for over 30 years . Know the reputation of your upholsterer .
 Call Now For Completion Before The Holidays 10 Park Street PArkview 9-1566 oct2fi-2t I THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2 .
 Westbrook Junior College is the first residential junior college in the country to offer the dental hy giene curriculum . The college is also the first to offer a dental hygene curriculum in America .
 Arlington Mission, Arlington Mission 3-8770 Open Evenings 7 9 P M. M. analt-tf .
 Today’s need for spiritual discernment will be emphasized Sunday nt Christian Science church services . Christian Science is a Christian Science denomination .
 Scriptural readings in the Lesson-Sermon entitled ""Adam and Fallen Man"" will include lh«*se words of St. St. John of the Word of God and St. Paul .
 Rev. H. HESTER UNITARIAN ( III RCH Mystic Valley I’arkway and Main Street PA rk view 9-0949 Rev. W. Hester Unitarian .
 Metcalf Union meets nt Hv church to go to a Federation meeting ii Melrose. ill Sunday, November 5. 11:00m.
 Fall Meeting of the Woburn Association at the First Congregational Church in Malden . Meeting will take place at 5:00 a.m.
 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats . CASHMERE SWEATERS with MINK COLLARS and LINED s 47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED into a CAPE, STOLE or CAP
 Nursery through 5th Grade Nursery to 5th grade . Reception of New Members ; extended session Nursery . 5:15m. 5:30m. Nursery and 5th graders .
 Monduy, November 6. 7:00m. Phone or come in W indicator 36 Church Street PAikview 9-3000 mar2-tf .
 Woburn Association of Churches will meet at First Congregational Church in Malden . Meeting will be held at the church in the town .
 The Welcome Wagon Hostess is the welcome WIll Knock on our Door witli Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social Welfare Leaders . No Cost or Obligation .
 Rev. Carlton Helgerson, Pastor of the EPIPHANY, is a Baptist Evangelistic Evangelistic Non Denominational Pastor . He is also a Non-denominational Baptist .
 The Senior Youth Fellowship at the home of MIbh Judy Durfee, 48 Cabot Street . The senior youth fellowship is based at her home . MIbh is a member of the MIbh community .
 1962 “calendar towels” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 Susan Stockwell, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Stockwell. Nites to 9 P.M. M. Nite to 9 p.m. ET .
 Miss Stockwell, a sophomore Spanish major, is a member of Pi Beta Phi sorority . She is a sophomore at the University of Alabama .
 School People Getting Around Candy Stripers . Parkhurst Teaching Team School . School . Getting around candy stripers .
 The teachers are enthusiast about the new system despite the extra work it entails . Teachers are also enthusiastic about the changes to the system .
 Graham, not a regular member of the team, gives service to it in her science program . Graham is not only a regular part of the science program but also a member of it . Graham: "I'm not afraid of it. I love it. It's a dream job"
 Mr Sutula studied the system in Lexington this summer . He keeps close touch with its present development at Parkhurst .
 Robert B Anderson is an educational revolutionary who thoroughly enjoys assailing the status quo in teaching, turning present school conditions upside down and then dealing constructively with the effects of his agitation . Anderson advocates team teaching in Gingery Parkhurst .
 His humorous but gingery talk was heard by a nearly full auditorium . Parents from all over town and some school administrators from other towns joined him .
 Anderson is the rector of the Teaching Team Project at the Franklin School in Lexington . Anderson is also on the faculty of the Harvard Educational School .
 Winchester resident says he chose Winchester to live in because of its fine schools for which he is willing to pay even more taxes . Little League associate says Winchester is a great place to live because of the fine schools .
 He quickly dispelled, however, any idea that this link with his audience would qualify the presentation of his views on education .
 Anderson tells of experiences shared with three of them and Mr Sutula at first Harvard Summer School Team Teaching program at Lexington this summer .
 He described it as a strenuous and at times even sanguine program which only the fittest teachers survived . He strongly believes in the value of the challenge, change and exchange involved when teachers are collectively planning and carrying out a program .
 Franklin School in Lexington, Kentucky, is the nation's first real pilot project in Team Teaching . Franklin School is the four-year-old Franklin School .
 This despite the fact that no statistics there yet show a claim of real advantage to the system . No statistics yet show any real advantage in the system, says the BBC .
 A team of teachers is given the responsibility to work jointly for the instruction of a group of students whom they group by ability rather than age . In contrast to this contained classroom concept, a teacher may retire and create a separate, insulated regime .
 Numerically the grouping of the 1 children may be done in many ways, and done differently for every subject ar far as scheduling permits . The grouping of 1 children is done in a variety of ways .
 The teacher among them whose ability is greatest in a | given subject takes the lead in directing the planning for this course . The other teachers support .
 This makes for most effective use of both talenu and time for both students and teachers — as well as for a great deal of planning for the latter . It also makes for the best use of time for teachers, students and parents .
 In the conventional school a poor teacher can conceal an inadequate performance and an excellent teacher cover up or habituate what may be a blind spot . But in a more flexible way they illuminate each other’s performances as well as the material which they are presenting .
 The constant curriculum evaluation which is highlighted by this process is one of the best potentials of the system, according to Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 Anderson believes it is also one of the greatest needs in American education today . Anderson: It's also a great need in America's education today. Anderson: "It is also a good thing to learn"
 In question period he said he felt social studies, mathematics and language arts all to need a new look . In general, he said much more might be done with creative work with beginning learners .
 As a system this kind of reorganization also offers a natural hierarchy of teacher assignment which would take into account ability variation . As a result, the reorganization of teacher assignments would also offer a new hierarchy of teachers .
 Teaching Assistant Program offers the perfect adjunct for the kind of teaching assistant Program which exists in Winchester . In the top or team leader level it certainly demands a higher remuneration and then on learning or assisting levels .
 Anderson recognizes that it is a live controversy in the educational world and cautions a very slow and careful approach to it . Anderson: "It's a live issue in the world and it's very important to be careful and careful"
 Winchester has taken this step at Parkhurst, but admits that if adopted on the elementary level it raises further questions on the secondary levels . Winchester admits he is proud that he has taken the step but also admits it raises questions about secondary level levels .
 Harry V Ciilson, superintendent, noted that the schools would move into this system only as fast as the various factors allow .
 Lynch Junior High School has been designed to be able to accommodate Teum Teaching if desired . He also invited the public to take note that the new Lynch junior high school is designed to accommodate the Teum teaching program .
 John Reed, president of the Parkhurst Parents, said good eve ning to an audience which buzzed with comment for a considerable time before it was ready to break up .
 Women’s Alliance of Winchester Unitarian Society will hold its second meeting on November 7th .
 Mr Geoffrey Harwood will speak after the business meeting at 10:00 a.m. GMT .
 Geoffrey Harwood has been gathering and analyzing the news on radio and television for some 20 years . He has collected and analyzed the news for more than two decades .
 Muchtraveled, he has interviewed famous people of our time and has written two novels and numerous stories . He has interviewed celebrities and written numerous articles .
 Mr Harwood is a fluent and provocative lecturer, who does far more than summarize . He does more than simply summarize, he says .
 He has 20 years of experience in assessing the news, on what today’s current events mean to us, and how they will shape our history . His mind is richly inquiring, and he has vigorous opinions, based on 20 years’ experience . He also has vigorous
 After the talk, luncheon will be served in Metcalf Hall by a committee of Mrs. Mrs. Edmonds . Lunch will take place at 12:30m.
 At Swampscott also Principal W Howard Niblock of the High School took an active part recently at the 144th meeting of the New England Association of School Superintendents .
 Winchester's program of acceleration is one of the oldest in the state . Winchester’s program is a state-of-the-artuated program . Winchester's acceleration program is the oldest of the state's in operation .
 Winchester teachers attending the Middlesex County Teachers Convention on Friday at the Metropolitan Theatre, Boston, found it the best program yet to be presented . Miss Sybil Daniels, president of the Winchester Teachers Club, reported that Winchester's teachers attended the .
 Chet Huntley speaks on the role of the educator in world affairs . Among others they heard Chet' Huntley speak on’’s role as an educator .
 There was a constant background of low African music and the meeting was held in the same building with three of the special exhibits put on for that week .
 Winchester group, the largest teachers delegation present, found it one of the very few day long conferences they were sorry to have come to an end it was so good . School of Fine and Applied Arts Building Building .
 Library Film Program at the Library this Friday and Saturday will appeal to animal lovers young I and old . The film program will be held at the library in the spring .
 Beaver Valley, a Walt | Disney production, shows birds, animals and fish in their native I habitat in the region of a beaver j pond . Beaver Valley is a Disney production . The production is based in Beaver Valley .
 Those who may have viewed this on TV will appreciate the color photography . This is the first time we've seen color photography in the U.S.
 A Night in a Pet Shop tells a story of what happens when the pet shop owner goes home and an enterprising monkey discovers how to unlatch his cage . The film is based on the story of a monkey in a pet shop in London .
 Trinity College will interview high and preparatory school seniors interested in liberal arts college . Admissions director will be in Greater Boston area Monday and Tuesday to interview students .
 Trinity College, a men's college of about.00 undergraduates founded in 1823, offers degrees in liberal arts and science . Trinity College is a men’s college of . about . 00 undergraduates .
 George L Tisdale of 15 Jefferson Road is currently attending Trinity College from Winchester . He is currently studying at Trinity College . George is a member of the Winchester-based Trinity College, Winchester .
 Some of the 66 “Candy Striper**’s who were awarded certificates at Friends of Winchester Hospital fall meeting .
 George Marks, president of the Friends, presided at the business meeting . He particularly welcomed the junior volunteers, to whom this meeting was dedicated .
 A series of slides, mostly Don’ts for hospital volunteers, was shown by Mrs. Johnson . The slides were shown by the hospital volunteer .
 Harry P Hood, Jr., Jr., program chairman, with an amusing commentary by the vice chairman of volunteers, Mrs. Mrs. Barbara Hood . Mrs. Hood is a member of the volunteer board .
 Harold Pyne, chairman of the Children’s Hour, gave a most interesting account of the duties of her volunteers . He mentioned the need for books, games, and toys for all age children .
 The highlight of the meeting was the salute to junior volunteers, or candy stripers as they are called, because of their red and white pinafores . Junior volunteers were saluted to the junior volunteers .
 66 teenagers from Reading arid Winchester volunteered for hospital service, attended training courses, and gave almost 1000 hours of service in the coffee shop .
 Certificates of achievement were awarded to those candy stripers as of June 1961, charter members of the junior volunteer group .
 Lynn Anderson, Betty Bowes, Hope Barker, Nancy Falzano, Gwen Eugley, Virginia Ellis, Lydia Ellis, Peggy Edson, Mary Frances Henry, Susan Haley, Nancy Hollinshead, Nancy Hinnendael, Margo Harmon, Debbi Harrison, Mary
 Elizabeth social hour for these junior volunJnckson, Jill Johnson, Sue John son, Mary Ann Johnson, Marcia Kimball, Beth Kaufmann, Sue Keppler, Ann LaPointe, Wendy Lewis, Jill Lougee, Gayle LeVan, Elaine
 Harold Rogers, First Reader of First Church of Christ, Scientist, Cambridge, Massachusetts, will speak . The speaker will be Harold Rogers of the First Church, Scientist in Cambridge .
 Christmas Fair GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH 70 Mont vale Ave. Church will burn Saturday, November 4 10m. to 10m., November 4 .
 FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTors have been working together since 1914 . Landscaping and trucking is the company's preferred method of construction .
 Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL 18 White Street, Winchester, Winchester Tel. 18 White St. 18 . White Street . Winchester . Medford EX port 6-7300 .
 Has been used J mental health W0t*k ns second enr and has Only 5.00(1 miles* Woods Dil) Excellent condition nnd prieed far be* market value .
 Call PA 9-2782. i OR SALE ( rntndndfut her clock, mu hottany. ten tub«*s. Ten tubs worth $1,800 each . Call Pennsylvania 9/2782 .
 Rumbling Ranch Ranch in California reduced to $20,600 . Ranch has two bedrooms, large kitchen, sun poreh, fireplaced living room, attached Karaite, fenceti in yard . Reduced to $19,600.
 Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, g ravel, brick, all types, flue liners, drain pipe, cesspool covers, fireplace dampers, cleanout doors, ash dumps and heutllators .
 Wells 50670. julv 6-tf REUPHOLSTERING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants . Welln't use remnants because they are dirt cheap .
 For $ v v the finest, most dependable sj \ TVRADIO • HI FI REPAIR J ’> } | PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMBOS .
 Includes power steering, brakes, windows, C-way power Kent, plus many other extras . Includes sure-grip differential differential and Goodyear captive air tires . Includes Deluxe interior interior .
 Modern 3-bedroom Ranch home with 2Mi baths, living room, dining room, all-electric kitchen, 2-car g a r a g e, completely finished basement . Modern 3 bedroom Ranch home is on sale at 9-4063 .
 MALE ICE-SKATING RINK SUPERVISOR WANTED . Wanted only part-time or partial employment during the winter months . Priced in the 30,000's .
 Experience in supervising young people desirable but not absolutely necessary . Work with young people is necessary, but it is not necessary .
 Ford Station ^ Wagon, new tires, low mileage, low-mileage . Huverty, WElls 3-5389. ueptl2-tf for sale .
 Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedge wood Apartments . $190 up . Five-bedroom apartment .
 The Social Service Guild of the First Gongregational Church is sponsoring a tour of the Metropolitan State Hospital in Waltham, Massachusetts . The tour will be held on Tuesday afternoon, November 7th at the hospital .
 Mental Health is one of the major fields of interest of the Socia Service Guild, both in study and service projects . Mental health is a major field of interest for the Guild .
 Mental and emotional illness is not an inadmissible social stigma, says psychologist . Mental illness is a field of increasing importance as the public becomes more aware of mental illness . Mental health is an important part of the field of study .
 Modern medicine is treating with increasingly beneficial results, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Public education for tolerance for tolerance and understanding is needed, he says .
 This need is very apparent when patients are ready to be dismissed from the hospital but have to remain because their families or friends are not ready to accept them and co operate in helping them adapt to normal life again .
 Members of the Social Service Guild have worked at the Metropolitan State Hospital as weekly volunteers for several years . The hospital is located in the city's largest psychiatric hospital .
 Members of the Mystic Valley Mental Health Association who missed their tour last year are invited to go along on this hospital tour .
 The group plans to assemble on the Vine Street side of the First Congregational Church at 12:45 m.m. on Tuesday, November 7 .
 Cars may be parked here if not needed for transportation to the hospital in Waltham . Cars may not be needed for transport to hospital .
 Each driver will be given written directions for the best routes to the hospital . This is for use if any group needs to leave before the tour is concluded .
 First floor has 3 large rooms with modern kitchen and pantry . Second floor has three nice bedroomH, den, und modern modern hath.nd floor has . 3 nice bedroom .
 Tutoring in English und History is available most afternoons and evenings . Tutoring is offered in English and History, available evenings .
 Large dining room set has no further use for your large dining set and is realistic about its present value . Please send description and price to Star Office .
 Have client who has just sold a 2-family house and must find another single immediately . Need to find a single immediately for client who is selling a house . Have client with client who wants to sell a house and needs to find new single .
 It is not necessary for a girl to evidence financial need to qualify for this award . The award is not required to prove financial need for the award .
 Three laboratory schools on the Lesley campus accommodate the teaching of these specialties .
 Gal Friday for Electron ica Sales Firm in Winchester, one girl office, excellent working conditions . Hillary commensurate with experience .
 DO IT YOURSELF BOAT LUMBER AND HARDWARE . Complete line of building materials for home und Industrial use .
 Wells 8-0062. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS WINCHESTER EMPLOYMENT -Domeatic help available and wanted . Cull PA 0-3132 after 7m. after 7.m. aug 7m .
 It can be seen at 26 Muple Street, Chelsea, where it can be found .
 All plane, ship, train, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all I Over^ The World can be made at tariff rates by culling your Authorised Travel j SEWING MACHINE SERVICE — Electric A * unt know your travel plans and repair service .
 System for Public* Employees have long boon the subject of dobnto not only by ordinary taxpayers, but by experts in personnel administration as well . The system for public* employees has long been a popular subject of debate among taxpayers .
 League of Women Voters of Winchester study Massachusetts' civil service system for two years . League wants to find out how it works, and whether or not it can be improved .
 The League is offering a series of units beginning next Tuesday on an evaluation of the Merit System for Massachusetts .
 It is imperative that League members come to these meetings so that the League can take action . Since consensus will he taken on 12 items dealing with both broad reform and pieceiYieal improvements, it is imperative .
 NonLeague people should take advantage of this chance to learn more about Civil Service . Civil Service is a subject which is being widely discussed and affects every individual .
 The best preparation for this meeting would be a reading of the League’s new publication, “The Merit System in Massachusetts” which is available from Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The League's new publication is available online .
 Management employees of J H Winn Inc. enjoyed a supper meeting at the Bellevue Golf Club in Melrose . Winn Supper Meeting on Tuesday evening, October 24 .
 After the supper of roast beef and chicken, Mr Ralph Jury, plant superintendent, acting as master of ceremonies, introduced Mr Ernest B Dade, chairman of the Board . After the meal, Mr Jury, acting .
 Mr Dade introduced his guest, Mr Vincent Ambrose, president of the Winchester Trust Company, who introduced the speaker of the evening, Dr. Dr. Vincent Ambrose . Dr Ambrose was the speaker .
 Baker spoke clearly and interestingly concerning his work with astronomical telescopes . Baker spoke about the precise calculations which must be made concerning the location and distance of heavenly bodies . Baker also spoke about his astronomical calculations .
 Baker’s talk was illustrated by the use of several photographic slides . Baker: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared"
 Ernest B Dade, chairman of the board of directors of PotterChamberlain, Inc. of Gilford, N.ll. announced at a special stockholders meeting held October 21, the election of Harry E Chefalo of North ConWay as a director of Potter-Chamber
 Mr Chefalo, formerly of Winchester, was a .member of the Winchester finance committee and board of selectmen .
 He is still active in business in Winchester and the owner of several business blocks . He still owns several blocks in Winchester .
 The 100,000 pounds of steel had arrived for the new boat storage building . The contractor was obligated to a fully completed date, under a penalty clause, by November 15 .
 New building will have a clear span without posts, having a total of 10,000 square feet . This new building will be a clear-spun without posts . The new building is expected to be 10,500 square feet wide .
 Mr Dade also stated that a new lease is being negotiated with Pembroke Marine, Inc., which will include the new building facilities and the marina packaged into one lease .
 To h 11 persons interested in the estate of RICHARD M BINSW ANGER . late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 The e-xecutors of the will of said RICHARD M BINSWANGER have presented to said Court for allowance their first account . They presented to the court for allowance .
 Witness: John C Loggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this sixteenth day of October.61 .
 The Water & Sewer Board will receive bids for cleaning 11,974 feet of 12-inch C I. I. pipe and 4,1 15 feet of 10-inch pipe .
 Specifications and plans of pipe lines may be inspected at the Office of the Superintendent, Lake St., Winchester, Mass.
 To all persons intercstiM in the estate of LORENCE M WOODSIDK, also known as LORENCK MONSON WOODsIDE late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 Witness: John C Loggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-seventh dny of October 1961 .
 John V Harvey, Register. nov2-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . Middlesex is the capital of the Massachusetts Commonwealth .
 CARMELA MO LEA, sometimes known as CARmELA MU LEA. nnd CARmela MO LAIR late of Winchester in Baid County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of CARMela MU LEa, sometimes called CAR
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of certain instruments purporting to be the last will and codicil of said deceased by MARY LORRAINE FORGIONE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving
 Esquire John C Leggat, Esquire, was the first Judge of said Court, this tenth day of October 1961 .
 To all persons interested in the trust of the will of WILLIAM A KNEE LAND late of Winchester in said County, deceased . For the benefit of FLORENCE L KNEELAND and others .
 The trustees of said estate have presented to said Court for allowance their fourth nnd fifth accounts . Trustees have presented their fourth and fifth accounts to the Court .
 The zoning by-laws be amended by changing or altering the man incorporated therein and made a part thereof . A portion of that certain district indicated and identified therein as a general residence district will be changed to an industrial district . The following described area will be . changed from a . general residence
 I certify that the foregoing is a true copy of an amendment to the Zoning By-Laws adopted by the Town of Winchester, Massachusetts, at the Town Meeting of June 19, 1961, nnd approved by the Attorney General of Massachusetts on October 10, 1961 . I hereby certify
 Elsie M Nelson Town Clerk uctl9-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex .
 To all persona interested in the estate of JOHN W THORNTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased. John W. Thorton, deceased, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the laat will of said deceased by WINIFRED AMELIA THORNTON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that Hhe be appointed executrix thereof without giving a
 A written appearance in Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the tenth dny of November 1961, the return day of thia citation .
 The Judge of said Court, thia twenty -third duy of October 1961. Enquire, Find Judge of . said . said Court .
 To all persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M ALICE MASON Into of Winchester in anid County, dtceasod, for the benefit of JOHN S MASON nnd others .
 The trustee of fluid estate has presented to Haid Court for allowunce its first and second accounts . The trustee presented to the court for allow unce its accounts .
 If you desire to object to you or your attorney should have a written appearance in Cambridge before ten o’clock in tho forenoon on the seventeenth day of November 1961, the return day of this citation .
 We can give you the best demonstration of how banks help car buyers if you’ll come in and discuss car financing through our bank . With a bank auto loan, credit requirements are simple; borrowing cost is low; terms are con* venient .
 You’ll learn how you may finance the initial car insurance premium in your loan . You'll learn, too, how to pay for the initial insurance premium .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your business in the next gallery .
 A cooking demonstration and discussion on diabetic diets will be presented at the event . The event will also feature a cooking demonstration by Mrs. Barbara Jones .
 Elizabeth Caso, nutritionist of the Cambridge Health Department, Miss Mary ElI len Collins of the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital and Mr Ernest Hinkley, chef and production supervisor, the First National Bank of Boston .
 Many members of the Massachusetts Dietetic Association will also participate in the program by answering questions about diabetes .
 The Institute held its first Boston sessions from October 30 to November 2, inclusive, offering 23 evening courses during that time . The Institute is based in Boston .
 Later in the year seminars will be held at different points in New England .
 Simple justice demands that the next issue of our series of “Champions of Liberty’s” stamps display the likeness of Dag Hammarskjold .
 One wishes that among the instructions to Peace Corps candidates had been one concerning the usefulness, and sanctity, of sealed envelopes .
 Shelter companies should acknowledge that their devices will not protect residents against blasts within a radius of as much as fifty miles . Shelter companies will not be able to protect residents from blasts within 50 miles of their homes .
 We are glad to know his dream came true, and that he was able to come hobnobnobnobbing with great and near-great, and gather material for a thousand and one nights of story-telling in the tea houses of Pakistan .
 His wife wonders if their humble hut will be good enough for him on his return . Meanwhile, back home, his wife is wondering if their modest hut is good enough .
 A sonic boom is not, as often thought, a one-time phenomenon transmitted just at the moment the sound barrier is broken . It's not just a boom, it's a boom that's transmitted from the moment a sound barrier breaks . A boom is a boom not only but a
 A plane flying faster than sound raises thunderclaps continually over a wide path of ground along its course . The thunderclap is heard from a plane flying over the course of a flight .
 NEW PLANT OF ATLEE CORP., now in operation a 2 Lowell Avenue, Winchester . Photo by JRyerson .
 $150,000 plant is the first building to be erected in the new Parkview Electronics Park in the North End of town . This $150k plant is first building erected in Parkview electronics Park .
 Containing 15,000 eq. ft., it is two stories in height in the front witli a single high manufacturing story at the rear . Containing a single manufacturing story, it is a two-story high in height .
 The applied dynamics division and its product lines have been integrated with the Atlas Division in the new plant . The corporate offices of the company are also located there .
 Many towns, including our own, are telling us just that in a less personal but more totali tarian way, the more dangerous in that it constitutes an unprecedented invasion of our individual rights and liberties . Yet this — and other — restraints against compul sion are being broken by
 Drinking unfluoridated water harms no one and denies no other person fluoridated treatment if he wants it . Fluoridated treatment can be fluoridated if someone wants it, and no one needs it .
 More precise dosages are available in liquid and pill form, and not expensive .
 Now that the flood gates are down, other projects for doctoring our water are crowding into the breach . Other projects are also crowding in the breach, with many of them being built .
 It won’t be long before someone will propose a serious amendment to add aspirin, a sleeping drug, and an old-age tonic to the fluorides .
 Students at Woodlands School staged a sitdown demonstration recently because they do not have sufficient homework . Students say they are not satisfied with their homework .
 During the thirty minutes you spent at breakfast, 2700 members were added to the human race . During the 30 minutes you spend at breakfast 2700 new members of the human .
 No considerate person would dream of taking fluoride tablets in to a neighbor’s house and saying, “Your children must take these.” Winchester Winchester says . Winchester: "Your children will take these."
 PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son insurance agency S THOMPSON STREET Rea.90654 . Rea Rea's insurance agency is located in Rea .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . PArkview 9-1062 FREE DELIVERSING ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 One shelter manufacturer recently amused others in the industry by advertising a “life-time guarantee” with his shelter . Another manufacturer recently posted a ‘life-year guarantee’ on its shelter .
 Waiting for a man to get mar ried is like waiting for an egg to fry itself. odor, failed to find it. odor .
 Saul Kronenberg of Brooklyn once had a patient come into his office and sit down gingerly while being questioned . Kronenberg: "I'm not afraid to ask questions. I'm glad to answer them" Kronenberg says .
 ERASMUS Republican Club Board Meeting meets at Winchester Country Club . Winchester Republican Club meets with members of the board at the country club .
 Reports from the various committees were given and several plans for the regular meetings were discussed . Several plans were also discussed .
 Health and food preparation classes designed to improve the inadequate unbalanced diets on which more than half of all Americans are living . Classes will begin on Sunday evening, November 5, at 7 to 9m., through Thursday, November 9 .
 This five-day course is being sponsored by the New England Sanitarium and Hospital as a part of the health education program . The course will take place in New England .
 Vollmer, of Glendale, California, instructor for the course, will give practical demonstrations in food preparation .
 Free recipes will be distributed at each lecture, and special gifts and door prized will be awarded .
 Thanks go to all who contributed their time and expense to make this Beatnik Hop the success it was .
 Marycliflf Bazaar Tuesday, November 7, from 10.m. to 10m. ET . You will find many attractive items from which to make your selections .
 Stay as long as you wish, since the tea room will be open for coffee or n snack . Stay in as long a tea room as long you wish .
 Footwear for men, women and children since 1866 Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m. Footwear is available 5 to 7, both meals modestly priced .
 As a gag, his friends painted his upper lip with ripe limburger cheese . The prankster's upper lip was painted with ripe meaty cheese .
 Pharmacy GIRL, Inc., Labs. Send to — PHARMACY GIRl, Inc. Send us your photos of your favorite fruits and vegetables .
 O'Brien's LIquor MART 2153 Mystic Valley Parkway Medford, Mass. 2153. V CY Q 1117 WINCHESTER tA D-iJl / O'briens LIQUOR MART .
 Pick up the one that's just right for you and yours . Impalas, Bel \irs. Yes, pick up the ones that are perfect for you .
 Mirak's enmplete -bop facilities (one id* tin tin) Mirak is one of the largest service and body shops in the world . Expert Service and Repairs services are available at Mirak .
 No costly service policies, no annual furnace cleaning bills, no expensive storage equipment, no motor operating cost necessary . No motor operating costs necessary . Service policies, annual furnace clean bills, storage equipment are no longer necessary .
 CLEANLINESS of Gas keeps household cleaning and redecorating bills low . Cleanliness of Gas helps keep bills low, too .
 As a Gas heating customer you may use our convenient Easy Budget Plan to spread the season’s estimated fuel cost over 10 months . As a gas heating customer, you may also use our Easy Budget plan to spread your estimated fuel costs .
 This is the third year in which the award has been made . Ryerson has won the award three times in three years .
 The award will be presented to Coach Knowlton at the annual award banquet of the Football Officials Association to be held Monday evening, November 20, at the Hotel New Brunswick .
 The banquet is open to the public and Winchester fans are cordially invited to see this “coach of the year” honored . Winchester fans will be invited to the banquet .
 The affair is stag and the honorarium is $5 . Tickets are available from Frank Finigan at the high school, PA 94.300, or MI 3-4464 .
 Governor Volpe is among the invited guests with All-American football immortal, Joe Bellino . Bellino is a football legend who played for the U.S. State of Columbia University in 1964 . The governor is invited to Bellino's memorial .
 It is also expected that Superintendent of Schools Harry Gilson and High School Principal Howard Niblock will attend .
 Police Aided In Stolen Car Chase Officers Robert Baird and David Boyle in a Police cruiser figured in the chase of a stolen automobile through town .
 Headquarters was notified by the Arlington Police that a youth who had stolen an automobile in Arlington was headed toward Winchester . Headquarters received a call from Arlington Police Headquarters that the youth was headed to Winchester .
 Officers Baird and Boyle went to the Ridge Street section of town, where the car had been seen . Officer Tony Pronski, al so on patrol duty in the area, was also alerted to be on the lookout for the car .
 Officers Baird and Boyle spotted the car on Cambridge Street, head ed toward Woburn . They gave chase and gave chase . Police say the car was headed toward Wobburn .
 The wanted operator turned right into Everett Avenue and the Police followed him into Bacon Street and along Main Street toward Medford . Police followed the operator along Bacon Street, Bacon Street .
 Officer Boyle kept Headquarters informed of their patrol car’s posi tion and Officer Cogan informed Medford of the chase . The chase ended in Medford, Massachusetts .
 As the fleeing car turned into Playstead Road it narrowly avoided a collision with another vehicle and nearly turned turtle . The fleeing car narrowly avoided hitting another car and nearly turning turtle .
 The operator ran through land ar Oak Grove Cemetery with Officers Baird and Boyle in pursuit . The operator then ran through the cemetery with officers in pursuit of him .
 Medford police joined the local officers at Playstead Road and searched the neighborhood . The youth, a 16-year-old, was picked up on Wood Road off Playstead road by the Medford Police .
 Arlington Police say the car he was driving was stolen in that town earlier in the morning . He was booked at Medford Headquarters and turned over to Arlington Police who say the stolen car was stolen .
 Commanders Walter Appelton of the American Legion and Robert Swymer of the Veterans of Foreign Wars invite all veterans to participate in the ceremonies at the War Memorial, at the corner of Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street .
 Veterans will meet at the American Legion Home on Vine Street at 10:30m. and march to the War Memorial monument on the McCall Junior High School lot at 10.45 .
 Brief exercises will be held at the Memorial at the traditional hour of 11.30am . The Memorial Memorial will be closed at the time of the day .
 This progress picture is tangible evidence that the long-awaited expansion to the hospital is making rapid progress . It is tangible proof that the expansion of the hospital in London is on track .
 It is hoped that the good weather will continue so that the exterior of the hospital may he completed before the winter period . The hospital will be completed by the end of the year .
 The latest estimate is that the new wing will be ready for occupancy about October 1 of next year . The new wing is expected to be completed in October .
 Vinson-Owen School all parties interested met on Wednesday, November 1, at the offices of Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke in Boston in Boston .
 The town meeting was called in an attempt to arrive at an agreement as how best to resolve the difference of opinion with regard to the town’s liability for certain bills in excess of the original appropriation by the town meeting to build the school .
 Norman E Weeks’ Tube Test Design Wins Recognition In ‘‘Electronics’ Magazine for October . Mr Norman K Weeks, Manager of Test Equipment and Standards Department of the . Industral Components Division of Raytheon Company .
 One operator loads the seven-ton machine with tubes and another worker packs tested tubes . The machine is loaded with tubes to test tubes .
 The machine performs twenty static and dynamic electrical tests, at a rate of 1,800 tubes per hour . The machine is capable of performing 20 tests at a time .
 Field rejects have greatly decreased since the machine was placed in operation . A higher quality assurance factor and repeatability of performance have been obtained . The machine's field rejects have also decreased .
 The ability of the machine to subject all tubes to exactly the same test conditions has upped acceptance . The ability to subject tubes to the same conditions has increased acceptance .
 The human fatigue factor, with its consequent lowering of quality assurance, is not a problem . Human fatigue factor doesn't have a problem, says the manager of the company . It's not the problem, he says .
 The tubes are indexed for each of the twenty parameters tests . After preheat cycles, the tubes are indexed . The tubes will then be indexed for the other parameters .
 If a tube is within limits, it proceeds to the next test position . If it is outside limits, the tube is ejected into bins, as shown in pictures illustrating the Automatic Tube Tester .
 Counters indicate the number of rejects for each position, and also count total input and total output . Testing speed is such that process engineering can be alerted if tubes coming through production are not up to standard .
 The automatic test set is calibrated daily, as well as prior to changeover to a different tube type . It is calibrated every day and prior to the changeover .
 A sample of 25 tubes considered acceptable is checked five times each day . The sample is checked at least five times a day for acceptable use .
 Quality control x and r graphs arc plotted hourly for up to 20 reject items and for acceptable tubes . The graphs are plotted hourly to ensure product quality .
 A feature soon to be added is an adapter for testing flying lead and other type tubes .
 This machine is one of many pieces of Automatic Equipment developed by Mr Weeks and members of his department for the Automation Program at Raytheon .
 Items amounting to $13,268.10, are still in dispute with $1,061.45 in architect’s fees . Items amount to $14,000 are still being disputed .
 The architect's fees will depend upon what decision will be reached in connection with the change orders .
 School Building Committee, contractor, architect, Board of Selectmen, Town Counsel, Town Accountant and Town Engineer . Represented at the November 1 meeting were the contractor, the architect, the board of selectmen .
 The Selectmen are charged with the payment of the outstanding bills . The General Court provided that no bill be paid until it has the approval of the Town Accountant and the State Department of Accounts .
 No agreement was reached among those at the November 1 meeting as to a reconciliation of liability . The Board of Selectman at their meeting last Monday evening came to no definite decision .
 Chairman Sherman W Saltmarsh said the Selectmen will consider the matter further at their coming Monday meeting . He was hopeful that a more definite announcement can be' made after this session .
 Herpetologist Herbert Clement was a resident of Winchester, Massachusetts, while he was still a resident here . Herpetologists have come more and more into the news of late because of his hobby .
 Town Comptroller Post Is Urged by Consultant John M Sinclair of Bentley College . Consultant recommends Comptroller to coordinate office administration of several departments of Town government . Report submitted to Methods and Procedures Committee .
 The Methods and Procedures Committee has the matter under advisement . The committee has made no commitment regarding the proposed Comptroller one way or the other .
 The Winchester Democratic Town Committee and its associate members will be the guests of Mr and Mrs. Brenda McGowan . Winchester's residents will be guests of the couple . In towns that have adopted the f Northeastern’s Levy Scholarship Scholarship to Winchester, the scholarship will be given to students
 At the business meeting there will be committee reports and some observations from those members who attended the meeting at the Muzzey Junior High School in Lexington . The meeting will be held in Lexington, Kentucky .
 Attorney General Edward McCormack will be the speaker at the Lexington meeting . Following this, plans will be made for November meeting at Lexington .
 The social hour which will take place after full attention has been paid to Democratic affairs, local, state, and national, is sure to please all who attend, as have our meetings in the past .
 Reptiles and amphibians occupied much of his spare time while he was going through Winchester High School . Reptiles, amphibians and reptiles were the subject of his classes .
 Herb’s casual interest deepened into a full-fledged study of reptiles, with emphasis on reptiles, and particularly onturtles and tortoises . Herb's passion for reptiles deepens into a study in Boston, where he studied in Boston .
 He soon became known as something of an expert in the field . He has consulted more than once by museum staff members in the Boston area .
 Co-founder of New England Herpetological Group, co-owner of The Ark, one of Boston's really unique animal shops .
 Herb has fashioned a mecca for animal lovers throughout the Greater Boston area . Herb and his partner have a reptile shop that caters to animal lovers in the area .
 It is remarkably non-commercial, no posters on the walls, and no “hard sell” involved . No posters on walls, no "hard sell" involved. It's a remarkably different way to sell.
 The position has been filled by the Town Accountant, because of his familiarity with the budgetary procedures of all departments . It is called Boston’s Street LOCAL BOY, continued page 7 .
 It appeared that, insofar as office administration work, the Town would operate more efficiently, if there were a co-ordinator of such work . The Town would be more efficient, says Town Councillor .
 As mentioned above, the various departments operate more or less as autonomous units .
 Mr Sinclair recommended the title Town Comptroller as an appropriate one for such a co-ordinator . Mr Sinclair said it was a good idea to be a Town comptroller .
 The possibility of combining departments of Town Government was raised during the survey, Mr Sinclair reported .
 The $100 Levy Scholarship is presented annually to students majoring in psychology who have showed high academic achievement and excellent character . The scholarship is given to students in psychology majoring at the University of Columbia .
 She has been a member of the Husky Key, the Silver Masque, student dramatic organization; and the Modern Dance Society since her freshman year .
 She is also vice-president of Chi Pi Epsilon Sorority and a member of Gamma Delta, women’s undergraduate society . She is a 1957 graduate of Winchester High School .
 Miss McGowan is employed at the Massachusetts Eye and EarRetina Foundation, as a laboratory assistant .
 Kaufmann Named Chief Of Medicine as a group to study procedures at Town Hall by the Town Meeting of March, 1960 . Kaufman named Chief of Medicine as group of doctors to study Town Hall procedures . Town meeting of March 1960 was held in front of Town Hall .
 The consultant’s basic objective has been to consider means toward a more effective use of existing personnel and equipment, to provide new equipment made essential by increased volume of Town business .
 Pupils At Saint Mary's 13 Local Girls Win Marian Medal Sunday, November 5, at St. Mary's .
 The Marian Medal is the highest award that can be received by a Catholic Girl Scout . After laboring for over a year and a half to complete the requirements for the reception of the Marian Medal, the girls saw the reward of their untiring efforts .
 Evelyn Brennan, Carol Crimmins, Donna DeAngelis, Diana Donald, Marianne Karnes, Mary Hannon, Rosemary Harrington, Carol Johnson, Cathy Kenny, Maureen McKenna, Joyce Moynihan, Diane Penta, and Diane Sampson .
 The awards were presented by Most Reverend Bishop Jeremiah Minihan at 2:00m. on Sunday afternoon .
 The girls were a part of an outstanding group from many parishes in the Archdiocese . They were a group of outstanding girls .
 St. Mary’s is very proud of the work that these members of the parish have done . They hope that they will prove by their example and lives that they are truly Marjian girls .
 Dirigos, a newly organized group of female songsters, made their debut in October, 1960 . They were the first female singers of the day .
 Their repertoire stems from rehearsing numbers for four part harmonizing . Their repertoire is rehearsing songs for four parts harmonizing.
 Under the talented direction of Mr George Blouin, the group has offered to a choice few the opportunity of participating in singing which is both challenging and enjoyable .
 Their time is divided between building up a repertoire and fulfilling engagements . Their time will be spent building up repertoire and performing .
 Since the date of organization, the Dirigos have made many appearances including singing under the hot TV lights at WABI in Bangor .
 Sunday, November 5, from 12 to 1m. was their first Television appearance this fall . Each girl was also interviewed for the first time .
 A love of singing and a navy blue suit with white accessories are their trademark . The couple have been married for more than 20 years .
 Norman E Weeks of Fells Road is a graduate of Winchester High School, Class of 1960 . He graduated from Winchester High in 1960 . Weeks is a father of four .
 The Board of Directors of the Winchester Hospital announce the appointment of Dr. GUSTAV KAUFMANN . Dr. KAUfmann will be the first person to be appointed by the hospital's board .
 Gustav G Kaufmann, a well known specialist in internal medicine, has been named Chief of Medicine at the hospital . Kaufman was appointed to the position of Chief of Medical in the hospital in May .
 He has been certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine . He is a member of the Massachusetts Medical Society and the New England Diabetes Association .
 Dr. William J Speers, Jr., president of the board, in announcing the appointment, stated, “We are indeed fortunate that once again a physician of Dr. Dr. Speers has been chosen for this position .
 After an internship at the Presbyterian Hospital in Chicago he was appointed resident in medicine at the Massachusetts General Hospital . He became assistant physician at Phillips Andover Academy after becoming an assistant physician .
 Dr. Kaufmann was associate physician in the adolescent unit of the Children’s Medical Center in Boston . Dr Kaufman was an associate physician at the center in 1952 to 1956 .
 St. Mary’s Girl Scout* pressive ceremonies at tin* Cathedral of the Hedy Cross . The ceremony was held at St. Louis Cathedral, St. Paul's Cathedral, and St. George's Cathedral .
 By-laws were read and accepted by a unanimous vote . Marianne* mary guret bump&on. by-law was read by-laws .
 Mr Howard Niblock, Principal, extended his appreciation for the strong parental support the school receives and helei a brief ‘orientation period” for the activities of the evening .
 Parents attended classes in which teachers gave information concerning the scope, aims, methods and general expectations of the individual courses . Following their son's or daughter’s program on a special bell schedule of ten minutes for each period, parents attended classes .
 Fall flowers donated by Winchester Conservatories served as colorful centerpieces . James Hollinshead, Social Chairman, directed the serving of refreshments throughout the evening .
 The Winchester Star is a weekly newspaper newspaper newspaper . Use this article to help us understand today's featured news stories . Share your thoughts in the comments below .
 The company candidate will compete with some 30,000 other checker-cashiers working in more than 3,000 retail food stores throughout the United States, and Canada .
 All First National Store checkers will be rated for customer courtesy, accuracy, care in handling food, and speed and efficiency at the trash register .
 The First National Stores campaign will be directed by Mr John J Caulfield .
 The competition is sponsored by the Institute and the National Cash Register Company .
 Me Neeley will attempt to wrest the heavyweight crown from Champion Floyd Patterson in a 15-round bout . Floyd Patterson is a former champion of the world heavyweight division . The bout will take place in 15 minutes .
 M e Neeley chose Colonial as his training site because of the ideal conditions for training which exist there . He wants as many as possible of his hometown devotees to visit his site and follow his preparations .
 Leasing Corporation of Boston, it was announced today by David J Seder, president of the firm . Leasing Corp. of Boston .
 Mr Browne comes to G.D.C. with an extensive background in sales and administration . Mr Browne has been at the centre of G.C.'s most successful career .
 He is a member of the Society for the Advancement of Management and the Sales Executives Club . He is an expert in management and sales management .
 A veteran of World War II, Mr Browne resides at Strawberry Hill Street in Dover, Dover . Mr Browne is a WWII veteran who served in the war .
 Leasing Corporation is an affiliate of the General Discount Corporation . The company is one of New England’s oldest and largest commercial financing companies . Leasing Corp. is a partner with General Discount Corp.
 It leases capital goods, with particular emphasis on machinery and equipment . The company is based in New York City .
 The ‘Boston Conservatory of Music has announced the programs for this year’s Fenway Series . Fenway Concerts will be held at the Fenway Field in Boston .
 These events are given by both faculty and guest artists at the Conservatory . They are held on Tuesday and Friday evenings at 8:30m. throughout the school year .
 The series opens November 14 with the first Boston appearance of Katja Andy, pianist-in-residence at the Conservatory . The series begins November 14 at the Boston Conservatory.
 Miss Andy served for many years as principal assistant to Edwin Fischer in Berlin and Zurich . Miss Andy worked with Mr Fischer in Zurich and Berlin for decades .
 Richard Conrad, tenor; and Robert Pettitt, pianis^, will give a recital on November 28 . The recital includes unusual English songs for Christmas . Richard Conrad will give the recital .
 On December 8, comes the debut of the Gabrieli Trio, which is in-residence at the Conservatory . The trio is in residence at the conservatory .
 The artists, all members of the Boston Symphony, are Alfred Schneider, violin; Earl Hedberg, viola; and Richard Kaepuseinski, ’cello .
 Other concerts will follow on January 9, February 0, March 13, and April 13 . Other concerts are scheduled for January 9 and February 0 .
 Appraiser MAKER and DESIGNER of EXQUISITE JEWELRY Repairing 47 Bromfield St., Boston, Mass.
 SIX ACRES NURSERY SCHOOL classes for 3, 4 years olds . Classes for 3-year-olds . Limited Enrollment . Non-Sectarian School BUILDING of MEDFORD JEWISH Community Center .
 Massachusetts Cancer Detection Center 1095 Beacon Street. Massachusetts Cancer Diagnosis Center is located at 1095 Beaconsfield Street.
 Forester’s Flower Shop won two of the awards at a New England unit meeting held last Monday evening at the Shoreside Club, Everett, Everett .
 Bob Glover and Charlie Forester made door sprays for Christmas decorations . Bob Glover made door spray Christmas decorations for Christmas . Forester and Forester used to make door spray door decorations .
 All pieces submitted were marked at retail prices . Workmanship, design, etc., etc., being Bob and Charlie were chosen first and second .
 The meeting was attended by florists of the F.T.D.A. from ail over New England . All types of floral arrangements were submitted by them .
 The Women of Epiphany will hold a Newcomer’s Coffee on Thursday, November lt> at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Janice .
 All women who are new to the parish are cordially invited to attend to meet members of different church organizations and learn about the many activities open to them .
 According to the lost and found report at the police station, he* kept’ them on hand for the skipper who lost them, presumably through someone else’s efforts .
 Anna M Crowley of 12 Garfield Avenue told police she left in an envelope on a nail in her kitchen last Friday . Crowley said she left the envelope in a nail on her kitchen . Crowley told police the envelope was found in a kitchen envelope . Crowley was arrested for allegedly leaving the envelope on
 Crowley said the money was taken from her j kitchen while she was out between 1:15 and 3:30m. Crowley said she was working in the kitchen at the time of the alleged theft . Crowley said it was from her kitchen and she was looking after her children .
 Rose M archant of 5 Mystic Avenue discovered that some rather un pleas ant person had smashed the rear window of her Chevrolet station wagon, presumably deliberately, and apparently with an instrument that makes a hole .
 Lincoln School Dads’ Club board of directors met Tuesday evening at tjie home of Edmund A Williams, last year’s president, i and elected a new slate of officers .
 The Lincoln School Dads’ Club Costume Dance will be held the evening of November 18th . Many new ideas were discussed for the coming year and after the j smoke cleared away, the plans wore made for the future .
 As usual a live orchestra will play for enjoyable dancing . Dad's made arrangements for coffee, cider, doughnuts and doughnuts to be served .
 A pre-sale for the annual Floj rente Crittenton Bazaar will be held on Wednesday, November 15 . The sale will take place at the end of the month .
 I Coffee will be served from 10:00 m. to 12:30 m.m. and punch from to 1 1 :30ni. I Coffee is served from . 10 to 12 a.m.; punch from . 1 1:30ni .
 Chief Titilah is married to the former Mary Louise Murray, daughter of Mrs. Mrs. Murray . She is also married to former Mrs. Mary Louise .
 Only that’s right -alt the prescribed medicine the average American buys in a year costs him only $15 - a small price indeed to pay for so much health benefit . Only That's right .
 Ad.erl IMITATION PINE <f SPRAYS ■ BEG. 5c — SI .20 Value CANDY o O BARS OO e 50c Value BABY PANTS 33 ' S2.25 Value FOOTBALLS $1
 Fine pink meat from young porkers and a well trimmed roast free of excess fat . Succulent Sic uvor ... *fbe tenJerest, juiciest pork roast* you ever tasted .
 Moody Motor Sales, Inc. SMALL ENOUGH TO KNOW YOU and LARGE ENOUGH to SERVE YOU . Moody Motor sales, Inc., is located in Moody, Texas, Texas . Moody is a proud owner of a small, reliable, reliable business .
 John Volpc ol \\ inrhcsU r was the key not <' speaker Monday evening, November (i. November) at the ‘Xitli annual ladies night dinner ol the llaptist Soeial .
 After-dinner program was hosted by Lewis M. Foster, and Lewis M Foster ol LJovtl Street, president ol t he Baptist Social Union .
 Lewis G Curtis Is Promoted To Rank of Captain The Fortnightly Guild Presents Mrs. Mrs. Curtis . Lewis G. Curtis is promoted to rank of Captain . Lewis Curtis is Promoted to Rank Of Captain .
 Ambassador to Howard and Mrs. Cusack, Mrs. John, is the wife of actor John Cusacks . She was married to the late actor and later married to actor John, who had a daughter .
 Mrs. Graustuck are Grcat Br ’ t,a ""\ Unowned for her members of The Fortnightly, and * rac f *n handling sem.-offictal du .
 Mrs. Downes is daughter-in-law of ti » at u u ° wh«ch she was often ass.gn .
 Eva Henderson, a j Voted Boston’s prettiest high well-known lecturer and traveler, school senior, she graduated from En Ka Ingathering mJoncn Bruno KJLj 3) c C onetf Miss Frances Ann Bruno, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
 James M BruI no of 7 Upland Road, became the 1 bride of James Joseph Maloney, Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs. Maloney . James M. BruI .
 James J Maloney of Watertown, at a nuptial mass celebrated on Saturday I morning, Sept.. . ,‘10, at the Immaculate Conception Church .
 Driscoll performed the marriage ceremony at 11 o’clock and was also celebrant of the nuptial mass . He performed the wedding ceremony .
 He is currently serving as an Armament Electronics maintenance officer with the 305th Bomb Wing, Bunker Hill AFB, Peru, Indiana .
 The 305th Bomb Wing is the first tactical medium bomb wing to fly the new B-58 “Hustler” supersonic bomber . The wing is also the first to fly a new tactical medium bomber to fly .
 Captain Curtis’ wife, Wendy, and their three children live with him at the Strategic Air Command Base . Captain Curtis and Wendy live at the base .
 Winchester Antique Study Group will hold the November meeting on Tuesday, November 21 at 7:30m., in the Rich Room of the library . November 21 will be the November 21 meeting .
 Those who did not attend the opening meeting in October missed an interesting informative and amusing lecture on fans by Mr Holbrook Dodge .
 Next Sunday, November 12, there will he a general discussion on the problem of Alcoholism, the person and the decision . There will be a discussion on November 12 on the topic .
 Don McClellan will be speaker at the home of Mrs. Mrs. McClellllan . Don will speak at her home at the time .
 The first meeting of the Literature Committee was held at the Library on Wednesday, November 1, with the chairman, Mrs. Mrs. Barbara Jones .
 Social hour will be at 1:00m. at Crawford Memorial Methodist Church Hall . The social hour is at 1.00 p.m.
 Winchester Friends of Don Orione meets at Barbo’s Auditorium on November 6 . Winchester Friends Of Orione will meet at 9 p.m. Nites to 9 P.M. aprlB-tf Friends of Orione .
 The Fiesta Fiesta will take place on Tuesday, November 28, at the Sons of Italy Hall on Swanton Street . The Fiesta will be held in honor of those who have attended .
 Spaghetti supper with chicken, salad, ice cream and coffee will be served from sixm. through nine m.m. A spaghetti supper will be held from six m. through 9 m. m. at the end of the evening .
 It is hoped that all Winchester friends will help this charitable and noteworthy cause because its success will insure the expansion of the Don Orione home for the Aged and the development of a National Shrine .
 Dorchester High School with ho nors at fifteen, the youngest in her class . Dorchester high school with ho-nors at 15, the oldest in class at 15 .
 She went on from High School to become a brilliant stu dent at Sacred Heart Academy in Manhattanville and at Blumenthal Academy in Vail .
 In ad dition to German, she learned to excel in French and also became an accomplished musician . She also learned to be an accomplished singer .
 Ken nedy accompanied her famous father on an extensive trip to Latin America ca. ca. 16 years ago .
 As a traveler, she became trail blazer in 193b when she tour ed Russia with only a child as companion .
 Rose Kennedy is a renowned beauty, intrepid traveler, accomplished pianist honor student, devotee of both political and fine arts . She is the wife of Joseph P Kennedy a Washington veteran of many top-level appointments .
 The Guild of the Infant Saviour will be honored to welcome Mrs Kennedy and most grateful to her charity in lecturing .
 A tea for Miss Mary Cullen, kindergarten teacher at Parkhurst School will be held in the kindergarten room Tuesday, November 14 at 3:30m.
 Room mothers for the morning and afternoon sessions . Perry McCarty, Mrs. McCarty and Mrs. Perry McCartartart are pictured in the room for the session .
 Mothers of these kindergarten children who are attending public school for the first time are looking forward to Miss Cullen’s discussion of her program and objectives for the current school year .
 Winchester Historical Society meets on November 2 (Thursday evening) Winchester historical Society meets in Rich Room . Winchester historical society meets in the Rich Room in Winchester .
 After the reports, and several re commendations had been consider ed, he turned the meeting over to Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Guy Livingstone, program chairman, introduced the well-known Mr Richard F Lufkin, president of the Bostonian Society, as well as curator of the Medford Historical Society .
 The president of the Medford Historical Society spoke briefly on the suggestion that various societies visit each other . He spoke briefly .
 Winchester Historical invited the Winchester Historical to the next meeting in Medford on November 20 . Professor Robert Nichols, of Tufts College, will speak at the meeting .
 The lecture by Mr Lufkin was “Boston, 1630 1880,” and was well illustrated with slides of the city in its various phases . A great fire in the 1870’s destroyed many land-marks .
 The Old North Church, the Old State House, King’s Chapel, and the Union Oyster House are the oldest . Paul Revere's House, as well as the Old South Meeting house, are among the oldest buildings in the city .
 Harry Mueller, Miss Phi Minster of the Visiting Nurse Association, and Mrs. Mrs. Mueller, the mother-of-one of the visiting nurses, are pictured at the hospital . Harry Mueller is a former hospital worker and mother-to-be .
 En Ka Society held its fall meeting at the interesting and attractive home of Mrs. Mrs. En Ka Tuesday afternoon .
 Stephen Nichols, president, opened the meeting with a word of welcome to all and with special greeting to Mrs. Mrs. Nichols . Stephen Nichols was president of the United States.
 Dunn read a letter from Mr Shinney, in charge of the Red Cross swimming program, thanking En Ka for the gift that made possible the first Annual Swimming Award dinner . Dunn read the letter in which he thanked En Ka .
 Bradford Bentley gave a detailed account of the work accomplished by En Ka’s Civic services .
 She announced that three new workshops were being organized, two to make gifts for Christmas for the* Home, for the Aged and for distribution by the Visiting Nurse Association .
 Mrs. Blair organised a workshop for folding sponges for the Hospital under the guidance of Mrs. George Blair, the third a morning workshop . The event was held at the Hospital in London .
 $2000.00 Membership, Mrs. Winchester Hospital . Winchester Hospital toward the purchase of a portable X-ray mahine $2000 .00 Membership . $2,000.00 membership toward purchase of portable x-ray .
 William Beal, chairman, had the new membership books which she and her committee had compiled . William . Beal had been chairman of the committee .
 These were distributed before the meeting and the members were asked to take note of the changes . The changes were distributed to the members .
 Harry Mueller, Chairman, expressed her thanks to all who contributed gifts for the Ingathering . Harry Mueller was Chairman of the Council of Ancestors .
 En In for the third year has taken ver the former activities of the Winchester Branch of the Needlework Guild of America, Inc. Inc. The “Ingathering” or harvesting was a timely feature of this fall meeting as En In .
 The distribution is distributed through the Board of Public Welfare, the Visiting Nurses’ Association, and local church groups .
 En Ka will carry on this ‘charity’ that helps other charities in Winchester . En Ka is continuing to help other Winchester charities in the UK .
 The fall meeting was concluded with a unique and amusing professionally planned fashion show . En Ka members modeled the latest in fashions as found on Church Street in the En Ka Shop .
 Winthrop Knox, En Ka Shop chairman, was thanked for planning and presenting this wonderful show . Winthrop . Knox was the chairman of En Ka .
 Margaret R Blemker will be the guest speaker at the Senior Forum at the First Congregational Church Sunday morning at 9:15 a.m. Margaret will be a guest speaker . The Senior Forum will be held in the church's First Congregation at 9-15 m.
 In the United Church Board for World Ministries, Miss Blemker is secretary for work in Europe and the Near East .
 Work also takes her to Bulgaria, Albania, Serbia, Turkey, Greece, Syria Lebanon and Iraq . The whole range of church activity is carried on in various centers .
 Her trips to Europe and the Near East have given her opportunity to talk with political and other national figures . Her trips have also given her chance to meet with leaders of the church in Europe and Near East .
 Deacons will be* Charles Irwin and Joe Kingston, and the ushers will be Bruce Hamilton and Jeffrey Russell . Deacon will be Joe Kingston and Charles Irwin .
 Elliott Bluisdell of 14 Herrick Street may earn him a trip to Scotland for two and $1,000 . A hole-in-ont) scored this season by Elliott Bluisell could earn him two .
 Winchester man gets ace at Winchester Country Club course . Winchester man entered in Old Places still standing in Old places .
 Most members bring gifts of New clothSmuggler Hole-In-One Sweepinteresting and was greatly enjoyed ing .
 The winner will be by members and guests. with which to buy clothing for announced early January .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist Church is designated as Stewardship Sunday . Crawford Memorial Church is located in Crawford County, Texas .
 In the afternoon, starting at two o’clock, fifty men of the church will canvass the entire parish for pledges of financial support . In 1962, the church was in full capacity for the first time .
 Mr Kenneth Lamprey and Mr William Leighton, chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the finance committee, will have charge of arrangements .
 Budget for 1962 will be almost exactly the same as the current year . While there are some changes in the budget for 1962, the total amount needed will still be the same .
 The major new items in the budget are necessary to carry out plans for major organ repairs, a new driveway approaching the front door of the church, and parking are and landscaping of the grounds .
 Sharon Sebers of Everett, Washington, announce the engagament of their daughter Sharon to Mr Danforth Scott, son of Mr and Mrs. Sebers . The Sebers are married and Sharon is in a loving relationship with Scott .
 Miss Sebers is a graduate of the Everett High School in Washington and is now stationed in Washington, D. C., at the Pentagon .
 Winchester Co-operative Bank has paid $300,000 during the month of October for Real Estate taxes on behalf of its shareholders who are buying their homes .
 In addition to an ever increasing demand for mortgage funds, there is also an increase in demand noted for money to modernize and improve properties .
 Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore a gown of white peau de soie with a beaded portrait neckline of Alencon lace . A bouffant skirt with a chapel length train adorned with matching lace, pearls and sequins . The bride was given
 Her tiered veil fell from a square crown of sequins and pearls . She carried a cascade bouquet of white orchids and stephanotis . The ceremony was held in New York City .
 She wore an aqua taffeta dress with a deep turquoise cummerbund and a bustle back .
 She wore a matching turquoise crown embroidered with pearls and a small circular veil . The ceremony was held in New York City .
 Miss Dona Fuearile of Woburn, small cousin of the bride, was flower girl . She was the flower girl at the wedding ceremony .
 She wore a floorlength frock of blue with a cummerbund and large bow at back .
 Her head piece was a halo of blue flowers and she carried pink and white nosegay . Her headpiece was a blue and white halo .
 Miss Dona Nutile and Miss Sandra Proia both of Woburn and cousins of the bride; and Mrs. Anna Barbara Bruno of Somerville, sister-in-law of bride; . Miss Nutile, Miss Proia, and Miss Barbara Bruno, were the brides
 The bridesmaids wore dresses similar in style to that of the matron of honor . Two wore pink with deep rose cummerbunds and two wearing orchid with purple . Ellen Santoro was the matrons of honor at the ceremony in New York .
 All wore matching headpieces w. r ith short veils and carried cascade bouquets of carnations . The event was held in New York City .
 Bruno Bruno, mother of the bride, wore a dress of gold and white brocade with a gold satin cummerbund, matching accessories and a white orchid pinned to her mink cape stole . Bruno wore the dress to the ceremony in New York .
 Maloney wore a white rose on her mink cape-stole and a turquoise brocade sheath with matching accessories . Maloney, wore the white rose for the first time, in a white brocade dress .
 Donald E White of Brighton was Mr Maloney’s best man, and ushering were two brothers of the bride, Robert A Bruno of Somerville and Carl V Bruno of Winchester . Carl J Proia of Woburn, cousin of bride; and Dominic Santoro of W
 After their wedding trip by motor through Washington, Virginia and Florida, the couple drove to Florida by motor . The couple's first wedding was in Florida .
 William V Kelley of 1 Wildwood Terrace was married at a nuptial mass on September 9 at St. Mary's Chapel . Kelley is married to William V. Kelley, who was married in September 9 .
 A reception followed at the Middleton Arms in Middleton, Middleton . The ceremony was officiated by a family friend of the bride .
 Priscilla Louise is engaged to John Becker, son of Howard E Clark of Carmel, California . Mrs. Clark and Mr. Clark announce the engagement of their daughter .
 Isabel Bcggs Scott of 2 Lagrange Street announces the marriage of her daughter, Sally Louise, to William Nelson Bursey, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs. Bursey . Sally Louise will be married to William Bursey Jr. William is the son of William and Mrs
 Following three years of military duty, he was appointed to the Foreign Service of the Department of State . He was appointed this fall to the State Department .
 Vice President, Marjorie Ralston, is Chairlady of this social and hopes that, all members and friends will attend . Vice-president, Marrjorie is Chair-woman of the social .
 Phis will be the one and only time this year this year the Department Finance Chairman, Mary Clark, will ask us for money for her project . Phis is one of the only times Clark will ask for money this year .
 Please mark the date on your calendar, Monday, November 13; come and bring a friend . Refreshments will be served after the social .
 Robert B Stewart, dean of the Tufts Fletcher School, commends Edward I Cohen . Cohen is a member of the Fletcher School's Fletcher School . Cohen was awarded a prestigious award for his work at Tufts .
 New \ ork industrialist, for his effective leadership in behalf of the nationwide Tufts l Diversity program for $7,550,000.
 Cohen, a Tufts alumnus, is a member of the national planning committee . Mr Cohen is also a former Tufts student .
 The Woman’s Auxiliary to the Middlesex East Medical Society will hold an important meeting on November 16 at 1:00m. in Hadley Hall of the Church of the Epiphany .
 This subject can prove fascinating not only to the antique enthusiast, but also to anyone interested in furnishing homes .
 Members of the Auxiliary urged to attend and to bring guests . Hadley Hall is a lovely place to meet and many people can be accommodated .
 There will be refreshments served, followed by a brief, but very important business meeting . A topic of vital interest will be brought to the attention of the members .
 It cannot be stressed too strongly that a great many women of the Medical Auxiliary should make every effort to be present .
 Epiphany Women General Meeting to be held in Hadley Hall, Tuesday, November 14 . Kenneth Watson, supervisor of case work for the Church Home Society, Boston will be guest speaker .
 He will discuss the work of the society placing children in foster homes and providing care and guidance for them . He will also talk about how the society provides care for foster children .
 Tickets must be reserved in advance and may be obtained from or at the church office . Tickets must also be reserved for the event .
 Greater Boston United Fund drive is first a story of volunteers and second money . The drive is a success story of volunteer efforts and money raised .
 Money will never be collected, counted or distributed to its agencies unless there are enough volunteer solicitors to call on every family in Metropolitan Boston . The United Fund needs some $14 million .
 United Fund volunteers have been working on the problems for weeks in preparation for the residential canvass that began on November 3 . This is one of the problems that key United Fund volunteer volunteers are working on for weeks .
 Teams of volunteers have been attempting to recruit solicitors to call on a few of their neighbors in behalf of the United Fund . Volunteers are working long hours after their regular jobs to raise money for the fund .
 One of their biggest difficulties is the old curse of public apathy, and the refusal of some who have volunteered before and found the role of the solicitor a hard one . One of the biggest difficulties of the volunteers is the refusal to volunteer again .
 Part of the “missing million” that has eluded the United Fund every year for the last four years is undoubtedly resting in the hands of willing givers whose doorbells have never been pushed . Campaign volunteers admit that part of the missing million is likely to be in the
 Mail a jigsaw puzzle postcard of Winchester to your friends, 25 cents each at the Winchester Star Free booklet . 24 fact-filled pages pin-point securities transactions .
 Includes practical work sheets that will bring your holdings into sharp focus for inventory and tax purposes . Includes practical use of work sheets to help you keep your holdings in sharp focus and tax records .
 Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club at the November 1st game . Winchester Duplicates Bridge Club . Winchester Bridge Club will play November 1th game .
 North-South Audrey Glaven and Rachel Sexton, 97, were crowned winners of the North and South . The results were; North-south Audrey and Rachel Glaven, 97 .
 Section B, which often inherits the intricacies of half-table scoring, once again had to be computed on a percentage basis . Section B also had to have its own percentage based on the fact that it is a division .
 Lloyd Butterfield, .611 Richard Smith and Blair Hawley, .579 Herbert Wood and < P Woodward, .558 Mr and Mrs. Lloyd Butterfeld, . 611 Richard and Blair . Smith .
 Pasquale, .616 John Nikula and Robert Arthur, .490 Board 16 in Section D was one of those interesting hands which confronts us with both a bidding dilemma and a delicate problem in play .
 We approve of South’s rehid of 3 diamonds . Although there is some merit to a call of 2 no trump or a raise in clubs, we approve of it .
 One pair played this in 5 dia1 monds and was destined to go down one . South A ¥ K 9 7 A 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 A K 4 3 East West A Q j 10 6 3 A 9 6 4 2 ¥ A Q 8 0 ¥ J
 Bob Haskell, who had been unable to locate a partner at the last minute, decided to spend the evening looking over our shoulder . Bob Haskell was unable to find a partner in the final minute .
 There was only one way to make this contract against any defense, he said . True to the kibitzer’s code, however, he pointed out afterwards that there was only the only way .
 Y’ou must avoid temptation to discard two hearts on your AS and KS . Defensive trump leads will reduce dummy's rutting power too soon .
 If West holds back his king and lets East ruff the second lead, he can't win back the lead . Nor can he bring in the diamonds he brought in if West doesn't hold back .
 Next Wednesday, the 16th, is master point night, and the Club’s Open Pairs Championship is scheduled for Wednesday, November 29th . This creates an extra entry to dummy and allows plenty of time to set up diamonds .
 The fair will he held from November 12 through November 18 at New England Life Hall . During each of these days speciul programs will be held for the many children from Boston and surrounding towns .
 Adventure In Store, Chocolate Soda; First Semester; and Second Semester, just published . Adventure In store; Chocolate Soda .
 She will describe to her youthful audience how a book develops from a simple idea into a reality . She will give a look at how a young woman's book develops into a book .
 Toot famous Brands at. Finast Wattles Dole ABC Breakfast Juice Pineapple-Grapefruit Juice Pineapples . Pineapple and Grapefruit Juice StarujAs, Toot.
 Ni Crosby's Pure Barbados Molasses iqtsozcont 43 c Dupont Sponges Med. Med. Ni Crosby is a classic Barbados mollassie .
 Subseof Agriculture, Orville L b reeman, j q q Uen t distribution will he made in Washington, D.C. A week prior through feed manufacturers and to the Chicago meeting . Distribution will he make in Washington . A week before the meeting, he made a
 Only one person in twenty-six is now engaged in tilling soil and tending livestock . Russia is forced to enslave nearly half its total population in collective farms .
 Americans have selected greater amounts of nutri tious meat, milk and eggs, available at reasonable prices, due to more efficient feeding . Glennon continued, “Our food Bupply is u most prized possession. Offered a wide choice of highly appealing foods .
 The manufactured feed industry has played an important role in utilizing new animal nutrition know ledge, and has become a source of new wealth and employment for other segments of our economy . The manufactured animal nutrition industry is an important part of the American economy .
 In less than half a century, the feed manufacturing industry has grown from a handful of grain and byproduct mixers to the 13th largest manufacturing industry in the United States . The industry is now the largest in the world devoted exclusively to providing goods and service to agriculture .
 It has a total investment of nearly two billion dollars, and annual gross sales of nearly four billion . Consisting of six thousand plants and twenty-five thousand dealers, it. has a . total investment . of nearly 2 billion dollars .
 Over a billion dollars worth of grain and high protein meals; . four hundred million dollars of transportation; . three hundred millions of food industry by-products; two hundred . millions of vitamins, antibiotics, minerals, minerals and chemicals . Hundreds of millions of fuel, utilities, credit, credit
 Glennon concluded, “The story of feed manufacture is the story of American industry and agriculture more potent than our mightiest missiles.” Glennon said .
 From Winchester were Naomi Fleischman, Judy Harmon, Gay Hoaglund, Robert Kessler, May Milliken and George Watson of Winchester High School . Linda Giragosian, Dare Paige and Barbara Tomlinson of Lynch Junior High School; and Anne Farwell and Arlene Wae
 Harris B Siegel, who teaches at Arl ington High School, teaches at Winchester High School . Another from Winchester attending the conference was Harris B . Siegel .
 The major objectives of the Col lege Student Conference were “to broaden and deepen American un derstanding of the achievements and aspirations of Africa’s people and to develop ideas which may be useful .
 Winchester Lodge of Elks will serve a spaghetti dinner at 12 o’clock noon . November 11, the Winchester Lodge will serve spaghetti dinner . Winchester Elks members will be at the Elks Lodge at 12 a.m.
 The first floor of the quarters have been renovated since the fire, so that all social activities of the club are again available . All social activities are now available .
 The local organization is appealing to all members to replenish the blood bank in the name of their lodge . The blood bank is being replenished by the local lodge .
 In the latter instance, the member was refused and thrown upon his own resources . In the other instance, he had to rely on the resources of the member of the public . The member of a public body refused and threw himself on himself .
 It is the duty of the members to take care of their own, says the lodge . "It reflects poorly on the lodge when a member’s plea for blood must go unheeded," he says .
 The bloodmobile will be at the Church of the Epiphany Monday, November 27 . The blood mobile will be available at the church .
 Gertrude Groesinger of the Animal Rescue League will tell of her experiences with finding homes for strays . She will tell how she has helped find homes for stray animals .
 Her job ranges from the pathetic to the heart-warming to the highly amusing, to the ulti mately satisfactory . Her job has been described as a 'humiliating' job .
 Groesin ger has never spoken in Winchester before and her story of her radio program on pet placement should be most interesting and entertain ing ing ing . Groesinsger has never been in the city of Winchester .
 A brief social hour (a “brief hour” is defined as one that passes quickly) featuring refreshments and chit chat will close the afternoon .
 Troop 61 did a conservation at Cedar which consisted of clearing away brush and wood of cut, diseased trees . The wild flowers of the area would not be damaged .
 Winifred Kelbley, Regina Harwood, Betsy Moore, Nancy Millican, Marilyn Bradley, Hannah Nowell, Ellen Buchanan, Valerie Kelbley and Janice Doherty went to the U.S. Girls who went to school in New Jersey were Winifed Kelbley .
 This was a worth-while project as well as one enjoyed by the girls in spite of the hard work involved . This was the first time the girls had taken part in the project .
 Troop 31 girls were investiture ceremony held at Mystic School on November 1 . Troops were invested by the girls at the Mystic School in New Jersey .
 Carol Anderson, Sydney Atkinson, Susan Hillman, Deborah Duffy, Gail Evans, Jean Fay, Nancy Han sen, Jennifer Knight, Louise Mears, Deborah Murphy, Paula Paglia, Carol Per rotti, Theresa Roche, Carol Scan dura, Jennifer Sibley, Christine
 Before the ceremony, the Girl Scouts of Troop 38, under the leadership of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson, organized the ceremony . The Girl Scouts were led by the Girl Scout's mother .
 Following the investiture refreshments were served to those mothers attending . The event was held in honour of those mothers .
 Herberich, the Winchester j League of Women Voters, partied1 paled in the Annual Conference of | the Adult Education Association in Massachusetts on Saturday, November 4 .
 The AEA in Massachusetts is an organization composed of representatives of civic, community, labor and industrial groups . It is composed of those involved in any form of Adult Education in the Commonwealth .
 Its purpose is to coordinate activities involving any form of Adult Education in the Commonwealth . The organisation is based in the UK and Australia .
 The theme of the November 4 meeting was “Effective Techniques of Public Affairs Programming .” selected participating organizations describe successful methods they have used in launching and carrying out programs .
 The purpose of the discussion was to exchange ideas and experiences which the conference participants can apply to their own organizational work . The conference participants will be able to use these ideas to improve their organization .
 The LWV has long used the discussion method as a means of disseminating information to its own members . The discussion method is a way of stimulating thought, study and active participation in League affairs .
 Adult Education Institute of New England arranged a series of courses on program presentation last winter . The League was invited to participate in the courses, which were held in New England .
 Herberich attended these seminars as one of the representatives of the LWV . He continued with a more advanced seminar in Boston this Fall .
 The League's Candidate’s Questionnaire was discussed as an example of “Using Mass Media”; and Mrs. Mrs. Smith discussed using Mass Media . The League discussed using the League's candidate's Questionnaire .
 He was born in Barton, N.S. in 1878, but came at the age of 16 to Bosj ton. He was killed in 1881 .
 He worked and studied at thi then Mullane Engineering School j her 6, at his home in Mullane .
 Later he held a similar position with the Diamond Power Specialty Company in Boston . He also held a position at the same company in Boston, Massachusetts .
 From Winchester he came to the Winchester plant of New England Laundries as a stationary engineer . He served in that capacity for more than 20 years, until bis retirement in 1043 .
 On July 3, 1030, Mr Smith married Beatrice L Bowditch of Somerville . They had lived in Winchester 31 years, the lust 10 years at their Washington Street addross .
 Funeral services were held Saturday afternoon at the BennettNorris Chapel . Funerals were held at the Chapel with Rev. Rev. William Bennett Norris . Rev. Norris was a member of the congregation of the deceased .
 Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., pastor of the First Baptist Church officiated at the service .
 "A Murder Has Been Aranged" is a terrific mystery drama by Emlyn Williams . The film stars Maurice Mullins, a smooth scoundrel, and a young wife .
 This is the fall paly of the Parish Players, to be given Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings, November 16, 17 and 18 on the stage of Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church .
 The cast includes Gene Pollard, .enore Gamage, George Connor, Nancy Dorsey, Phyllis Hollinshead, George Hebb, Elizabeth Shepard, Otis Jason, Rhoda Feuer . The cast also includes .
 Virginia Rideout, prompter; with Granville Gilpatrick in charge of the stage crew; Margaret Hodgson, setting; Mrs. Hodgson was setting, Mrs. Rideout was prompter and Mrs. Gillespie was setting .
 Troop 33 composed of girls in the 6th grade at Mystic School went on an overnight on October 27 and 28 to the Winchester Girl Scout Cabin .
 Friday evening meal was a onepot dish . Saturday breakfast was cooked on buddy burners which the girls made the night before . The girls made breakfast on Saturday morning with breakfast made from scratch .
 All fires were prepared by the girls and all meals were cooked by tho girls . The girls cooked all meals .
 The girls found their dunk bags containing their eating utensils frozen solid on the line outside . When the girls woke up Saturday morning, they found the bags inside .
 Audrey Puffer, Mary Fay, Lynn Jones, Dorriann Perrotti, Susan French, Susan Kajander, and Candace Grass are featured .
 Kary Laban, Wendy Nelson, Susan Beckley, Alma Fontaine, Janice O’Connell, Marilyn England, and Cornelia Taggart are among the winners .
 This exhortation was given at the end of his talk in a list of things we can do to sell the world on choosing the right but longer and harder way to a higher standard of living .
 Mr Kennedy included with active citizenship is the need to develop the study habit and the habit of keeping up in world affairs, he said .
 Mr Kennedy toured Africa in 1960 and was a reporter for the International News Service in 1956 . He was in South and Latin America during a two-month trip to Latin America .
 He then pointed out how susceptible these people are to the illu’sorv words of communism as it promises the quick, easy answer and change . How much harder is the job of the democracies to sell their longer, more difficult but better way to the same end, he
 This reporter followed up the assembly by attending a Modern Problems class . He found the talk and its questions carried over to some blackboard discussions .
 John wanted an appointment to West Point . Each was asked what he would like in return from the President . John wanted a West Point appointment .
 Maurice T Freeman of this town are listed among the patrons of the Christian Cul ture Lecture series sponsored by the Paulist Fathers . The Paulist Information Center is located at Park Street, Boston .
 The next in the series of lectares on November 15 at 8:15 will be given by Hon. Hon. John Dickson . The next lecture will be held at 8.15 p.m. November 15 .
 Frederick H Bo land is permanent representative of Ireland to the U.N. He has been in charge of the Irish delegation to the United Nations . He is a former member of the Republic of Ireland, Ireland's ambassador to the UN .
 Members of Realtors Councils “L” and “P” gathered last month for a Legislative Liaison night at the Winchester Country Club . Realtor Councils "L" and "P" met last month .
 The dinner meeting was held by a panel of real estate professionals . Attorney Clarence A Roberts is legislative counsel for the Boston Board and the Massachusetts Association of Real Estate Boards .
 The purpose of the meeting was to acquaint the individual realtors with the men and women who represent them at the State House . Realtors lay before the legislators the need for tax relief for the real estate industry .
 Among topics discussed formally and informally were zoning, metropolitan planning and urban renewal .
 Eugene A Boyle of Winchester, Winchester, died Thursday night, November 2 . He was a lifelong resident of Winchester . Eugene Boyle of 15 Nelson Street, 15 Nelson St. died Thursday .
 He was born in 1898 in Winchester and grew up in the town, attend ing the Winchester schools . He was also born in Winchester .
 In recent years he had been a guard at the I.G.A. in Burlington, Vermont . For a time he was associated with his brother at the Winchester Provision Co. He had been associated with him for a time but was recently retired .
 Marian Penfold of Clearwater, Florida; three sons, Eugene J of . Clearwater; James V of Lunenberg, and Paul E Boyle of, Winchester; three sisters, Sister M Reinette. stationed at Sacred Heart Convent in Bradford, Florida .
 The funeral was held Monday morning from the Costello-Moffett Funeral Home . The requiem high mass was held at St. Mary's Cathedral in Dublin .
 Rev. Rev. Joseph’s Church, Belmont, a nephew of the deceased, was celebrant, Rev. William Williams . Rev. Williams was a member of the Belmont family .
 Novemhad been in poor health foi* four years, hut his was wholly unI expected . Reginald Hall Wentworth of if* Allen Rond, a retired Edison Company lighting engineer, died suddenly Monday afternoon .
 He was born August f> 1905, in Somerville, Massachusetts, and grew up in that city .
 A Massachusetts registered professional engineer, Mr Wentworth spent 33 years with the Boston Edison Company . He retired in 1958 because of poor health .
 He was a member of the Illuminating Engineering Society and a Mason, a former member of Soley Lodge of Somerville, Massachusetts .
 In his more active years he was a member of a Masonic degree team composed of Edison employees . He was also a team of Edison workers .
 Mr Wentworth’s hobby was photography and he devoted many hours of his free time to that field .
 For 11 years he took motion pictures of Winchester High School football games for the school . He also took many stills of teams and other school groups . For the 11 years, he took pictures of school football games .
 In taking the football movies Mr Wentworth was assisted for seven years by his son, Jack, and after Jack’s death February 27, 1956, by his daughter, Jeanne .
 On August 18, 1928, Mr Wentworth married Victoria Atley of Somerville, Somerville . They came to Winchester from that city in 1939 .
 Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at 2 o’clock at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church . The minister will be Dr. Dr. David Johnson .
 Wynn C Fairfield was a distinguished Protestant church leader who died at Claremont, Calif., on October 14 . He was the father of Mrs. Fairfield, who died October 14, .
 Oil Burner Installations All Work Guaranteed Time Payment* WE 3-1720 27 Lake Avenue, Woburn J*nl2-tf Mrs. Conlon .
 Bridget M Callahan of 20 Kendall Street, wife of the late Timothy Callahan, died Monday afternoon, November 6, at Her home after an illness of three months at the age of 81 . She was the wife of Tim Callahan .
 She was born June 16, 1880 in County Kerry, Ireland, in 1880 . For more than 65 years she lived in Winchester and was one of the older members of St. Mary's St. Genealogy .
 She leaves a daughter, Sister M Eusebia, C.J., stationed at Sacred Heart Convent in Roslindale . She also leaves a son Officer William J Callahan of the Police Department . She leaves three grandchildren, Robert T a senior at Boston College, and Mary
 The funeral was held this Thursday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass at St. St. Mary's St. Michael's .
 She spent her early life in Burlington, later living in Montreal, Canada, and in Putnam, New York .
 She and Mr Symmes, a native of Winchester, were married June 24, 1936 . They first lived after their marriage on Kenwin Road, later residing a 4 Ridgefield Road until they moved to Melrose in December of 1948 .
 Symmes was a former member of Winchester Chapter, Order of the Eastern Star, but her interests were always centered in her home and family . She was always primarily focused on her family .
 Maryland Estes of East Providence R I.; and two brothers, John Payne of Pawtucket and Milton A Payne of Detroit, Mich. The family is also in Rhode Island .
 Funeral services were held Monday afternoon at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with the Rev. The Rev. Michael Bennett . The funeral services were conducted at the funeral home .
 Rev. Lewis Mills, assistant rector of Trinity Episcopal Church in Melrose, officiated .
 Mr Stepper is a Fulbright Scholar I studying at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He is a temporary resident of Winchester and a member of the Unitarian Church Choir .
 Mr Stepper will show slides of East and West Berlin us it is today . He will also discuss the problems facing Berlin .
 All interested High School students are invited to attend this very timely meeting, 6:30 Sunday at the Unitarian Church .
 Marguerite L Norwood, a former long time resident of Win Chester, died Sunday, November 5, at the Boston City Hospital, after a long illness . Norwood died at the hospital in Boston .
 She spent her early life in Bynum and later lived in West Virginia before moving to Winchester in 1927 . She spent most of her life in Winchester .
 She was a maid in the families of several Winchester residents, including the Clarence Millers, the William Wymans, and the Rev. Rev. William Wyman .
 John E Page lived at 22 Everett Avenue, accompanying the family to Maine during the summers . He was held in esteem by the Pages and their friends .
 Norwood retired from Page home and took up residence in Boston at 52 Atherton Street . Norwood is a former resident of the Page home .
 She leaves a niece, Mary Norwood, and two nephews, Frank Norwood and Jeff Norwood of Philadelphia, Pa. She leaves behind a niece and nephew .
 Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at the Kimball Chapel with Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister will also be remembered for his work in the field .
 He received his A.B. degree from Oberlin College in 1907 and his Bachelor of Divinity from the Oberlin Graduate School of Divinity in 1910 .
 Fairfield commenced his long career of service in 1909 when he was appointed a career missionary to China . Fairfield was appointed by the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions .
 He sailed in 1910, and on July 19, 1910, he was married in Karuizawa, Japan, to Miss Daisie Gehman of Norristown, Pa., who had been serving in China since 1903 .
 After their marriage they went on together to Taiku in North China, where they were stationed for the next 19 years . They were stationed in Taiku, North China .
 They served in church and educational work, being associated with Oberlin-Shansi Memorial Schools . Dr. Dr. Shansi died at the age of 92 .
 Fairfield was called to the headquarters of the American Board in Boston in 1929 . He served for the next 10 years as the board’s administrative secretary for China and Japan . Fairfield served for 10 years .
 He became secretary for general administration of the Foreign Missions Conference of North America in 1945 . His position involved liaison with the International Missionary Council, the Federal Council of Churches, the World Council of . Churches .
 Fairfield served in 1950 as administrative secretary of the National Council of Churches of Christ in the United States . Fairfield was a member of the planning committee that established the council of churches in the US .
 He was called up in 1951 to lend his extraordinary organizational and executive ability to Church World Service . He was the head of the National Council of Churches' department .
 He was executive director of this organization until his retirement in 1954 . He served as executive director for this organization .
 Fairfield was honored by the Turkish Red Crescent Society . He was made a life member and received the society’s medal in recognition of assistance given the Bulgarian Moslem refugees .
 Queen Juliana of the Netherlands presented him with the Order of Cranje Nassau in appreciation of aid given to the Dutch people during floods in 1953 . The Order was presented to him in appreciation for aid given during the floods .
 Fairfield went to Japan on behalf of the OberlinChansi Memorial Association . Fairfield was writing a history of the association at the time of his death .
 Fairfield gave heavily of his time and efforts to the strengthening of the American Council of Voluntary Agencies . Fairfield contributed greatly to the organization's continuing success .
 Fairfield leaves two sons, Frederic W Fairfield of Farmington, Mich, and John F Fairfield, a missionary of the United Church Board for World Ministries in Tokyo, Japan . Seven grandchildren and one greatgranddaughter also leave behind .
 Harold S Matthews, a former missionary, now in Claremont represented the United Church Board for World Ministries at the service .
 During the past several months of his illness, Larry received hundreds of cards and notes of good wishes which were a great comfort to him . In Appreciation, Larry says he is grateful for the cards and good wishes .
 Our sons, Robert and Ri•hard, and I would like to express our appreciation to all our friends in Winchester for their thoughtfulness at this time .
 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr. F Meredith Cooper (F Meredith Cooper) Margaret Cooper 4 Wedge Pond Road .
 Coach Knowlton is the coach of the year at W. Winchester High . He has coached the high school since 1988 . He is known for his work at the school .
 His standards have always been above reproach and any boy who has played for him will tell you he will tolerate no breach of the sportsman’s code . Any boys who have played under Roy Hodgson would tell you they would tolerate any breach of his code .
 Football coaches and officials who have competed against him or officiated in Winchester games will agree . Winchester has a history of officiating and officiating .
 Coach Knowlton has built a lot of real character on Manchester Field . Manchester Field has been home to Winchester since the 1940s .
 The West brothers, Rill and John; Charlie Lovejoy, Quicker Roche, Bill Whittemore . The West Brothers were college stars .
 Paul Amico, Jocko Serieka, Mike and John Murphy, Don Armstrong and others will testify to the ethics as well as the football they learned from him . The All America Joe Bellino will be interviewed at the end of this week .
 Coach has never believed winning is the beginning and end of coaching and has never compromised in the slightest the welfare of his boys . He has never said winning is not the end of the coaching career .
 Coach Knowlton has an enviable record of success in his 21 years of coaching here . He has been in charge of the Manchester United team since 1996 .
 Winchester won the Class C State State title in 1942 and 1946, and the B title in 1951 . Winchester also won Class B State titles in 1942, 1946 and 1951 .
 His ’55 team went undefeated and untied, but the polio scare that year cancelled several of its games . The polio scare made it impossible to pick up enough points for a championship .
 Only those showing no interest are dropped to permit more concentration on those who want to learn . Only those who show no interest should be dropped to allow more concentration .
 Last year he served on the Kennedy Committee for Physical Fitness . He has been highly complimented for his work by Ralph Colson, director of Physical Education .
 He has worked with and for his fellow coaches in their various organizations . He has coached and coached at various organizations throughout the world .
 He has never been too busy to talk Winchester sports to local groups who are interested . Winchester has a history of speaking to Winchester groups .
 His grasp of public relations has meant much to Winchester and to football hereabouts . He has been a key figure in the club's public relations department .
 His place in the affection of local sports followers is best shown by the gift to him a few years ago of an automobile by a group of citizens of all walks in life for his work with Winchester boys .
 Former Plymouth players recall his place in the hearts of his former players . And if you want an affidavit of his place, ask any one in Plymouth .
 Let’s face the facts about fallout shelters in Winchester: They just won’t save us . Let's Face The Facts: They won't save us. Let's face the fact that they just won't .
 Anything less than the truth at this moment of history is a cruel deception . But anything less than that is the truth is the real truth, he says . The truth is not the truth, it's the truth .
 Winchester is eight miles from the prime target area of Boston, and that even if it were thirty miles away, it would still be destroyed . The primary fact for . us to face is that Winchester is . eight miles away from Boston, the author says .
 In World War II the British could rush down to their underground ‘tubes’ and escape the bomb . The British were able to escape the bombs in the 'tubes' of their underground "tubes"
 Nuclear fire storms may suck oxygen out of your shelter, guaranteeing the entombment of all within . And it may serve as a funnel through which nuclear fire storms might suck the oxygen from your shelter .
 One sees cozy pictures of families seated in their basement shelters playing dominoes and drinking canned water . One sees pictures of people sitting in basement shelters with canned water and dominoing . One of the shelters shelters is in Haiti .
 "It will take us a while to find out what our bombs did to the Russians," he says . It will take a long time to see what Russia did to them, he adds .
 We will be too busy guarding our shelter doors against entry by the neighbors we were once asked to love . We will not be able to protect our shelter from the neighbor we once asked for .
 A suburban Chicago man installed a machine gun at his shelter door to fend off his former bridge partners . Lest this fact seem incredible, just recall the recent news of that Chicago suburbanite who installed the gun .
 Nevada has announced plans for a 5,000 man militia to fend off not Communists, but California refugees seeking shelter when the bombs hit the coast . Nevada has also announced plans to fight back against the Communist Party .
 This is nuclear war wc are facing, and to understand what it means we must entirely re-shape our thinking . We must all be re-shaped our thinking. This is what we are facing. We need to re-think our nuclear war .
 We must fight our way through the obscurity and delusion and outright deception that now paralyze our nation’s will to peace and face facts . We need to fight through this darkness and deception that paralyze us, our nation, must face facts. We must .
 President Kennedy said in nuclear war 70 million Americans would die . This assertion, entirely inaccurate, contradicts the statement of President Kennedy .
 President's statement contradicts Defense Secretary McNamara’s assurance that only one-quarter of the American people could be saved in shelters . Defense secretary McNamara said only a quarter of the U.S. people would be saved if they were saved .
 Nonpolitical scientists, on the other hand, state flatly that in an all-out 20,000 megaton mutual attack, mutual attack would not be possible . Non-political scientists say that would happen in a 'mutual attack'
 75 per cent of the Russian people would be killed if the U.S. went to war with the West, Russia and the Russians, it has been claimed . Russia would have been wiped out of existence if the war broke out .
 Let us suppose, Hagan say's, that the Soviets, not quite on target Boston, hit Cambridge City Hall with a 20-megaton bomb (twofifths the size of the bomb Russia tested last week .
 Deep blast shelters might help, but basement fallout shelters would be of no use . Within ten miles of this blast, the blast would be ten miles from Winchester .
 As far out as 15 miles from the blast, flying objects, including human objects, would endanger life .
 Within two minutes of the nuclear blast anyone in a 25-niiIe radius of the blast will receive a fatal dose . Yet within two minutes anyone in the 25-mile radius will die from the dose .
 Within 10 miles of the blast, merely looking at the tireball would permanently blind you . The blast occurred 10 miles from the site of the explosion .
 Let’s stop deluding ourselves that we in W. inchester can survive nuclear war . Let's not be deluded ourselves we can survive a nuclear war. We need to be more prepared to survive .
 Maybe if enough of us act on these facts and demand rational negotiation by the world’s statesmen, perhaps man can he be spared the certain death that awaits him if the bombs ever fall .
 In the name of mtr children and future generations, let us act now . Let us act in the name human reason and sanity, let's act now. Let us take action .
 Unspectacular hearings might be to the public at large, but to the individual concerned they are often of the most vital importance . The hearings may be of the greatest importance to the individuals concerned .
 There is no need to bore with statistics or details of these hearings of which literally hundreds take place each year . Hundreds of hearings are held each year in the UK .
 Selectmen do their level best to be sympathetic, non-partisan, impartial, and conscientious . Let it suffice to say that in each and everyone of them your Selectmen, however hackneyeded, might seem, do their best .
 In the town manager system, the administrative detail described by the Greenfield selectmen is placed in the hands of the town's town manager . This allows the selectmen for thorough study of the broad policy matters facing the town .
 The selectmen have responsibility for appraising the effectiveness of the manager’s administration since he serves at their pleasure . Over and above the consideration of policy, however, they have responsibility to appraise the effectiveness .
 The town manager must maintain political leadership when issues relating to the town’s administration threaten to entrap the manager in local politics . Furthermore, they must maintain leadership when they must be in charge of town administration .
 Town officials still remain the town’s ‘selected men’ and can furnish invaluable assistance to a town manager by interpreting public opinion on issues . They can also offer knowledge of a town's traditions and aspirations .
 Since Saugus accepted the manager plan in 1948, 22 towns have introduced enabling legislation in the General Court . The citizens of 12 of these towns have accepted it .
 The various acts parellell the duties and responsibilities established under the Saugus plan . There are certain modifications reflecting local situations and circumstances .
 The manager’s power to appoint varies somewhat from town to town for the positions that he might fill in theory may he the responsibility of the electorate, selectmen, or moderator rather than his .
 In Shrewsbury, the town clerk and town treasurer-collector are elected . The town accountant and town counsel are appointed by the selectmen . The finance committee and the personnel board are also appointed .
 Town of Ipswich has two enabling acts dealing with professional town management . The latter act calls for the establishment of a ‘town manager’ to be designated as executive secretary . Town manager is the town manager of the Ipswich Town Council .
 The 1949 statute called for the office of a town manager with complete authority for supervising and directing the administration of all departments, commissions, and boards, except the board of selectmen, the school committee, trust fund commissioners, election officers, and registrars of voters .
 "His authority to reorganize, consolidate or abolish departments, boards, commissions, and offices under his direction was singular," he said .
 The power to appoint the planning hoard was vested entirely in the person of the town manager . Hoard of public welfare, health, and public welfare were also vested in the power of the mayor .
 dissatisfaction with provisions of the enabling act brought about the submission of ‘remedial’ legislation to the General Court in 1954 . However, in the course of these four years dissatisfaction with the provisions of an enabling act was unsatisfied with .
 This act was quickly approved by the state legislature and subsequently by the citizens of Ipswich . Ipswich residents voted for the act to be approved by Ipswich police .
 The legislation broadens the authority of the hoard of selectmen by charging them with the responsibility for “formulating a general policy for administering the affairs of the town’s . Selectmen can direct and advise the town manager in any matters pertaining to the duties of his office .
 Ipswich has been the only one town to weaken the position of town manager . Of the 13 towns with ‘strong manager’ charters, Ipswich only one has weakened the position . Ipswich is the only town with a 'strong manager' charter .
 The manager is responsible for the efficient administration of all departments, boards, and commissions under his jurisdiction .
 He should make recommendations to the selectmen on such matters as he thinks desirable, he says . He should also make recommendations for the selectman to make .
 He may reorganize, abolish, or consolidate departments, boards, and commissions under his direction . He may also reorganize or consolidate boards, commissions and commissions .
 He must purchase all supplies, materials, and equipment with the usual statutory exception to hooks for schools . He must also purchase all materials, materials and equipment .
 He is required to keep the selectmen informed of the financial condition of the town and its future needs . He is also required to report the town's financial condition .
 He must prepare and submit to the selectmen and finance committee his annual budget . He must submit his budget to the committee .
 He should keep the selectmen and indirectly the public informed about the operations of all aspects of the town’s government . Finally, he should also inform the public about the town government .
 Ten of the seventeen Massachusetts towns had been managers in other communities before they were hired for their present posts . Ten of those towns had previously managed in other towns .
 The remaining seven had previously served as assistants to managers, had held other positions in local government, or had come from governmental research work .
 Five managers arc products of the unique public management program conducted by the Univcr sity of Maine . The others arc from various schools with degrees in business, public amdinistration, or engineering . Five managers are products from the unique program .
 The average period of time they have served their present community is 3 and one-half years . Six of the seventeen have been in the same community for five or more years .
 Massachusetts town managers are being paid in the salary range of between $7,000 per year and $16,500 per year depending on the number of years with the town and the community’s size and ability to pay . Town managers are currently being paid as much as $7
 The town manager method of administration is relatively easy to explain . It is difficult but apparently necessary to explore the psychological impact of the town manager concept on the New Fnglander .
 The Maine development is unique in New England . For a variety of reasons, it is the first of its kind .
 No other New England state has had as many factors creating the milieu necessary for the establishment of the manager plan as has Maine . Maine is one of only two states to have a manager plan .
 There seems to be practically a natural antipathy toward the town manager concept in Massachusetts .
 People object to the manager plan rather than anything else . However, upon closer analysis the reasons” why people object to it seem to involve misconceptions about it rather than any other thing else .
 After 31 years and numerous reprintings, her book discourages peers as a survey of man’s supreme culture . Her book was published 31 years ago and has been reprinted since .
 "It's at once scholarly and exciting, it's a hook to treasure and know hy heart. It is at once scholar and exciting and exciting," says author .
 She is content to describe what DID happen in the first culture in which the spirit of the East and the reason of the West were joined . The first culture where man ceased planning his life in terms of death, accepted life's challenge and lived it with joy .
 For the Greeks there were no limits to thought, no forbidden areas beyond the light of inquiring reason . The Greeks believed that there was no limit to thought. For example, the Greeks believed there was a ban on thought .
 Sophocles: Man was great because he could think, talk, wonder, doubt, and decide . He said he was great, not only because he tamed the seas and wild animals, but because he thought, talked, and decided . Sophoches: Man is great because
 Throughout Asia Minor, Miss Hamilton writes, the missionary Saint Paul was mocked and beaten . The missionary was mocked, beaten and beaten throughout Asia Minor .
 In Athens the same crowds that thrilled to Aeschylus’ tragedies and delighted in Aristophanes’ limitless spoofs, listened politely to word of the Christ . But in Athens the crowds were polite to hear word of Christ .
 They had a burning compulsion to know and suffered no censor but the internal censor of reason . They suffered no censors but internal censors of reason, they said . They had no censor, they suffered no censorship, they added .
 On these two commandments, engraved at the Delphic shrine, hung all the Greek law and the prophets . The two commandments were engraved in the Delphi shrine .
 Unashamed by the beauty and joy of the body, they celebrated life in sculpture and in fact, free of inhibiting fears, they said .
 In this celebration they founded an art, a literature, a science, a philosophy, a society in which the requirements of mind and body were related in balance . The celebration was a celebration of an art and literature, literature, science and a philosophy .
 Xenophon led 10,000 Athenians to freedom from the tyrants of Persia . The dramatist Aeschylus was an army general, while the erudite Xenophon immortalized Socrates in his "Memorabilia" Xenophon .
 The Greeks, writes Miss Hamilton, were the first people who knew how to play . The Greeks were first people to play the game .
 For them the athletic event itself embodied the human genius in a splendid concert of mind and body . For them, they said the Olympic Games was an example of a human genius .
 For them a gold trophy would have been superfluous, a simple crown of olives for the victor did nicely . For them they would have preferred a simple gold trophy for the win .
 Facts in turn were important only so far as they brightened the passage from wrong to right . And facts in turn, they are important only to the point of fact, and facts are important .
 In the later Greek religion, ethics preceded magic and no idea that could not stand up under critical inquiry was considered worth holding . In Homeric myths, ethics before magic was considered to be ethics .
 In poetry and prose they loved facts, for the purpose of their literature was not to obscure or embroider, hut to clarify and teach . They loved facts and were not to embroider and embroider .
 The result was the clean prose of Plato telling the tale of Socrates in language more alive than our own . The historian Herodotus scouring the world for data on strange cultures, telling the glorious .story of Thermopylae .
 Greek tragic playwrights invoked pity, awe, and exaltation to show' man that suffering was not private pathos hut part of the cosmos itself, rooted in past evil, to he born nobly .
 They sought to show ‘mankind in a man’ the general truth in the particular fact. They sought, writes Miss Hamilton, to show the truth .
 Greece is dead, its wondrous balance of mind and spirit never quite found again, its joy of life almost fantastic in the age of the Hydrogen bomb . Now Greece has been declared dead by the Greek government . Greece's joy was never found again .
 If this age of science and hidden persuasion cannot recover the rational Greek spirit, it can perhaps learn something from reflecting on why Greece was great, she writes .
 We can perhaps realize how much we have permitted private greed to obscure community need . Little balance exists in our society between the things of Caesar and God, says author . We can see how little balance exists between Caesar and Caesar .
 The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements . Will publish without a correction in the next issue of the issue .
 Page Seven Town Comptroller lown Manager Remember When thorn thorn. Buckley, chairman William G Andrew Thomas B Brennan i The Winchester Star .
 We are noi was important that we heard Mr Kennedy, and will hear in the future* other persons of public prominence. It was important Mr Kennedy was heard, and we will hear him again,’s mother said .
 You published a letter last week, signed, “Disturbed Mother,” which bothers me deeply. could not agree less than I do with the I authorities for sponsoring this writer. Mr Kennedy. could . agree less . than I . do with . the I . authorities for
 We feel If she had attended the Parent that the student body is adult Advisory Meeting, that same 1 was enough to jydge anti criticize such week, and later, the High School a speech for its real merit . We feel if she'd attended a Parent that . had attended a
 Whether Mr Kennedy’s intentions were political or otherwise, we should be exposed to such a talk as part of our educational experience . We should also learn about the impact of the Kennedy's views on education .
 Winchester High School Student Council meerned with I together to find a way to odu his success or failure in presenting cate our Town in what to do and j ommendations the subject . Winchester High school Student Council found a way of oduing his success . Winchester
 "Our school system is doing fine job, and is constantly on the alert for new methods and techniques. Our school system does fine job," says superintendent .
 No matter what tomorrow is like, we should be teaching our children to make the new family next door welcome . Children should be taught to help the injured robin that they find in the yard .
 The best way to teach it is by doing it ourselves, not spending all or even part of our time criticizing, avoid ing, and pretending not to see situations that are right near us .
 Teachers can get a very good idea of what makes Susy the way she is, after a chatty and informal session with Susy’s mother .
 The mother can see for herself why the child enjoys the teacher . And if the mother cares to, she can . see . for herself . The mother of the child can also see why she likes the teacher.
 As long as there is a world, as we now define it, there will be people . "There will always be people in the world as we define it," says David Cameron .
 "I think the best preparation for living in it, no matter what talents we possess in science, math, art, you name them, is to learn to live with people in warmth and thoughtfulness"
 A Town Comptroller be namL» ‘ . ‘ on August 25 of that year . The proposal duce an apathy or lethargy among people in high places .
 Under jin explaining the Walpole Town j $22,000. such a system bills now mailed out I engineer plan (cf. under jin) Such a system would have cost $23,000 .
 We stood in the background while our children rang the doorbells for their treat . We stood behind the scenes as they rang the bellbells to celebrate .
 As we took out their treats to sort them for the children we were disgusted to find ground eggshells wrapped in a napkin . The whites of eggs and dirty candy were mixed together and coated with black pepper .
 Two of the children received napkins of candy that was full of lack pepper . Two children were given napkins full of pepper instead of candy .
 It is hard to believe a nerson would stoop so low as to do such a thing to a child . The victim was taken to hospital after the attack .
 Mr Edward "Ted" Kennedy addressed Winchester High School students on Thursday morning . Mr Kennedy addressed the Winchester High school student body at the school .
 His speech concerned his trip j bills with no money for extras, through Latin America; he touched . The trouble is, also, people do upon the problems of our neighbors .
 Winchester should have a large community Fallout shelter, with arrange ments for aged and children . Why can’t Winchester have such a large Fallout shelter? Winchester has a large number of Fallout shelters .
 3 Churcli Street, Winchester — PA 9-5300 John 1 . Lots of people live from day to day hoping they can pay their taxes . John 1. John 1: Don't forget that it's a job .
 "The play is fast-paced; the outcome always excitingly uncertain to the very end" The play is always exciting and uncertain, says the director .
 King’s letter recommending compulsory building of atomic shelters, is based on the same fallacy that is the undoing of most other ‘compulsory” programs . King's letter to the U.N. should be based on same fallacy as many other “compuls
 It assumes that one or more all-wise and all-powerful people happen to have the “right” an swers, and that less fortunate individuals must somehow be forced to see the light . The idea is that someone has the ‘right’ answers,
 The tragedy comes when such a master plan is followed, only to find out later that the planner purposely or accidentally left out some small detail which completely alters the value of the plan . The tragedy is when the planner deliberately or accidentally .
 An ordinary raincoat, boots and hat, plus a handkerchief tied around the face will do very nicely . If the problem is protection from fallout, an ordinary rain coat, boots, hat and hat will do .
 Close all windows, doors, air conditioners, wall fans and chimney dampers . Simply close all windows and doors .
 Obviously then, the fallout shelters described are not intended for fallout, but for blast, heat, or radiation protection . The shelters described were intended for blast or heat protection, not fallout .
 For radiation shielding, an ordinary home cellar is probably as safe a place as can readily be devised, and it doesn’t cost a penny . An ordinary cellar is a good place to hide radiation from radiation .
 If the danger is supposed to be blast or heat, then the outdoor shelter built underground is certainly best . If you're in danger, it's best to build a shelter underground .
 The cellar shelter, even if built with cement blocks, could very well become a death trap . Even if built in the cellar, the cellar shelter could become a deadly trap .
 If a shock wave or blast rocks the house enough to bring it tumbling down upon the cellar strong-room, there is an excellent chance that the water pipe or gas pipe inlet will be broken loose either in the basement or inlet .
 "The ultimate safety of the American public will come from greater knowledge of the terrors confronting us," says President Obama . The ultimate safety comes from knowing of the dangers confronting us, he says .
 Safety will not come from madly rushing to build artificial and inadequate shelters, but from learning slowly and painfully the characteristics of various forms of mass aggression . The best means of evading, decontaminating or counteracting assaults is to learn the characteristics .
 Then, and not till then, it will be proper to start building your own particular shelter for your own needs . Then, not until then, you will be able to build your own special shelter .
 The voters get duplicating and supply functions, j the id’*a that at last they can lay their hands on the report . i (IoVvn) let the town the General Services Department mn Itself .
 YVo think there is overburdened with work or it is not busy at all . °** government up to a point where 3.5% of the population thinks there is not enough work . °* government . °-strength in the town-meeting form not busy
 The size of the town prevents it, in the Treasurer and Collector’s of lice to increase efficiency, including an adding machine equipped for possible future electronic papertape punching devices, an electric letter opener, and an automatic time stamp .
 R bookkeeping machine now used in the Accounting Department to be moved to the General Services Department . The General Services department will also acquire a bookkeeping device equipped to accommodate possible future electronic devices .
 Under the present system three precincts are billed every three months . Under the current system, three precincts will be billed every 3 months .
 Mr Sinclair proposes that one precinct be billed every month to assure a more steady flow of money into the Town Treasury . He wants to avoid unnecessarily busy periods every three months . He proposes that the precinct should be billed each month .
 Establishment of h forms control program could help reduce costs of Town stationery . Standardization of forms and stationery might be effected .
 It has been our purpose to retain it in its essential features. In this connection, purchase of a photocopy machine and the use of a multilith offset printand it has been its purpose to .
 Hie facts, however, seem to indicate that particular issues determine the interest shown in town meeting for any one year . Town meeting is held in town halls across the country .
 The primary strength of the manager plan is the unification of powers in the town meeting and the selectmen rather than their piecemeal distribution among several boards, departments, and commissions . The town meeting is meeting with selectmen and town board members .
 There is no real danger to democratic government from town manager system, says author . Elected selectmen alone make the final decisions, and must stand or fall on these decisions .
 As for the town manager, he continuing machine to produce forms now . The town manager continues to occupy the uneasy role ot printed or purchased from stocki .
 This is as it should Mr Sinclair. be; for as long as elected men fi7.7. This is . as well as Mr . Sinclair. , .. , , . . , .. . , . , u . u . and u . . Sinclair: "This is as
 Massachusetts town government is lown government cannot reach another without calling through j at j at ( ^ a 1 secU10 ‘ ‘ the telephone office.’ ‘
 A call from an outside party cannot be transferred from one department to another, meaning that anyone calling must hang up and dial another number . Anyone calling from outside party can't be transferred to one department or another .
 The greatest effort of all times by children to help children was marked by careful planning, smooth organizing and the wholehearted enthusiasm of all involved . Locally sponsored by Metcalf Union of the Unitarian Church and Girl Scout troops .
 Local residents who were away from home Hallowe’en night can still make their contribution . Local residents were not reached by the young Trick or Treaters for some other reason .
 Donations will be accepted at Winchester Trust Co. and W Allan Wilde & Son Insurance Agency from today until November 10 . Donations are being accepted from today to November 10 at the Winchester Trust .
 Cub Scouts Cub Scout registration will be held at the Noonan School Auditorium on Wednesday, November 15, at 7:30m. Cub Scouts will be in attendance at the school's Auditorium .
 Boys between the ages of 8 and 10, and accompanied by both parents, are eligible for the program . Boys are eligible to participate in the program if accompanied by parents .
 Use of a tape recorder at meetings of various boards while) testimony is being given . Use of tape recorder is a common practice .
 Realtors Real Estate — Mortgages Insurance PArkview 9-1492 au«12-tf immediately being made for the erection of the present stone building at the corner of Main Street and the Parkway .
 This church, costing $40,000, was completed and dedicated April 27, 1899 . This church was completed in 1899 and dedicated in 1899 .
 The Gifford school, prior to 18(55, was a primary school building located at the corner of Washington and Myrtle streets .
 When it became necessary to have better accommodations for the high and grammar school pupils, it was moved from this location . A new grammar school was built there, named in 188b for Edward A Wadleigh .
 The old Gifford school was moved to Main Street beside the then Unitarian Church . The old school was used as a primary school for children from the center and much of the East Side .
 Children from Symmes Corner attended the school for their 4th and 5th grade work . The school was used to help students with their work in 4th/5th grade .
 At its peak the school housed five grades and a kindergarten, ft ft was torn down in the four-school building campaign .
 Immaculate 10-vear-old CAPE, lovely location, 3 large bedrooms and family room . Beautiful location, three large bedrooms, family room.
 Members of The Ark staff, (Herb included), are kept busy after hours with a heavy schedule of lectures and discussion groups .
 Children’s Museum of Boston and Museum of Science work closely with each other . The museum is based in Boston, Massachusetts, and Boston, New Hampshire .
 Herb has conducted courses in Herpetology at the Children’s Museum, and serves as an advisor to its live animal collection staff . Herb is a member of the museum's Herpetologist Advisory Board .
 Herb has filled The Ark with the usual run of pet shop animals, such as cats, dogs, parakeets, and tropical fish . The Ark is filled with a horde that would be the envy of Noah .
 More than fifty species of turtles, snakes, many snakes, monkeys, toads, macaws and even tarantulas have paraded their way through The Ark to eager buyers .
 Both common and scientific names adorn the cages, together with descriptive educational legends which make a visit to the shop a Natural History course in itself .
 Herb Clement was still an ardent student of the violin, (which he still plays), and plotting to assault the world of classical music . Whoever wrote that inscription knew Herb Clement better than ho knew himself back in those days .
 Seven-room seven-room home in Washington School area . Many unusual features under $40,000 .
 Three bedrooms, den, fireplaced living room, dining room, modern kitchen . Modern kitchen. Three bedrooms. Fireplace living room .
 Each apartment bus a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full buseiucnt for hobbies or play area .
 CAPE in excellent condition with three bedrooms plus nursery, or sewing room . In excellent condition, the home has three bedrooms and a nursery . The home is located in an excellent condition .
 F'i replaced living room, dining room, modern kitchen with dishwasher and eating area; finished play room . Modern kitchen, modern play room and finished playroom .
 Gertrude H Murphy, PA 9-2310 Richard H Murphy 9-6213 Marion It. RUTH C PORTER CO., Realtors . 13 THOMPSON STREET PArkview .
 Four-bedroom Cape in Parkhurst School area . C harles T McCarthy, PA 9-5972 . Four-bed Cape . Parkhurst .
 K Four-bedroom (’ape in Wyman School district) Four-bed home is located near Wyman . Deluxe kitchen with laundry facilities. Deluxe kitchen and laundry facilities .
 Roderick L Bullen, Real Estate Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 . Barbara DeCamp and Jean Gibb also listed as real
 Dining room, modern electric kitchen and lavatory complete the first floor . Modern electric kitchen, lavatory and modern electric ovens also feature on first floor of home .
 Three chambers, 2M> ceramic-tile baths, family room with fireplace, two car garage . Two car garage, two-car garage .
 Realtor 38 Church Street PA 9-3320, 0047, 5612, 2672, 1164, 5046, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER . Good older home. Realtors can call their realtor at 38 Church St.
 Features a beautiful yard, secluded porch, panelled game room with fireplace, large living room, three bedrooms, unfinished fourth bedroom . Three bedrooms, four bathrooms, four bedrooms and unfinished fourth .
 Large modern modern Split Level with five bedrooms, two baths and two bathrooms . Split Level home has five bedrooms and two baths .
 North Shore — Four-bedroom, three-bath newly converted carriage house . Duplex, five bedrooms, two baths, unfurnished. Duplex . Available December 1, 1961, to September 1, 1962. $250 per month .
 A sincere buyer has sold his present home and wishes to buy a good-sized familytype home with four to six bedrooms, in Winchester, Winchester .
 Hill brick and frame Colonial with excellent first-floor family room, library, two-car garage, lurge fencedin lot, and many other plus features . West Side Hill . Hill brick . frame Colonial .
 Alfred D Elliott was a member of the Co-operative Bank's Security Committee . Ralph R Macaulay, Vacuum Cleaner Sales and Service, was a key member . Alfred D. Elliott was chairman of the Board of Directors .
 Lindsay H Caldwell, Winchester, is a member of the backstage committee for the annual fushion show of the Retailing Club of Westbrook Junior College, November 9 .
 Everett P Stone, formerly of 10 Warren Street, have left for Florida where they will stay for several months . After that they will go on to California, they will move on to Florida .
 Richard C Ashenden, Jr., of 99 Pond Street has been elected commodore of the Manchester Harbor Boat Club .
 Margaret Corrigan, proprietress of the Mar-Cel Beauty Shop on Washington Street, attended the Fall demonstration of the latest hair styles given at the John Hancock Hall by Breck Hair Products on Monday, October 30 .
 They returned to Winchester most enthusiastic to put these latest methods and styles into practice . They returned with enthusiasm to put them in practice .
 Kodak color prints and Christmas cards should be ordered now at the Winchester Camera Shop . Dr. Dr. nov2-tf Dr. Martin's Christmas cards are available now .
 George E Kimball of 20 Everett Avenue is attending the meetings of the Operations Research Society in San Francisco this week . Kimball is attending a meeting of the operations research society .
 Kimball will visit in Appleton, Wisconsin, for Parents’ Day at Lawrence College . Kimball’s daughter Susanna is a member of the freshman class .
 The event marks the launch of new programs of education and of campus development .
 John F Hogan, Jr., of 38 Salem Street and Emily H Marks of 32 Foxcroft Road have been drawn by the selectmen to serve as traverse jurors, commencing December 4 . The selectmen have drawn two women to be traverse jurors for the first time .
 Lewis M Foster of 34 Lloyd Street, is serving aboard the escort destroyer USS Carpenter . He was scheduled to take part in Operation ‘Silver Sword’ on October 30, assaulting beaches on the Island of Maui in the largest meneuver of its kind to take place .
 Lt. Lt. of the Air I Force navigator received the wings of a navigator on October 23, at Harlingen AFB, Texas, . Lt. Cpl. Receives AF Wings Receiving
 RICHARD BINGHAM is the son of Mr and Mrs. Richard Bingham . He is now ready to take his place with the nation’s Aerospace Force following 38 weeks of training .
 While in training at this South Texas Air Training Command Air Force base, he was taught the fundamentals of electronics, dead reckoning and radar navigation as pertains to today's rapidly advancing Aerospace Force .
 Bingham has been assigned to Keesler AFB, Miss., for advanced training . Bingham will be stationed in Mississippi for the next two years .
 Edward Bowler of the Police Department last week attended a week-long refresher course for instructors in first aid at the Red Cross chapter house in Salem .
 Bowler was for ten years chairman of Red Cross First Aid in Winchester . Bowler conducted many first aid classes during his time at the Red Cross .
 Alumni Club of Arlington, Lexington and Winchester members will take an active part in the homecoming festivities . The homecoming will be held at the University of Winchester in Winchester .
 When you want to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair or a good used car Dlease call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, VHssion 3-8000 .
 Mary R DiCenzo of 23 Bromfield Street, Lawrence, reported to police on Monday that she had crashed into the pedestrian cross light at the intersection .
 Winchester Emergency Committee for WGBH is mailing a town-wide appeal for funds to rebuild the educational station this week . WCBH is located in the Winchester, Massachusetts, area . The Winchester committee is hoping to raise funds for the station .
 Many parents in the community enjoy watching this TV window on education with their children . The children's education window is a popular educational program on PBS .
 The lecture, music, art, and theatrical programs offer all of us a seat at some of the outstanding educational and cultural events of Boston. Boston.com .
 Please give so that we can keep informative WGBH radio and television, one of New England’s valuable assets, in existence . Please give us a small gift to help keep the station in New England .
 Glacken, past president, North Council; Mulhall, acting manager, Winchester telephone office . Mulhall is acting manager of Winchester phone office . Glackens is past president of North Council and past president past president .
 The Boston Edison Company is sponsoring the attendance of 10 science students and eight science teachers . The three-day conclave will take place November 9 through November 11 . Boston Edison is sponsoring attendance .
 The purpose of the Conference is to present to a group of the nation’s most able high school science students and teachers a first hand, authoritative picture of the promise of the peaceful atom in its various applications .
 In the manufacture of paper, the fibrous stock is subject to treatment which reduces it to uniformly fine particles and forms it into a wet sheet or web that is processed into the finished paper .
 It often happens that the wet sheet contains fibrous masses or aggregates of random sizes and shapes . The wet sheet is often filled with random masses of random shapes and sizes .
 These masses are undesirable for paper making and many devices and processes have been proposed to avoid their formation . Paper making is difficult to make with masses of paper .
 Fibrous masses, if of controlled sizes and high density, have numerous filler for plastic molded articles, and as a carrier for chemicals such as medicines and insecticides . Fibrous mass can also be used as carrier for medicines such as insecticides and insecticide .
 It is desirable to have an efficient and inexpensive meth od and apparatus for producing them . Thus it is desirable for an efficient meth od .
 In accordance with their invention, the raw material is formed into a continuous wet* web or sheet . The web is directed onto the conventional endless wire screen used in the manufacture of paper .
 As the web is advanced on the screen, it is cut into eontinuour ribbons by water jets impinging against it . Water jets are impinging on the web, cutting it into ribbons .
 The ribbons are then subjected to the action of a scuffing belt and associated devices . They are cut into predetermined lengths which are rolled tightly and dried to form fibrous nodules or masses that are of desired weight and size .
 The fibrous aggregates or masses of their invention may be made from the usual cellulose paper-making materials, from synthetic resins such as rayon and nylon, and from mineral fibers such as asbestos and glass fibers .
 Plastic molding material may be used as an inert carrier for various chemical compositions . Insecticides, fertilizers, soil conditioners and the like are released or leached out gradually .
 This patent has been assigned to Arthur D Little, Inc., Inc., Cambridge, Mass. This patent was filed in the United States in 1994 . The patent is pending pending litigation in the U.S.
 The late Charles A Farrar of Winchester was honored at the Pioneer Lounge and Work Shop of the Telephone Pioneers of America . The late artist was a member of the group .
 Spmicon, Inc. announces the appointment of Rolland V Robison of Winchester as President of the electronic semiconductor manufacturing firm . Robison will be the new President of Spmicon of Bedford, Bedford .
 Robison was formerly associated with Sylvania Electric Products, Inc. as sales engineer, product planning manager and product sales manager in the Semiconductor Division .
 He received his B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from South Dakota School of Mine and Technology and his M. S. degree from Harvard Business School . He also received his M S. in Business Administration from Harvard .
 The world premiere of the Vassar Centennial Opera, “Command Performance, is at Kresge Auditorium in Cambridge on November 17 . The performance will be performed at the Cambridge Auditorium .
 The cast party was held at the Mrs. T Faculty Club, and the cast party following he performance, at the -home of Mrs. J. T .
 Davies, class of ’96 at Vassar, has been a frequent visitor to Winchester . Davies is a senior member of the class of '96 at the University of Winchester .
 Swanson was an artist in the Laboratories’ technical illustration section . Swanson was one of many employees and members of their families who entered works in the categories of oil painting, sculpture, photography, crafts, and drawing, water color, and graphic art .
 The Work Shop has also set up to provide an additional service of repairing talking ma chines used by the blind .
 North Council Pioneers operate programs on volunteer and spare-time basis . Both programs are operated by active and retired members of the Pioneers .
 Two of the first fifteen machines in need of repair were actually restored to operating condition in the process of showing visitors how this work can be done . During the open house, two of the 15 machines were shown how they can be repaired .
 Mrs. John J Sullivan of Winchester was sisterin-law of Charles A Farrar, and his sister, Mrs. Mrs. J Sullivan, of Winchester, and Mrs. Charles A. Farrrar, died in hospital .
 This is indeed a touching tribute to the loyalty and activity of our dad and we know he would be exceedingly proud of such an honor .
 A group of Pioneers tackled the first batch of machines in need of repair last Monday night . Milton Dickey of Woburn, chairman of the Community Activities Committee, tackled them .
 This marks the beginning of a plan de signed to provide faster repair service . This will allow a more nearly con stant operation of this equipment so vital to these people .
 Mr White is president of the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company . He is also senior vice president of a Telephone Pioneers of America .
 Others are Mr Thomas M Hennessey, vice-president of the company; Mr Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr., chairman of the Board of Selectmen; Rev. Rev. Richard W Salt, Jr. and Rev. Sherman W. M. Saltmars . Others are
 Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., Jr., of the First Baptist Church; and Mr John M Dick, association vice-president for New England. Mr Dick is association vice, for New Hampshire .
 Mr Dick is returning to Winchester, having recently purchased a new homo on Ginn Road . Mr Dick recently moved in to Winchester .
 Miss Katherine M Doyle of Winchester was one of seven of the ten former presidents of the North Council who attended . Several presidents from other councils in Massachusetts, coming from New Bedford, Fall River, Framingham, Gloucester, and other points .
 Assisting Mr Dickey in the Work Shop was Mr Kevin Smith of the State Division of the Blind . Mr Smith is a member of the state's Blind Division . Assisting Dickey was Mr Smith from the State Department of The Blind .
 Mr A1 Korn of the Winchester Appliance Co. provided a stereophonic radio-record console for the occasion . Winchester Appliances Co. supplied the stereo equipment for the event .
 Jnyccen MMr ing, Winchester Red Crons House, 7 :30 m.m. November 9, Thursday, Thursday . Winchester Winchester Jnccccen, Winchester, Winchester .
 History Group of Winchester College Club will meet at tho home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . History Group will meet in the home of Johnson at the Winchester College .
 Grooslnger of the Animal Rescue League will talk on her experiences placing peta by radio . She will also talk about her experience placing pets by radio.
 Parish Players present English mystery, ""A Murder Has Been Arranged"" in Chidley Hall, First Congregational Church . November lfi, 17 18, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Saturday .
 College Club Art Group will meet at the entrance of the Addison Gallery, Andover, just before ten o’clockm.m. November 17 .
 Dave Maynard, well-known disc jockey, one of ""The Live Five" on Station WBZ, Boston, will entertain . Maynard is one of the best known radio personalities in Boston .
 Troop 9. extend cordial invitations to the mothers of all the girls to attend . Troop members, friends and the girls of Troop. 9. extended cordial invitation .
 Lillian Rose was born October 26 at Beth Israel Hospital, Brookline . John J Merieantante, 26 Loekeland Road, announces the birth of their fourth child, third daughter .
 Carl Magnus Pi hi, II, of Moores town, New Jersey, announce the arrival of a son . Stephen William Pihl, Ocotber 21, was born to Carl Magnus Pihls, II .
 Grandparent honors are shared by Marshall R Pihl of Winchester and Dr. and Mrs. Mrs. Pihls of Winchester . Grandparents are Marshall R and Dr . and Mrs Pihll of Winchester, Winchester .
 William G Hook of Big Spring, Texas, formerly of Danvers. y i i i Mr and Mrs. Hook were married in Danvers, Massachusetts .
 John H Atkinson of 21 Mark Street, Burlington, announce the birth of their second child, John Malcolm . John Malcolm was born at Winchester Hospital on Sunday, October 29, at the Winchester Hospital .
 Donald G Martin of Winchester are proud to announce the birth of their third child, second son, Gary Philip . Gary Philip was born on November 4th at the Winchester Hospital . The Martin family is proud to give birth to their second son .
 James G Frailey, of Timonium, Maryland, gave birth to his first daughter, Lisa Pendleton Frailey November 6 . He is married to James G. Frailey and his first wife, Laura Pendleton, a mother of four .
 C WAFFLE CREAMES new EDUCATOR NUT CRACKERS EDUCator HOLIDAY ASSORTED COOKIES SUNSHINE KRISPY CRACKER KIES 2 pkgs. 29c each 19c p k g19c -oz.
 Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday Special, November 13, 14, 15 Pork Chops 69c lb. P k S45c P k . S29c P . 29c P. g* 29c Monday and Tuesday specials . P k ?25c P  S.29c
 Wincheater's 101.5% volunteer enrollment are Sherman W Saltmarsh. The show will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Winchester’s Board of Selectmen Jr. Jr. and William D Sullivan, town chairman for the United Fund drive. Jr., chairman of Winchester, left, left . Town chairman: Winchester's board of selectmen is chairman for United Fund Drive .
 First joint report luncheon held recently at United Fund headquarters in Boston . Mayors' Day is Mayors’ Day .
 The atmosphere was friendly and informal, informal, slightly smelly and very heart-warming . It was a very heartwarming experience .
 These lost or deserted pets are given a brief new ‘lease on life" and chance to find a home and owner . The pets were given a new lease of life and a new home .
 In turn they will reward some child or lonely adult with over-flowing gaiety and affection . In their turn they reward some children or lonely adults .
 America's most famous tailors HART SCHAFFNER A MARX are at your service . If you’re a decided individualist, Hart SchaFFNER a MARX will be your help .
 Come in, choose the fabric you like from hundreds of samples and select the style you prefer . Select the fabric and style you want to wear .
 HS&M master craftsmen tailor your suit to perfection . Our tailor takes your measurements then HS&m master craftsman tailor your bespoke suit .
 November thirteenth meeting of The Fortnightly will be held in the Social Hall of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church .
 The Business Meeting will take place at two o’clock with the Club’s 1 ’resident, Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . The Club's 1 ‘resident’ will attend the Business Meeting .
 Speaker Don Greer, recently elected President of the Associated Industries of Massachusetts, llis subject “The Individual in the Space Age” of the Board of Selectmen, will present the speaker .
 Greer Co. Co., Wilmington, Wilmington, as its president and vice president . Greer is vice president of the Wire Belt Co., of Winchester, Winchester, as well as president . The company is based in Wilmington, Delaware .
 Mr. Winchester is vice president and director of the Winchester Trust Company and the Boston Filter Company of Charlestown .
 The Fortnightly members with their guests are cordially invited I to come and hear Mr Greer on his topic . Greer is known so well servj subject that will convey elements his community as chairman .
 3 Church St. 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. 3.00 . Subscribe to the WINCHESTER STAR for a one-year subscription .
 Dover was one of the stars of the high school team Son of the late Mr and Mrs. Dover . Dover was a member of the famous high school football team . Dover is the son of late Mr. and Mrs Dover .
 Alfred, or ‘Al” ns he is still known, is 71 years old and living in Brookline, Massachusetts .
 A young friend of his with a flair for writing has gotten together a story about the former Winchester High hoop star . The story should interest any sports follower and especially “AIV old friends who are Star readers’s old friends .
 The game was played in 1009 and ‘everybody’ went in to see it . As we remember the game was . Played in the 1009, "everybody" went into the game .
 The whistle wasn't blowing every 30 seconds and it wasn't a two-shot foul if you ran into a player who got in your way . Those were the days of basketball when the whistle wasn’t blowing every . seconds .
 A group of youngsters were taught the fundamentals of basketball by members of the Winchester Town Team, who gave “When Al. entered Winchester High in 1900 he tried out for the basketball team and made second string .
 By his third year he was a first stringer and in his senior year he not only played but coached as well . By his senior season he had been playing and coaching as well as a first-stringer .
 Al. set a schoolboy record in the 1D01/1 0 season when he scored 19 baskets from the floor against a Dorchester High team . Al. Set a record for 19 baskets in a game against Dorchester high school .
 This record has since been surpassed but at that time it was an extraordinary feat . This record was since surpassed but it was a remarkable feat .
 Richard Cain’s Badminton and Health Club operated on Oliver Street, Boston, from 1925 to 1949 .
 At first the club was exclusively for men, but after a short m inton instructor Al devoted more than four years to learning of the sport .
 Al was responsible for the start of badminton in numerous Massachusetts communities which included Hingham, Swampscott and Woburn . Badminton was started in Hingham .
 Al’s job is selling the products and re-stringing tennis and badminton racquets . Al's job is to sell the products, re-stringing tennis, badmagnets . He says the racquet industry is changing the way racqu
 Al is married to Edina (Campbell) Dover, director of the Hickox Secretarial School for Girls . Edina is noted for her work among prison inmates throughout the state . Al is known for his work with inmates .
 New leathernecks report to Camp Lejeune, N.C., for combat infantry training . They then attend a service school for specialized instruction .
 Mail servicemen’s names and addresses to WINCHESTER HOMEFRONTERS PUBLIC LIBRARY NOW . Name of Serviceman Rank Serial Number Military Address Home Address .
 Five Winchester boys have enlisted in the Regular Army recently and are undergoing preliminary processing at Fort Dix, New Jersey . Winchester Homefronters navU-8t John FENTROSS Local Boys Join Regular Army .
 Laura Parkin of 27 Elmwood Avenue re-enlisted as a Sergeant for his second hitch . Bruce M Govostes of 16 Swanton Street John H Bond of 47 Clark Street . Richard R Riccioli of 22 Albamont Road and Charles L Petri of Manchester Road
 Govostes enlisted for assignment to Europe following basic training at Fort Dix . He enlisted for Europe following his basic training . He is son of Mr and Mrs George Govoste .
 Anthony Riccioli enlisted under the Army “guaranteed” assignment program for assignment to the Army Ballistic Guided Missile School Charles Petri, the son of Mrs. Petri . Charles Petrri is a graduate of the school in California, California .
 Edith Petri chose the communications field for his three year tour of Army duty . He will receive advanced training in communications in communications as soon as he completes basic training .
 Bond, whose brother William is also a regular Army man, is the son of Mr and Mrs. Bond . Bond is also the brother of William Bond, who is an Army officer .
 Charles Bond and also joined the Army for training in the communications field . Charles Bond joined the military in the 1960s and '90s .
 Send $1.50 fur ITCH-AID Now — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc., Inc., Labs Fifth Ave., Brooklleld, Conn. Don’t Put Off —Send $1,50 fur Itchy-Aid Now .
 WHSR was seen nationally last Thursday afternoon from 4:50 to 6:00,p.m. School radio station, WHSR, is seen nationally from 4,50 to6:00 p.m., a national broadcast . WHSR is a nationally-sympathetic radio
 The show’s director, William Lord, was in Massachusetts for one week only and chose Winchester as an example of up and coming student endeavor . The director chose Winchester's fine station to present as a good example .
 Mr Lord asked to do the program after having heard the station on the air during a previous visit to the state . Mr Lord had contacted Thomas A Morse, WHRS faculty advisor and assistant principal .
 There was also a pantomime view of members of Modern Problems class in a discussion, something which the station often broadcasts .
 Mr Lord did a short tape interview at the same time the Parent-Faculty Association sponsored Gisela von Klueke from Berlin .
 It is in its sixth year of operation and has been picked up as far away as Plymouth, Mass. It's in its 6th year and has picked up locations around the world .
 It serves you with music, discussions and radio-drama programs; high school sports broadcasts; and civic events including the all important town meeting live as it happens . It also includes live sports broadcasts and live radio dramas .
 Ted Kennedy’s High School talk on Latin America on the air direct . Just this week it put Ted Kennedy's High School Talk on Latin American on air direct.
 WHSR owes its existence to the Rotary Club, donors of its original equipment, still in good repair . WHSR is now a national radio network .
 It owes its continued operation to civic-minded groups, such as En Ka and Parent-Faculty Association .
 Student work ip this field is entirely extra-curricular and does not earn course credit . However, the station is a valuable adjunct to both Speech and Modern Problems courses .
 News Announcers Alice Dyson of 9 Ridgefield Road and Wendy Everett of 14 Mt. Mt. Mount Pleasant, Vermont, will be reporting on this week's featured news .
 The Science Club is doing its best to keep the students of W.H.S. up to date and informed in all matters . Students of Winchester High School are encouraged to participate in after school extra curricular programs .
 The Science Club boasts, at this time, of over 60 members with equal representation from each class .
 Edmund Grotty, president; William Eddy, vice president; Ruth Anne Hutchinson, secretary, and Pamela Smith, treasurer; and ably directed .
 Science | Club promises to have an exciting year . Lenna M Travis, head of the Science department, says the club is 'exciting'
 Already this year, we have had a field trip to Harvard Observatory at Harvard, Massachusetts, sponsored by Robert Grenzeback of Winchester .
 This was held on Sunday, October twenty -second and the turnout was excellent . This is the first of many events held in the town hall .
 The second of our meetings, held Wednesday, November 1, was a discussion by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a guest speaker at the meeting .
 The meeting proved to be very interesting by showing examples of the progress of radio tubes from Thomas Edison to the modern day Transistor invented by three noted scientists .
 Seniors, Kristina Wilhelm and Lloyd Stillman; Juniors, Jan Thomas and Scott Erskine, and Sophomores, Fred Cardin and Lance Grenzebaek. Seniors and Juniors .
 Students don’t have to be enrolled in a Science course or even in the club itself to attend the meetings . Students can also attend the club's meetings .
 Winchester Jaycees will hold a most important meeting tonight at 8:00 o’clock at the Red Cross building . The Winchester Jayccees are the largest Jaycies in the state .
 The Jaycee Charter night dance will be held on December 9, just one month away . The event will take place at the end of December .
 Bill Bird was unanimously elected the new president of the Jaycee . The resignation of Jim Quine was regretfully accepted, and Bill Bird is unanimously elected president .
 Jaycees hope that every effort will be made by mem . mem . to attend tonight’s meeting .
 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow . Snow thrower can be used in snow storms .
 Remote control chute chute handle directs the stream of snow 25 feet in the direction you want . Snow stream is 25 feet long and 25 feet wide .
 An adjustable slip clutch protects against chain breakage or impeller damage . The clutch is adjustable and can be fitted with an adjustable chain clutch .
 New leathernecks report to Camp Lejeune, N.C., for combat infantry training . They will then be assigned to a unit of the Fleet Marine Force .
 High school seniors and graduates have until November 17 to apply for the Navy’s Reserve Officer Training Corps .
 Designed to supplement the officer output of the Naval Acudemy, the NROTC program makes it possible for a young man to earn a regular commission while studying at a civilian college of his choice which has an NROTc unit .
 All tuition, fees and hooks are furnished by the Navy, and the student receives an annual retainer of $600 for not more than four years . The student receives $600 per year for the duration of the course .
 After completing the usual four year college course, he is commissioned in the Regular Navy or Marine Corps and goes on active duty as a prospective career officer in the Naval service .
 He receives the same promotional opportunities, duty assignments and benefits as his Naval Academy contemporary . The Naval Academy graduate is a graduate of the Naval Academy .
 High school seniors and graduates who have reached the 17th anniversary of birth on July 1, 19(52) may apply for the NROTC aptitude test .
 A real economy item for the student who likes all his notes in one neat volume . The volume contains all notes in a neat volume and easy to read .
 William H Sullivan, Jr., president of the Boston Patriots Football Club, has agreed to serve I ns the 1961 Honorary Christmas Seal Chairman for Massachusetts, announces Frederick Y Briscoe, president of Middlesex TB Christinas Seal Association .
 Sullivan will lead the 1961 state Campaign which opens on Monday, November 1"". in cooperation with Charles O Finley, owner of the Kansas City Athletics, and a recovered tuberculosis patient, whose appointment as National Honorary Chairman was announced by National Tuberculosis Association .
 California Bowling League Anchorman Frank DiMambro helped his California team overcome Alabama's challenge by a 4-0 score . The team has regained the top spot in the standings after defeating Alabama .
 California vs. Holy Cross, Notre Dame vs Yale, Maryland vs Harvard vs Harvard, and Navy vs Boston College vs. Boston College at Strike Lanes .
 Two attendance prizes were awarded, the first going to Emile Doucette, and the second to Angie Amico . The attendance prize was awarded to Emie Doucettes, who was in attendance .
 California 21 7 11,659 Notre Dame 20 8 1 1 1 ,636 Harvard 19 9 11,567 Navy 18 10 1 1 . Alabama 17 11 11 11,116 Maryland 17 1 l 1 1,340 Yale 16 12 11,411 Penn 16 12 1 1 -368
 This is her first teaching position although she practice taught kindergarten, third and sixth grades in both Belmont and Watertown before coming to Winchester . This is the first time she has taught in Winchester .
 A punt return for a touchdown by Captain Mike Bellino got the Sachems back into a ball game . A Oo-yard punt return by Captain Bellino gave the Sachesms back in the early stages of the game .
 John RICHARD LAURENCE WAYNE and WIBMARK HARVEY receive the daily sunlight from 2:00am to 2:30pm .
 Levine was born in Fall River, graduated from Durfee High School . He got a Bachelor of Science degree in Education from Lesley College in 1961 . Levine is a father-of-three .
 As hobbies she lists playing the piano and sports, especially basketball and bowling . She also lists playing basketball, bowling and playing the basketball .
 She and her husband were married 15 months ago and make their home in Woburn . She and their husband are now married and live in the town of Wobourn .
 Mr Levine graduated from Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute . He is now a graduate student in geophysics at Boston College .
 Hob Benincasa sprints goalward in last Saturday's W inchcster-Bclmont game on Manchester Field . Winchcster's Hobincasa won the game 2-1 at Manchester Field on Saturday .
 Miss Joan E Banning is one of the new teachers at the George Washington School . She is teaching third grade in the same classroom in which she did her student teaching . Miss Banning was a student teacher at the school .
 She did other practice teaching in the Franklin School in Lexington in the Team Teaching program .
 She graduated from Harvard Graduate School of Education in 1959 . She graduated with a Master of Education degree from Harvard .
 Miss Banning was a social worker with the Family Service Bureau of Greater Boston . Prior to entering Harvard Graduate School she worked for a Boston-based social worker .
 She has traveled extensively through Europe and the United States, spending some time in Moscow in 1960 .
 She has done some writing and plans to work in the near future on children's story books .
 Winchester High School sophomore football team blanked the Woburn High sophomore eleven 22-0 . Tanner cubs their first defeat of the season . Winchester High school sophomore team also blanked WobURN .
 Winchester High faces wliat looms as the toughest football game of its 1961 schedule Saturday afternoon . Sachems leave their wigwams above the turgid Aberjona and trek across country to Wakefield for their final Middlesex League engagement of the season with the scarlet clad
 Ruth Graham in grade 3 of the Washington School while studying at Harvard Graduate School of Education . Ruth Graham was a member of Washington School and Washington School . She is now a member member of the Harvard Graduate of Education.
 Ed Cutting went the last seven yards for the touchdown . Three minutes later a poor Woburn punt was downed on the WOBurn 22, and the Sachems again went over . Ed Cutting was Ed Cutting, Ed Cutting going the last 7 yards for a touchdown .
 Winchester's third touchdown came following a pass interception at the Woburn 20 by Cutting . Winchester’s third touchdown was following an interception by Cutting at the end of the first half . Winchester's final touchdown came after an interception from Cutting by Cutting by cutting .
 Two plays later Barry Johnson grabbed a pass in the end zone for the score . The score was the first touchdown of the game for Barry Johnson .
 Woburn defeats Winchester 25 in final minutes of play to reach Winchester 25 . Tanners win by air attack as time runs out of play as time expires .
 Wakefield is undefeated in league competition while Winchester has been beaten twice and tied once . Winchester has beaten Wakefield twice, tied once and beaten once . Wakefield are currently unbeaten in the Premier League .
 Up until last Saturday the Sachems had shown little to make their supporters feel they had much chance against the Warriors . The Warriors have the biggest line in the league and several good backs .
 Winchester looked like it was beginning to jell, and at times played some good football against Belmont last week end . Winchester looked to have a good start to the season . Winchester has not lost a single game to Belmont in some time .
 The Sachems showed promise against Belmont on Saturday night . Wakefield Warriors will have an interesting afternoon against Wakefield .
 Wakefield and Winchester have played five teams in common Stoneham, Lexington, Belmont, Concord and Reading . Wakefield has played five different teams in the past .
 The Sachems are 14 points stronger offensively and 38 points weaker defensively . By the dangerous yardstick of comparative advantage, they are stronger offensively than defensively . They are also stronger defensively than they are offensively .
 Winchester has had its troubles defensively all fall . Reading and Stoneham will prove fatal Saturday . Winchester has struggled defensively this fall .
 With the exception of Stoneham, the Sachems have been able to move the ball well against everyone . On the other hand, Stoneham has struggled to make an impact in midfield .
 Wakefield have hardly outclassed their last three Middlesex League opponents, Belmont, Lexington and Stoneham . Wakefield has hardly out-classed opponents in the last three games .
 Lexington had to score three times in the last quarter to pull off its twopoint win . Recovering a loose ball in the end zone helped plenty in the Lexington game .
 Warriors run from a wing-T formation, loosening an end and halfback in a slot formation . The Warriors are known for their wing-backs and wing backs .
 Quarterback Shevlin is a good back in Bacon and an effective passer . The quarterback also has a good running back and a good passer .
 Birch, another back, is the target for many of Shevlin’s passes and is a good receiver . Birch is another back for the team .
 At times, also, the Warriors drop off an end, leaving their giant tackle, Hupprich free to receive a pass . At times also, also the Warriors dropped off, leaving the giant tackle free .
 Winchester is going to need more imagination in its attack than it has yet shown if it is to cope with the bulky Scarlet line . Winchester will need to use more imagination than they have shown if they are to cope .
 The Sachems have no real heavyduty bucking back and continual belting away inside the tackles has been of little avail all season . They have been in poor form this season and have been struggling to cope .
 Winchester have little more than an outside chance against Wakefield on Saturday . Winchester travel to Wakefield for the first time this season . Winchester have just one outside chance of a win over Wakefield .
 There is that outside chance, and if for a change the Sachems should live up to their potential for once, who knows . However, there is still a chance, however, that they could be the next generation .
 Winchester boy, former Sachem end, playing a similar position on the long side of the long . Princeton freshman football team is undefeated and undefeated .
 They played Penn last Saturday and meet Harvard Frosh at Cambridge, November 11 . They play Penn and play Harvard at Cambridge next week .
 Bellino kicked to Gardiner who took the leather deep in his own territory and got past every one on the Winchester team but Bellino . Bellino knocked the flying Belmont boy outside at the Winchester 34 .
 Wood immediately hit Gardiner with a pass at the Winchester 27, but on the next play Donlon spilled Gardiner for a yard loss . The next play on the play was a tackle tackle for a safety penalty for a second-half fumble .
 Cronin ran through huge holes in the left side of the Winchester line, reaching the 15 for a first down and then, the five . Twice on trap plays the speedy hard-driving Cronin bolted through . The 21-year-old scored the five points in the first half .
 On two straight dive tackle plays Cronin carried over, going a yard on his second carry . Cronin went on to carry over a yard in the first half .
 Erskine stopped Emerson two yards short of pay dirt from seven yards out . Cronin busted through for the extra two points, but Belmont was offside on play .
 Winchester couldn't go after the kickoff and some good defensive work by Mooney and Menucci stalled Belmont at the Winchester 44 . Winchester couldn’t go after a kickoff and the kickoff went to the Winchester .
 Belmont had to kick after a pass was batted down at the line and a kick was kicked by Wood . Winchester had to settle for a touchdown after a long kick .
 Bellino caught the ball over his shoulder at the seven, and cutting back to the five yard line, reversed his field and legged it for the far side line . Bellino made the catch in the end of the first half of the game .
 Mikey simply outran most of the defenders with only one man having a shot at him at the Belmont 35 . Mikey was the only man to have a chance of stopping him from running .
 Bob Donlon threw an effective brush block that got Bellino by and that was all that was needed . Bellino was the only player to be hit by a bullet bullet .
 Mikey fled the remainder of the way into the end zone for a big touchdown that put the Sachems right back in the ball game . Mikey ran in the end of the entire drive for the touchdown .
 Bellino cut back between two running Belmont boys to stumble into the end zone for two more points that put Winchester ahead . Bellino started for the right corner, but cut back to cut back and scored the other two points .
 Belmont advanced from its 33 to its 27 to the Winchester 27 . On fourth down Wood on a rollout was stopped a yard short of first down with the Sachems taking over . After the kickoff Belmont advances to its 33rd down .
 Benincasa cut through the line to get away for a first down at the Belmont 39 . The Sachems looked like a different team with eight points under their belts . The team looked like they were on their way to victory .
 Cronin hauled down Winchester boy from behind to save a score . Cronin's speed was an indication of his speed was the fact he hauled down the Winchester boy .
 At the Belmont 39 two plays stuttered hut on third down . Colliander hit Timpone at Belmont 24 and another first down . At the Belmont 39 two plays stalled at the end of the clock .
 Bellino on a sweep-left was knocked outside at the 12, just lacking running room to go all the way . Bellino was knocked out of the 12 at the end of the first half .
 Benincasa was piled up at the line for a two yard loss and a pass to Donlon in the end zone was batted down . The loss was a two-yard loss for the defense .
 Colliander on a sneak was short of first down yardage with Belmont taking over at the half . Interference might well have been called on this play, but it wasn't, and it was a mistake .
 Winchester started well after the half, advancing the ball from its 42 to the Belmont 31 . Winchester advances from 42 to its 42-to-31 after the break .
 Colliander tripped and fell as he ran back to throw', being pinned at the Bel mont 46 . Bellino was held at the line and was caught at the end of the play .
 Bellino kicked a quick kick that rolled dead at the Belmont three yard line . Bellino got off a pretty quick kick, kicking it dead at Belmont's three .
 Wood was badly rushed on his attempt, the ball reaching only the Belmont 30 . Belmont had to kick and the ball was only the 30 yards from Wood .
 Bellino broke through the line for a first down at the Belmont 15 . Rowe was dumped for a yard loss, but Bellino made it to the end of the first down . Rowe and Bellino both ran for a touchdown .
 Bellino went t/ver on a sweep, but Winchester was called for back-in-motion and the ball went back to the 13 . Bellino was called out of the game for back in motion . Winchester was also called for a back in-motion violation .
 Rowe made a diving interception of a Wood pass at the Belmont 42 as the third quarter ended . Belmont’s drive after the kickoff was stopped short by Rowe .
 Benincasa got a yard and Bellino in two tries made first down at the Belmont 26 . Bellino scored a touchdown in the first half of the second half .
 Benincasa drove to the 15 for another first down and then bucked to the nine . Benincas drove to a 15 for a first down, then buckled to the 9 .
 Winchester was called for offside on the play and the ball went back to the Belmont 20 . Winchester was offside and the play was called offside . Winchester scored a touchdown in the first half of the game .
 Bellino took a pitchout and simply outran the Belmont secondary into the end zone . Bellino ran in the end of the score .
 Winchester sent in a flock of substitutes ami the Sachems were called for taking too much time . Winchester won 22-6 in front of a crowd of substitutes .
 WinchesterBelmont game was played on Manchester Field last Saturday . Bolinoiiis Jim gives chare in last Saturday's game . Captain Mike Hrlliuo drives tor extra yardage .
 Winchester won 30*22. that did not go ten yards and resulted in Belmont getting the ball at the Winchester 44 . Winchester won by a score of 30 yards . Winchester did not score a touchdown in the game .
 Cronin scored a touchdown for Winchester . Casalinuovo knocked down a long scoring pass . Cronin circled Winchester’s left flank and ripped awny from three would-be-tacklers, got into the clear .
 On the try for points-after Cronin was piled up short of the goal line, but Winchester was called for a personal foul and the hall went ahead to the one-point try . Winchester was also on the score sheet for the first time in a row .
 Winchester's Timpone was hit hard after taking the kickoff and had the ball jarred from his grasp . Belmont recovered at the Winchester 49 at Belmont . Winchester's win over Belmont was the first for Winchester .
 Cronin whirled away for a first down at the Winchester 28, again around the Sachems’ left flank, before a last ditch tackle by Benincasa saved a score for the Winchester side .
 Wood on what looked to he an intended pass play was spilled in the pocket and lost the ball . Graham recovered for Winchester at the Sachem 41 . Wood was sacked for Winchester in the first half .
 Benincasa, on a quick opener, broke through, and aided by a timely block got into the clear, outrunning a Belmont defender .
 Winchester was assessed a 15 yard penalty for communicating, putting the ball back on the 40 . Winchester was also given a 15-yard penalty for communication . Winchester had the ball at the 25 but was penalised for communicating with the officials .
 Two pass plays went bad, on the first the receiver dropping the ball when tackled and the second falling incomplete . The receiver dropped the ball in the first play, but the second fell incomplete .
 On fourth down Colliander tried another pass and when his receivers were all covered he had to eat the hall on the Winchester 45 . On the fourth down he tried to pass another pass but it was not successful .
 Gardiner and Cronin made it first down at the 34, but a long pass to Burton was caught outside the field . A subsequent pass attempt was broken up for a ten yard loss for a 10 yard loss . Gardiner's first down was a first down first down on the 34
 Winchester was called for a personal foul on the play and the 15 yard assessment put the ball on the Sachem 19 . Winchester was also penalized for a 15-yard penalty . Winchester scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Cronin ripped his way to the eight, Wood reached the six and Cronin, the three . Cronin won his way into the eight and Wood reached six .
 Cronin hit off his own right tackle for the score . Burton in the end zone added the two points for the win .
 The Sachems lost 81 penalties and fumbled twice, recovering once . The team lost 81 penalty penalties and lost 81 yards in penalties .
 The visitors lost 35 yards to the white pants and fumbled three times, recovering twice . The visitors fumbled twice in the first half and lost three fumbles .
 Starkweather; rt, Kimball, Mullen; re, Timpone, Graham; qb, Colliander, Macdonald . Ihb, Benincasa, Flaherty, Erskine, Rowe, Rowe; fb, Bellino, Bran
 Winchester Belmont 8 14 — 30 0 16 — 22 — 22 . Bellino 2, Rowe, Benincasa, Cronin 3 . Cronin also scored a touchdown for Winchester .
 Wakefield remain at the top of the Middlesex League with a perfect record, five wins and no losses . Wakefield Fops Middlesex remain unbeaten in the circuit .
 Lexington and Winchester each have won three and lost two league games . Winchester has played one more league game than the Minuteboys, a tie with Reading . Lexington has won three, lost two, while Winchester has lost two .
 Concord has had most points scored against it, 120, with Belmont yielding 108 . Concord and Belmont have scored 120 points . Concord has the most points against Belmont .
 Joseph P Lynch Jr., of 32 Grove Street, opened her lovely home for the first of the year’s luncheons for the Mystic School teachers .
 There were fifteen teachers present and two practice teachers; also Mrs. Mrs. Smith was the teacher .
 Edward Dreano, Mystic School secretary, and Raymond Dickman, principal, are pictured at Mystic School . Mr Dreano and Mr Dickman attended Mystic School in the 1950s .
 Nancy Luddington of Stoneham, former Olmypic skating star, will replace Maribel Vinson Owen, as skating instructor at the Medford rink . Maribel has been a skating instructor for more than 20 years .
 Owen was killed last year with her skating daughters, Maribel and Laurance, in a plane crash in Belgium . Owen was also killed in the crash with her daughters in Belgium last year .
 Many will be pleased to have a girl from a neighboring town succeed Mrs. Martha Washington . Mrs. Washington will be the first woman to succeed her predecessor .
 Joan Christensen of Milton, Milton, will serve as instructor at Ulin Rink in that town . One of her pupils, Joan Christensen, will be instructor at the rink . Christensen will also serve as Ulin instructor in Milton .
 As in real life, success depends on right proportion of fame, happiness, and money . Success depends on the right amount of fame and happiness .
 Each player tries to be first to reach the goals which he hos set for himself . There is excitement and fun galore as each player tries and fails to reach his goals .
 ‘Navy’s Jog Bellino’ is off the presses and is finding its way into homes everywhere of admirers of this sterling young man . Bellino won every conceivable football honor as a schoolboy at Winchester High School and as a midshipman at Ann
 The book was written by Cynthia Barone in collaboration with her husband, Dr. Dr. Richard Barone .
 These pictures really add much to the book, and they would be great sport shots, even without their Bellino angle .
 There are also inside pictures of life at Annapolis that are out of the ordinary for a book of this sort .
 A tremendous amount of time and effort must have gone into amassing these shots and getting permission to use them . A lot of time must have been spent amassing the photos and getting them approved .
 Much could have been told about Bellino but was withheld for the sake of brevity . It is well covered in the Barones’ book, skill being shown in tne selection of material .
 The book is not intended to be a complete biography of this remarkable young man who has been held up to the world as a top example of American youth and sportsmanship .
 The book is cleanly printed and attractively bound, with large photos of Joe in midshipman’s uniform and football togs on the jacket . Within its covers is an interesting story of Bellino's life written by two true admirers .
 Barone was a midshipman in the Navy and played football for the Blues . He was married to Ann Tansey, a boyhood sweetheart, and his marriage to his sweetheart . Barone has been married for more than 20 years . He has also been married to his
 The Heisman Trophy, Maxwell Memorial Award, the Chic Harley “College Football Player of the Year” Trophy, the Touchdown Club’s Memorial Trophies and the Naval Academy Thompson Trophy Cup and Athletic Association Sword . Joe won the Heisman Trophy and the Maxwell Award .
 Joe was the first midshipman in 42 years to win both these coveted Navy awards . He was the only Navy back ever to score three touchdowns against Army . Joe was also the only back to score 3 touchdowns against the Army defense .
 The pictures of the various trophies and awards amassed by Joe during his schoolboy and academy days are among the most interesting in the book . As a matter of fact the pictures of Joe's awards and trophies amassed by the former Manchester United star are among most interesting .
 Bellino's catch of the forward pass for a touchdown against Missouri stands alongside any made at any time on any gridiron . There is a heartwarming picture of Bellino with his proud parents, another thriller of him marching at the head of a Middie parade, yet another of
 A snap of Joe at the age of three has been released of his life’s story . Joe's life's story begins with a photo of him at three .
 Bellino's muscular legs are one of the muscular Bellino legs that carried him to gridiron fame and kept him there . Among other unusual shots is a picture of Bellino with his muscular legs .
 The Barones spent countless hours collecting the material from which they drew for their book . The book is not intended to gild the lily of Joe Bellino’s football prowess, but rather to hold up this youthful fellow townsman as a true example of what the real All
 Club staged a variety show for the entertainment of the Club and their friends . Club staged show for entertainment of club members and friends .
 Fred McCormack, master of ceremonies par excellence, made many witty comments as he introluced the various acts . Fred made the most of his witty comments during the show .
 This is ung by A1 Fay, Ray Sylvester, Bill Sullivan, Chris Brown, John Bulger, and Pat Cosgrove . This was ung .
 The male chorus aptly named “The Show Stoppers” sang a medley of George M Cohan songs . Then followed the male chorus who sang a song by Cohan . The show was held in New York City .
 Under the direction of George Dillon were Jim Grower, Tom Arnold, John Campbell, George Kean, Leo Roche, Jack Waite, Joe Maloney, John McDonald, Fred McDonald and Fred Fiumara .
 A snappy song and dance number, Ballin’s Jack, was perform'd by Julie Covino, Ann Dean, Hedy Fiumara, Mary Mears, Midge Pazolt, Mary Keith, Lillian Newton . The show was performed by Ann Dean and
 Winchester’s own Phil O’Rourke shillelagh in hand, entertained with songs and stories . Winchester resident Phil O'Rourke entertained with stories and songs . Winchester's own Phil . O Rourke was awarded the award for the best performance in the
 The Nantasket Nifties took us back in time to a day at the beach in the 1920s . Rose Mnrchant, Chris McDonald, Rita McCormack, Marie Campbell, Sally Cause, Trudy Mainberger, took to the beach .
 The Highland Lassies performed an intricate drill routine . Then the smartly attired Highland Lasses performed a dance routine .
 Under direction of Rosemary Dolan the group included Eleanor Arnold, Mary Reid, Virginia O’Grady, Pat Waite, Mary Roche, Yolande Finneran, Dorothy Cullen, Pat Sanford, Helen McLaughlin, Madeline Sullivan and Madeline Murphy .
 At the finale, Mae and George Kean, directors of the show, expressed their thanks to all who participated .
 They were especially grateful to Martha Daschbach and Herb Cleary who were the piano accompanists . The group was especially grateful for the pianist and pianist who accompanied them .
 Community Seliool Association makes plans for distribution and sale of tickets . Winchester High School Auditorium will host the show on December 31 .
 Clarence Gay, president of the Community School Association of W. Rochester, is pictured in his honor . Mrs. Gay is also pictured in her honor . Clarence Gay is the president of a Community school association in Rochester .
 Atlantic Gelatin took six points from St. St. Paul's St. Mary's . Atlantic gelatin beat St. Peter's Gelatin 6-6 in the first round .
 A team using only dummy score is usually lucky if it takes two points . This is a feat which is almost impossible, for a team using dummy score to take two points. This is the rarest of all football teams using only a dummy score .
 Knights of Columbus will hold their annual Mass for their deceased members and the deceased of all Wars . Knights will hold the Mass for the deceased members of all wars . The Mass will be held in honor of the deceased .
 Mass is at the Immaculate Conception Church at 8:00 o’clock . The celebrant will be the chaplain, Rev. Rev. Reel. The Mass will be held at 8-00 o'clock .
 Coffee and doughnuts will be served in the school hall after Mass . All members and their families are invited and coffee and doughnut is served .
 Gelatin Gelatin 40 24 11,169 . Post Office 38 26 11,116 49’ers 32 32 1 1 1 ,188 Bros.-in-Law 1 29 35 10,660 St. Louis-area residents .
 Community School Association production will be presented in Winchester High School Auditorium on Friday afternoon, December 1, at 3:45 m.m. Charles Raflfi, Jr., of 2 Everett Avenue, to plan the sale of tickets .
 The Community School Association of Winchester is sponsoring this presentation in the belief that ‘live’ theatre for children fills a need both educationally and culturally in the lives of today’s children .
 Samoiloff spoke to the meeting concerning the background of the Children’s Theatre Groups in the metropolitan area and throughout the country . The meeting was held in response to the concerns of the children's Theatre Groups .
 Winchester Children's Theatre School was one of the pioneers in this movement . Winchester Children’s Theatre School is well known for its versatility . The Winchester School of Theatre School has been a pioneer in theatre theatre .
 Each performance combines the talents of each child and unites the arts . The props and scenery are painted by the performers . The performance combines each child's talents .
 The children who will act in the current play have made lovely, colorful posters depicting scenes from each story . These will be distributed to schools and business establishments .
 Plans were discussed for the distribution and sale of the tickets to the children in the schools .
 In addition to a display of 3,000 children’s books, many authors, illustrators and storytellers will entertain at various times during the week . The event will be open to the public at the weekend .
 Winchester’s author of teen-age novels, Helen Miller Swift, is one of the guest speakers at the Winchester College of Education . Winchester's author of teens will be a guest speaker at the event .
 In the Children’s Room of our own Winchester library there will be a display of the new fall hooks which we have purchased . Winchester library .
 We hope many parents as well as children will enjoy the thrill of looking through them . We hope they will be able to enjoy looking at them .
 Now you can enjoy more than 50 different kinds of solitaire card games to intrigue you . Play the first-player version of this weekly Newsmax! Show your knowledge of the latest CNN iReport cards .
 Friday evening, November 17, at 7:30, each of the three high school classes will present a one act play . The play will be a one-act play .
 Each will be trying to win the trophy which is awarded for the best presentation . Each team will be aiming to win a trophy which will be awarded for their presentation .
 Comedy starring Sally Leighton, Jim Reid, Sue Bennett, Sandra Simpson, and Bill Sandburg . If you've seen it before, refresh your memory of the comedy .
 The stage is lively with action when a stuffy banker finds that his son has a date with a Hollywood beauty . The film is set in New York and London .
 She turns out to be a beauty who knew him when he was less of a stuffed shirt . She was one of his 'stuffed shirts' before he became a man .
 The cast includes Jeff Peckham, Diane Kelley, Betsy Woodward, Larry Archibald, Jan Thomas, and Candee Callaham . Diane Kelley is also in the cast .
 "Nobody Sleeps" is the sophomore play directed by Linnie Butts and John Giger .
 Starring in this production are Jim Bonney, Diane Clifton, Sue Knight, Betsy McCreery, and Jean Weiner . The production is set in New York City .
 Robert Andree, Illinois school su per superintendent; Sarah Caldwell, Ohio teacher in Ohio; and host William Carr . Host William Carr talks about schools in Illinois and Ohio .
 Winchester Wee Sachems defeated the Woburn Pop Warner football team by the score of 22-6 . The Winchester team defeated the Pop Warner team by a score of 23-6 on Sunday, November 5 .
 Winchester’s Choo Choo Collins ran off tackle for a 55 yard touchdown play . Winchester didn’t want to waste any time with their chief rivals and on the very first play of the game, Collins scored a 55-yard touchdown .
 Peter Mawn and Marty O’Donnell charged and nailed the Woburn quarterback for safety and gained two more points for Winchester . Shortly afterward, the Winchester defense gained another two points with a safety penalty .
 Choo Choo ran for another touchdown with the entire Winchester team leading the way . Winchester team led the way in the third period with the finest display of blocking that we have seen all year . Winchester won their first game of the season with a score of 14 points .
 Woburn hoy intercepted a pass and ran 75 yards to score 75 yards in final minutes of play . Winchester had looked to be going to hold the Wobsurn scoreless . Winchester was forced to settle the score with a 75 yard touchdown .
 Winchester beat Wellesley 3-1 in their final match of the season . Winchester have won three of their last four matches . The Sachems hope to make Wellesley their fourth in a row .
 G' to 14.6'x30', including a selection of new. used, antique and semi-antique in all qualities and colors . Includes new used and antique, antique, semi-annexcessed and color .
 The Wyman Parents’ Association annual party was held on Friday evening, November 3 . The event was held at the Wyman Children’s Centre in the United States .
 Travel posters loaned by Mark Kirsten of the Kirsten Travel Agency in Winchester . Giant tubs of philodendron used through the courtesy of Winchester Conservatories . A scalloped canopy over the fireplace contributed to the gay atmosphere .
 Two attractive flower girls, Nancy Carter and Joyce Pettingoll, sold corsages during the evening .
 Robert Westwater and her flower committee were also responsible for the many attractive floral arrangements .
 Cider and popcorn served at red and white covered tables furnished refreshing pauses during the evening .
 The cider was generously con tributed by Converse Market, and refreshments were served by Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The cider is generously con-tributed .
 Lewis Wadsworth, president of the Parents’ Association, drew the names of the winners . The names were read by the husband and wife of the parents .
 Charles Gill, an attractive tea tile; Mr. Robert Johnson, a Parker pen; and the Boston office of the TWA, two travel bags . Charles Gill also received a tea tile from Charles Gill .
 Wyman parents have given an enthusiastic support to the Association’s only fund-raising event of the year .
 Agnel Bixler has been selected to be a member of the first team for the Northeast Field Hockey 'tournament to be held on Smith College playing Fields Saturday and Sunday, November 11 and 12 .
 Sixteen teams from Boston, Westchester, Albany, . Albany, Ontario, Vermont, Rhode Island, and Rhode Island . Connecticut Valley will compete .
 Players include nine who have been or have been members of the United* States Team or its reserve . Nine players have been part of the U.S. Team .
 Teachers’ Tea At Noonan was held in the Noonan Auditorium on Tuesday October 31 . Tea was held for teachers of Grades 1, 2, and 3 .
 Mrs. Thomas Cheatham presented to Miss Minnetta Jurgenson, the school principal, to Mrs. Minnie Jurgens, the principal, and Mrs. Tom Cheatham . Mrs. Cheatham was also present .
 The Noonan School Chapter of Community Schools of Winchester, Winchester, was founded by John F Collins, the president of the Noonan school chapter of Winchester High School .
 Mary Mead, Elaine Corcoran, Zella Giggie, and Sarah McGowan were all crowned Misses .
 In keeping with Halloween motif refreshments of delicious cider and doughnuts were served . centerpiece of the table held a large jack-o-lantern holding a beautiful bouquet of mums .
 Andrew M Sinclair, the chairman of the tea was ably assisted by the room mothers from the various rooms . The tea was held in honour of the children at the end of the day .
 These teas are prepared by the room mothers as their special tribute to the fine services of our children’s teachers .
 The semi-monthly meeting of the Guild of the Infant Saviour will be held on Tuesday, November 14, at 2m., in K of C Home .
 Edward F Conners, will present a workshop dealing with the art of decorating for Christmas under the capable craftsmanship of Mrs. Mrs. Conners .
 ALCOA ALUMINUM 3-CHANNEL COMBINATION WINDOW $ 11 95 1 1 1 Screen Is self-storing. Screen is self--stored.
 Floral DESIGNS PA 9-1077 Eves. For more floral arrangements, visit www.florydesire.com .
 SherwinWilliams program includes a two day visit to the paint company’s Chicago factory . The program includes demonstrations of new paint products and sessions covering the latest trends in color .
 PArkview 9-4363 after 6m. augl2-tf PHOTOGRAPHY by RYERSON . For T V Radio Sales and Service 1203 Mass. PArkView 9-3311 .
 This delightful comedy hit is currently in rehearsal under the direction of Jacqueline Langdon Sibley with an all-star cast of new and seasoned performers . The show is currently being held in rehearsal .
 Tony Carrigan plays renegade father, Biddeford Poole, in the role of the renegade dad . Newcomer plays with great relish in the new role of Tony .
 Two new members from the high school ranks, Norma Wood ind Gary Callahan appear as their daughter and her fiance . Another new Player, Billy Ann Maley, plays his ex-wife Katherine, while two new Members of the High School ranks appear .
 A long-lost father suddenly appears on the eve of his daughter's wedding and calls the whole thing off . Come and see for yourself whether or not a long lost father can suddenly appear .
 WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH is located on Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Strict PArkview 9-0949 . Rev. Rev. David Wright will lead the charge at the Winchner Union Church .
 Lower School classes, kindergarten through grades J; Crib Room facilities. 11:00 a.m.
 South Middlesex Conference meeting at Wellesley Hills Unitarian Church . Meeting at 5:20 a.m.
 Rev. Wesley A Mallfery, B D., Associate Minister, PA 9-377*3.328 Rev. Dw ight L Cart, D.D., Minister PArkview 9-0 . Rev. Mallfry, B . D.M. Cart, B
 Washington Street at Ken win Road “The Church in the Highlands” Ralph H Earle, Minister Residence, Minister . “Washington Street Church Study, Tel. Tel. ‘The Church In The Highlands’ Ralph H. Earle .
 The title °f his sermon will be ""Proving the Plan of (1ml)" •' lft ».
 Blemker of the 1 nitud Church Board for World Ministries, Secretary, Europe and the Near Hast. He is also the secretary of the church's board for world Ministries .
 Parish Players Rehearsal in Chldley Hall . Parish Players rehearsals in the Palmer Room . Study Group in Palmer Room.
 Senior High P.F. will study the importance of Christian Missions . 8:00 a.m. to discuss Christian missions in the community .
 Mr Raymond B Stillman, Super__ intendent of the Church School, annuls the claims of matter, that j Tel Tel Tel. which annuls . The Church School School. which Annuls the claim of matter .
 Phone or come in 36 Church Street W inches ter PArkview 9-3000 marS-ti .
 The Canvassers will meet in the church parlor for instructions und assignments . The church will hold a meeting in the parlor .
 Every junior high young person in our church should he in this fellowship. Every junior . high young . person in the church should be in the fellowship.
 The Welcome Wagon Hostess will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors and Your Civic and Social Welfare Leaders . ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies . Mr Raymond Shannon, Organist and Choir Director .
 Glendale Christian Training Institute, at First Baptist Church, Medford . 8:00 a.m. to attend Glendale Training Institute .
 The High Fellowship of the First Congregational Church elected its officers Sunday . The church's officers were elected Sunday .
 The next activity that the group will participate in will be held on November 10 at the Junior High School and will be a dance for Fellowship members only .
 The next regular meeting of the young people will be on November 19, at which time food collected through the Sunday School will be packed and delivered to City Missionary .
 1962 “calendar towels” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colprs to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 JJadfey 39 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-0200 i Page Fourteen . Winchester Star .
 The sulfa drugs, penicillin, terramycin and tranquilizers are signs of medical progress during the past 20 years .
 The compound used in that tranquilizer, chlorpromazine, was discovered in France and initially used in surgery, he said .
 SK&F purchased the rights to the compound and supported an intensive two-year research program before introducing it to physicians in America . SKF is the first company to use the compound in the U.S.
 Before tranquilizers, half the hospital beds in America were occupied by mental patients . Before the tranquilizer, half of America's hospital beds had been occupied by mentally patients . The tranquilizers were used to treat mental illness .
 In 11.56, for the first time in history, the number of hospitalized mental patients was reduced . In 11)56, the hospitalization of mental patients in the U.S. was reduced to less than 1,000 .
 Last year the pharmaceutical industry spent $200,000,000 to make such advances possible, Driscoll said . Such advances are made possible through research, he said .
 Smith Kline & French is spending $18,500,000 in its search for new health products in 1960 . In 1960, the company was spending more than $18 million on health products .
 Because of rapid research advances, “the life of a new drug today has been estimated to be only from two to five years,” he says . “The life of the new drugs today has to be estimated from 2 to 5 years.”
 Nine of every 10 prescriptions written today are for drugs that simply did not exist 20 years ago . The drugs are now available in the United States for the first time .
 To assure the patient gets “just what the doctor ordered,” exhaustive testing and quality control during manufacturing processes are required on each compound .
 A single anti-ulcer medication is checked at SK&F 1170 times to assure its purity . The purity of the medication is also being checked every single dose .
 The average American spent a total of $11.5 for prescriptions in 1959, according to Department of Commerce studies . According to Department o Commerce studies, the average American spend $11 .
 Department studies show that drug prices have gone up about half as much as the increase of other items . Drug prices have increased about half the increase in other items, Mr Driscoll said .
 A survey by “American Druggist’s’ magazine indicates the average prescription cost is now $3.14 . The average cost of prescription drugs is now about $3 .14 .
 Calling all children — to “NeverNever-land’ next Wednesday, November 15, at 3:45m. at 3.45m . The event will take place at 3 p.m. on Wednesday November 15 .
 Storyland Bazaar will be held at the Unitarian Church . Storyland is a collection of stories from the Storyland Museum .
 Bob Munstedt (Mr Bob), comedian, ventriloquist and ouppeteer, will present a one-man 'fun show' with a variety of acts .
 At that time ho lived in Switzerland, where he toured the neighborhoods with his puppet show . The puppet show was a success in Switzerland .
 During World War II he served in the Air Corps, Special Service, as staff sergeant . He served as a staff sergeant during the Second World War .
 Alex Smallwood was a member of the 312th Bomb Group in World War II . He carried his barracks bag and carbine, but also his accordion and wooden pal, Alex .
 In spare moments from his duties Bob entertained soldiers (and sailors) wherever they were ... in hospitals, on shipboard, in Red Cross centers, or just in open-air jungle theaters .
 Bob, with or without his various puppets, has appeared many times on WBZ-TV television . Bob and Alex have the distinction of having appeared on the very first telecast of that station . Bob, Alex and Bob have appeared on many occasions .
 On Thursday afternoon the hildren’s entertainment will be cartoon films, also at 3:45m. The hilders will be entertained by cartoon films .
 Standing, Constance Sasso, Catherine Gould, Mary Fielding, Wakefield; Helen Rideout, District 18 membership hairman; Margaret Eikrem, department president; Mary Thorne, district president; Ruth Gorman, department chief of staff; Vivien Spinney, W
 The season's first mooting of Mission Guild of the First Congregational Church will be held in Chidloy Hall on November 14 .
 Sinclair is a member of the Second Congregational Church there . Sinclair is also active in church work .
 She is a former president of United Church Women of Massachusetts . She went as a delegate* to the recent Assembly in Miami . She is also a former treasurer of National U.C. Women .
 There, she was elected one of the Vice-Presidents of United Church Women . She was honored by being elected by the church .
 Take rout** 93, turn right onto route 125, proceed to route 1 28; follow 28 into Andover . Follow 28 into town of Andover, Massachusetts .
 He says he's glad to have a backlog of Savings Bonds to help meet the expenses of setting up housekeeping .
 He sends his youngsters to college, and Savings Bonds help out . He retires — and savings Bonds again have an important part In his life .
 America’s farmer one of the strongest boosters of U S Savings Bonds . The farmer has 20 years of experience .
 Bonds offer everything a farmer likes in an investment, dependability, good return immediate availability . Bonds offer the farmer a good return, dependable and availability .
 The Bond Pro gram has given it their fullest endorsement and recommendation . They have also served the Bond Program, giving it their full endorsement .
 As the program observes its 20th year, the Treasury Department is proud to acknowledge this sup port . The Treasury Department says it is proud of the program .
 After the opening ceremonies were conducted membership chairman Helen Rideout of Malden Auxiliary presented 10 candidates for membership .
 Department President Margaret Eikrem acted as chaplain and gave the obligation to the members of the congregation . The service was held in honor of the deceased .
 After the new members were welcomed into their respective auxiliaries the department president was called upon for a few words . The new members of the department were greeted by the new arrivals .
 She spoke briefly on the various programs scheduled for the balance of the year . She stated she was pleased to be present on this occasion .
 "The Dept. of Hospital Work, Community Service, Publicity, Americanism, and the Dept. Membership, Hospital Work" was created in 1964 .
 Finance Chairman’s Project were a few of the many subjects she spoke on . Finance Chairman's Project was one of the subjects she discussed on .
 The Department Chief of Staff Ruth Gorman was introduced and recognized . The Department chief of Staff was also recognized .
 Louise Barentine, department publicity chairman, was asked to speak briefly on Publicity, which she did . She was also asked to give a brief version of her thoughts on the Publicity Department .
 All three comrades expressed to the sisters present that it was a pleasure for them to be present on this occasion and hoped the Auxiliary would obtain many more new members in their membership drive .
 Auxiliary President Mary Thorne with a substantial check representing one-half the proceeds of the First Banquet held on September 23 in Melrose .
 Chairman Bolivar stated he knew the Auxiliary would appreciate the check to carry on the wonderful work they are doing . The Auxiliary will receive a check to help carry on their wonderful work .
 After the meeting closed an open house social was held . Several ladies interested in the work of the Veterans of Foreign Wars Auxiliary enjoyed meeting the members of the various auxiliaries .
 Membership Chairman Helen Rideout hopes that many of these ladies will be asking for applications to join the Auxiliary in the near future .
 Delicious refreshments were served by Chair-ady Gertrude Horn and her committee .
 Adult Discussion Group At Second Church begins five week series of studies this Sunday night at 8:00m. at the Second Congregational Church .
 i will center its attention upon the i message of the Old Testament and its relevance for the present day . The group i will be focusing its attention on the i messages of the old Testament .
 The Bible does speak to the world about national, social and individual tensions which exist in our time . Specific attention will be given to the thesis that the Bible speaks about national and social tensions . The Bible is an example of the Bible's influence on national and individual issues .
 The Irish American Associates of Middlesex County have completed plans for their benefit concert and dance to climax the current fund drive for the African Foreign Mission Society . The Irish-American Associates will hold a benefit concert .
 Irish step dancing medalists and many of New England’s favorite radio and TV entertainers will be held Friday evening, November 17 at the Hotel Commander, Cambridge .
 Tickets for the concert and i dance are now on sale . Tickets may be reserved by telephoning PR 6-0860 j or KI 7-6305 . i dance may also be reserved .
 Sinclair was sent by the national organization of United Church Women to India . Sinclair was a delegate to the International Prayer Fellowship meeting . Sinclair is a member of the U.S. Church Women in India .
 She spent several weeks travelling all over India, visiting colleges and missions .
 While on this trip she also took the opportunity to visit missions in the Near East . While on the trip she was also taken to the Middle East .
 The Guild invites all women interested in the mission work of the Church to hear a most informative and stiVnulating talk . The Guild will meet at Phillips Andover Academy in Andover .
 On Friday morring, November 17, the group will meet in the entrance hall of the Addison Art Gallery, before ten o'clock .
 Recently he gave this lecture abroad, and it is a rare privilege to have the opportunity to hear it and to see the slides . Recently, he gave a lecture abroad .
 After the lecture there will be ample opportunity to see the display of paintings in the Museum . The lecture will be followed by a visit to the Museum of Art .
 This particular exhibition is a survey of thirty years of collecting, with special emphasis on acquisitions during the past five years . Special emphasis is on acquisitions made during the last five years.
 If by chance anyone arrives later than ten o’clock, please do not try to find the group (which will be listening to Mr Hayes) but wait in the Gallery and study the paintings until the lecture is over .
 Andover Inn and Fieldstones are two excellent and well-known places for luncheon nearby .
 Malden Hospital Alumnae Association held turkey whist for the benefit of needy nurses and student nurses . The whist was most successful .
 Among the whist winners to receive turkeys were Bert Stevens, 27 Eaton Street, A1 Barnard, 52 Middlesex Street, Mrs. Mrs. Barnard and Mrs. Stevens . The turkeys will be given to the winners of each other .
 Mather, 57 Ashland Street, Medford, and Mary Sullivan, 10 Hancock Street. Mather and Sullivan: Medford. Sullivan. Sullivan: Mather. Sullivan . Sullivan: Sullivan, Sullivan, Mather; Mather .
 Anthony Pronski of Winchester, who headed the committee in charge of arrangements for the whist, wishes to extend her group’s sincere thanks to all who aided in any way in the success of the party .
 Give your cherished pictures nc^v lije and beauty . . . Oil paintings _ __ reframed . . Or restore llolnnlm P . Of aha it 4 * 78 Summer St.
 Wakefield Laundry’s expert cleaners ean he a great help in giving the men in your life that smart professionally groomed look . Don’t forget blunderers and drv it is a good tiling .
 If anyone had told him, a short while ago, that his 1961 Cadillac could be improved on — he would have regarded them with disbelief . He would now be surprised to be able to drive his classic 1961 Cadillac .
 After only half an hour in the newest ,f car of cars”, he knows that a year of Cadillac progress has made a world of difference .
 Cadillac's 1962 version of the Cadillac One-Cadillac One was released in October 1962 . Cadillac's first model of the 1962 Cadillac One was unveiled in September 1962 . The Cadillac One One was designed to be a classic sports car .
 For added beauty, there is a lower, longer silhouette . There is also a new interior elegance and luxury . For more simplicity and dignity of line, there's greater simplicity .
 For improved comfort, there is increased spaciousness . New convenience of appointments . and a ride that is unbelievably quiet and smooth . The ride is extremely quiet .
 For increased safety , there is a new dual braking system ... a new three-phase rear warning light system . And new cornering lights that illuminate your way around turns . For more safety .
 Even Cadillac quality has been enhanced for 1962, Cadillac says . Cadillac quality was enhanced in 1962, says Cadillac .
 The car continues to be built to the highest standards that can be brought to the production of an automobile . But the truth is simply that the car is simply being built to a high standard .
 The Cadillac Grand Prix will be the first time a car has been driven by a Cadillac . Cadillac will be driven by the company's new owner, Cadillac co-founder Steve Lemmon . Lemmon says he's happy to demonstrate a difference a year can make .
 The WINCHESTER STAR turns 40 years old on November 9 . This year marks the 40th anniversary of the award-winning magazine's first publication .
 Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service located at SI High St., Medford, EX 9-9775 nov9-2t . Expanding National Paint Manufacturer has Dealer Franchise Available in Area . 12 to 36 months Financing Merchandising Demonstrations Demonstr
 Frank Reego and SONS CONTRACTors are contractors for Frank and Sons of Engineers . Landscaping includes gravel, gravel and crushed stone .
 Just 10 min. from your town For alterations on that dress You will tind mu the best. For alterations, you will need to go to your local tailor .
 WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 nov2-4t ELECTRICIANS ANGELO A AMIC0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. We are happy to make an offer for a job .
 Winchester and Woburn JUNK DEALER HIGHEST PRICES PAID For Rags. ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 JUNk DEALERS Winchester and . WobURN JUNKE
 SAM 'omt running I — Hitlmn condition. PArkview 9-1346 augl2-tf WALTER J J. J.
 PIANOS PIANO CARE Tuning — Reconditioning Organs and Players Complete Rebuilding Clinton Jonas Jonas PArkview 9-0785 augl2-tf $150. Fm Interior Painting, Ceilings Carpenter Work Reasonable .
 Wringer type wn*l iet*. end tables, ski*, po lei, worn ianV toppe rn. FOR SALE . For SALE, wringers are sold at auction .
 Metal Furnaces Removed, Iron, Rons, alBo Rubbish Removal Removal . Metal Furnace Removed, . Iron removed, . Rons removed, Iron removed . Rubbish removal .
 Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL . 48 White Street, Winchester Tel. PA 9-2835 .
 PArkview 9-3516 Weekly Pick-Up If Desired janl2-t t t t .
 Christmas trees that sell on sight sell at wholesale for $1.5 million .
 Concrete, cinder and chimney blocks, lime, cement, sand, travel, travel and brick all types, flue liners, cesspool covers and cesspools all types .
 Wells 0670. july 6-tf RKUPHOLSTEKING — Dirt cheap because we use remnants . We'll be using remnants to make things easier to find .
 Haverty, VVElli 3-5389. septl2-tf for SALK . 4-bedroom, 2 1 j bath home large cabinet kitchen, fl replaced livingroom, dining room and 2 dens . Haverty's 4-bed, 2-1 j bath
 FOR SALE — 1 drum table and coMY table with leather tops, 2 table lamps and 2 living room chairs . For sale, you can buy a drum table, co-MY table and a living room chair for free .
 For the finest, most dependable TVRADIOHI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMBOS TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing .
 Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester, Winchester, 9-27-tf .
 Woburn, Central Square section, 6-room house, 3 bedrooms, tile bath . 6-bedroom house in 6-county section .
 Estey organ, old fashioned manual operated, good condition, $12.99 . For sale, organ is manual operated and in good condition .
 Furnished combination living. bedroom, bath, kitchenette, all utilities, parking. For rent, you can rent a furnished combination living apartment .
 In Winchester, Winchester, upper apartment, fireplace, oil heat, porch, guruge . G room upper apartment has fireplace, fireplace and oil heat .
 2nd floor apartment has rooms, rooms, gas heater, gas stove* hot water . Apartment is located on the second floor of an apartment complex .
 Plennnnt five room apartment, comlpetely redecorated, located in quiet section near center .
 Professional office space with parking with parking on grounds, cuntrai location . For rent, rentable office space can be rented out for $1,000 .
 Good home for fine German Shepherd dog for nine months . Call PA 9-68G0. Oct. 5-tf WANTED WANTF2D .
 Ride from Everett to Winchester, 4-5 in the ufternoon. Cull PA 9-1253. nov9-2t .
 POSITION WANTED — Woman deeii coking and serving dinner throe nights a week . Position WANTED: Woman coking, serving dinner and serving .
 Mavis McGrath of the wollknown McGrath Travel Service of Woburn, has returned from a month’s trip to Rurope .
 She left Boston in the evening on a Pan American arriving in London the following day . She arrived in London on the following morning .
 All arrangements in Russia were made by Intourist, the Russian State Tourist office . Miss McGrath’s eight days in Russia included four days in Moscow .
 Miss McGrath visited the Mausoleum on October 3rd . Stalin held just as prominent a spot as Lenin .
 From Moscow, a one hour flight on a Russian Jet took Miss McGrath for a four day stay at the Astoria Hotel in Leningrad . She was accompanied by a Russian jet from Moscow .
 Her English speaking Intourist guide accompanying her while sightseeing in the former St. Louis suburb of St. Charles .
 The Winter Palace, the Hermitage, Peter and Paul Fortress are among the most famous landmarks in St. Petersburg . St. Peter's Winter Palace is one of Russia's most famous museums .
 From Leningrad, Miss McGrath returned to Moscow with her guide and then flew via Russian Jet to Prague .
 Strahov 11th Century Monastery, now a museum, former palaces, which are now embassy residences and many fine restaurants such as Praha which was displayed at the World’s Fair in Brussels .
 From Nice to Cannes she went on to Cannes to attend the 31st World Travel Congress of the American Society of Travel Agents . She was the secretary of the New England Chapter of American Society .
 After a week at Cannes, Miss McGrath flew to Brussels, where she spent three days visiting Brussels, Ghent and Bruges .
 Sgt Jack Bateson Army recruit er in Winchester points out that many of the young women from this area have enlisted for the WACs under the exclusive two year enlistment program .
 As a member of the Women’s Army Corps, traveling is made extra appealing by the exclusive tours at low rates . Special Services tours are scheduled by Special Services representatives .
 Assignments overseas put the travel-minded WAC within easy reach of places she has always dreamed about . The WAC is based in Washington, D.C.
 Elootric Sewing Machine Repair Service. SEWING MACHINE Service . Elootic Sewing machine repair service. Sewing Machine Service .
 One horse sleigh with Swiss bells in beautiful condition, all TXJrner 4-3307. WElls t-0052. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS ANTIQUES .
 Heating, Oil-burner sales and service can be seen at G Maple Street, Chelsea . It's also available in the UK .
 WElls 81947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There is a way out. There is also a way to deal with the problem .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling yoyr Authorised Travel Agent .
 The world’s largest cymbal is being seen, and heard, by 50,000 flth-to-lOth grade Greater Boston students this school year . The “World of Sound’� program at Boston's Museum of Science features the world's largest
 The science of sound is explained with the help of some ingenious visual aids and sound effects . Its purpose is to explain the science of the sound .
 The ninth annual School Visit Program is the most effective yet in generating enthusiasm for science among local public, parochial and private school students, educators say .
 The program is sponsored by the Metropolitan District Commission and planned and conducted by the Museum’s Education Department .
 Sounds are created by many different methods at the Museum's Morse Auditorium . The lecture-demonstration is seen Tuesdays through Fridays in the Museum’s Morse auditorium .
 They range from heating a grid in an eight-foot Pyrex gl^ss tube to catching a whisper from the back of the auditorium in an 8-foot parabolic reflector .
 Students giggle delighted as the lecturer changes his voice by breathing in a mouthful of helium . Or sings a musical scale by snipping off the end of a drinking straw, bit by bit .
 With a giant ear model, as big as himself, he reveals some of the wonders of the human ear . The human ear brings humans more information about the world than any other sense .
 A wave simulator, a 10-foot line of tiny lighted bulbs that forms giant mechanical waves to explain amplitude and frequency of sound waves . An ear analog, an electronic device that shows how the nerves in the cochlea respond to various frequencies . Other visual aids include a wave
 Immaculate Conception School of Winchester was among school groups attending the School Visit Program this past week at the Museum . School groups attended the Museum's School Visit program .
 Treoa. nov2-Ht notice of lost pass book . In connection with the requirement * of Chapter 107. Treoa . Treoa: "In connection with this requirement, I would not be surprised to find this information."
 To all persons interested in the state of MAHKI.I.K H LORD late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 The executors of the will of Said MABRLLE H LORD have presented to said Court for allowance their first account .
 The executors of the will of said RICHARD M BINSWANGER have presented to aaid Court for allowance their first account .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this sixteenth day of October, 1961 . Witness: "John C Leggerat, esquire, first Judge of the said Court"
 26-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . John V Harvey, Register. ect .
 To all persons interested in the trust estute under the will of MABELLE H LORD late of Winchester in said County, deceased . For the benefit of LOUISE FRANCES EBERLE and others .
 Trustees presented to Court for allowance their first to third accounts, inclusive . Trustees of aaid estate have presented to court for allowance . The trustees of the estate have given to said Court .
 I.ORENCE M WOODSIDE, also known hh LORENCE MONSON WOODsIDE Late of Winchester In said County, deceased . I.M.WOODSide was a member of the Winchester family .
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-seventh day of October 1961. Esquire .
 To all persons interested in the estate of CARMELA MO LEA, sometimes called CARmela MU LEA and CARMela MOLAIR late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this tenth day of October 1961 . Witness: Sir John C. Legga .
 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add to an existing garage attached to the premises numbered 61 Emerson Road, locating the same less than twenty feet from the lot line .
 To all persons interested in the estate of DANIEL C DENNETT late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain Instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by Boston Safe Deposit and Trust Company of Boston in the County of Suffolk praying that it be appointed executor thereof .
 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add a garage with less than half the side wall in contact with the house, numbered 1 Salisbury Street .
 Board of Appeal Oilman Wallace, Chairman Edward V. French Daniel T Chane nov9-2t .
 To nil persona interested in the trust of WILLIAM A KNEELAND under Article Ten of the will of the late of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of the deceased .
 The trustees of said estate have presented to said Court for allowance their fourth und fifth accounts . Trustees have presented their fourth and fifth accounts to the Court .
 Middlesex, ss. Middlesex and ss. John V Harvey, Register of Commonwealth of Massachusetts .
 To all parsons interested in the estate of JOHN W THORNTON late of Winchester in said County, deceased. John W. Thorton was a widower .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the lost will of said deceased by WINIFRED AMELIA THORNTON of Winchester in the County of MiddU«ex praying that ahe be appointed executrix thereof without
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty -third day of October 1961. Esquire was Esquire .
 To ull persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M ALICE MASON late of Winchester in said County, deceased, deceased . For the benefit of JOHN S MASON and others .
 Trustee of wiid estate has presented to said Court for allowance its first and second accounts . Trustee presented to court for allowance for allowance .
 Esquire, First Judge of aaid Court, tide twentythird day of October 1961 . Esquire was Esquire of a British Empire .
 A guiding principle of banking is that trust is inviolable, says the Wall Street Journal . The Wall Street Star was founded in 1961 in New York .
 This holds not only for money and property, but also for confidential information that depositors and customers entrust to a bank . This includes confidential information about depositors, customers and property .
 You can confide in members of our staff with every assurance that your desire for privacy will be respected . We are happy to let you confide to us about your concerns .
 Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon Attended Conference Mrs. Mrs. Smith. Smith is a former conference attendee .
 The conference was sponsored by several departments of the Association and also by some of the associated agencies . Dana M Greeley of Boston president of the Unitarian Universalist Association addressed the conference .
 Kimball is currently serving as treas urer of the continental Alliance of Unitarian Women, one of the sponsoring organizations . Kimball was elected to the U.S. Senate last year .
 Lee Ann Healey won the top vote of the customers for first prize in the salesgirls’ costume con| test . Lee Ann was voted first place in the costume con test .
 Homeowner's insurance policy offers more coverage at less cost . John B MERCURIO: ‘INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED’
 Thousands of Communist East German border guards pace the breastworks of their own prison . They now have the grim job of shooting down fellow Germans who are struggling for freedom .
 Now it seems the last echoes of the bomb will he punctuated by the staccato blast of machine guns driving our neighbors from our shelters . The last echo of the bombs will be punctuated with the sound of machine gun fire .
 Too many parents tend to shunt their youngsters aside, too many parents do so . Small Talk: Parents are responsible for the reprehensible manner in which they shun their children aside .
 We must recognize that a child has needs which call out for satisfaction, and the very least we, as adults, can do is to give him or her the courtesy of interest in his ovej-tures .
 It was, I thought, a wondrous speech, They ought to print and save it; I liked its tone, I liked it all. I liked the tone, the pace and the pace of the speech . I like it all .
 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 3 THOMPSON STREET Res. PA. Res. 9-06S4 . 9-6S4 is located at 3 Thompson Street Res.
 High fidelity music in 1970 may emanate from living room wqlls, painted with a special chemical paint that conducts sound waves .
 Walls will tune into the music’s frequency and one will be surrounded by true stereo sound . The walls will be tuned in to the music's frequency . One wall will be able to hear the sound of the music .
 For a change in mood music, the wall colors will change, too, it will also be added . The wall colors are also added .
 That restful six percent of the people who have no political opinions must be somewhere, but they never show up any place I go, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A Maine logger, fresh from the big woods, was watching a store clerk open a package of gaily colored men’s pajamas . The Maine logger was watching the clerk open the package . The store clerk opened the package and said it was a pair of men's p
 A lady in heavy mourning entrusted a photographer with the task of enlarging the only snapshot she had preserved of her late husband . A photographer was tasked with enlarging a photograph of her husband .
 A lady best described as a perpetual talker was asked by one of her long-suffering neighbors if she ever thought about what she was Toing to say .
 Three students from Winchester, the Misses Marilyn Beckley, Martha Maloney and Susan Wallace are members of the 150voice Wellesley College Choir . The college opened its 1961-62 season on Sunday, November 5, with the traditional Fall Vesper Concert at the college .
 Later this season the choir will present concerts with the glee club of Williams and Hamilton Colleges, and will give their traditional Christmas and baccalaureate vesper concerts .
 Choir members sing at daily and Sunday chapel service on the campus . In addition, choir members sing in chapel service .
 Miss Maloney is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Maloney . She is a first-year student at the University of Cambridge .
 Miss Wallace is a sophomore at Wellesley and her parents arc Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Wallace . She is also a junior at Harvard University .
 Miss Beckley and Miss Maloney are Winchester High School graduates, while Miss Wallace prepared for college at Abbot Academy in Andover . Miss Wallace is a senior member of the Winchester High Class .
 Miles R Weaver of 29 Winslow' Road, director of Publication Relations for Sylvania Electric Products Inc., received an award for outstanding leadership during the year 1961 .
 The Board of Directors regards the new emphasis of Industry in Public Affairs as pre-eminent among its various programs . The new emphasis is expected to be pre-eminently .
 Mr Weaver was given this award in recognition of his valuable contribution toward progress in advancing the economic growth of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts .
 Three models, plus duplicate bridge boards and an advanced course ir contract bridge . Three models of bridge boards .
 Mr Sheehan’s program presented by the club last vear will remember with pleasure his beautiful color slides .
 Some of these slides are included in his newest lecture, “Steeple Chasing,” which is a pictorial review of travels from north to louth told in the beauty of places of worship .
 Sheehan describes the historical significance of stained .rlass windows, altars and carvings, itatues and architecture . He describes the significance of such points of interest .
 His in’ormative commentary is enhanced by music from world-great choirs and orchestras . His commentary is based on music from the world's great choirs .
 He takes his audience from the famous Boston churches to the outdoor splendor of the Cathedral of the Pines, from quaint Quebec City to the majestic beauty of Ste. Ste. G.C. The author also travels to Quebec City and Canada .
 St. Anne de Beaupre visited great cathedrals and shrines in Washington, D.C. before returning to familiar local churches . He visited the Cathedral of St. Louis and St. Charles Charles in France .
 Winchester Star is the official aluminum duplicate bridge hoards and the advanced course in contract bridge . See this fascinating' game at the Winchester Star . The Winchester Star also contains the official duplicate bridge hards .
 Quality Footwear for men, Women and children since lillHi CoWct rd Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m. daily .
 S4VE*50“on this Caloric Ccckinq Heating Heating Gasl&nge This Gold Star Award 40"" Gas Range has a built-in room heatei in one end . The range has been awarded a Gold Star award for the best
 Thermostat-controlled thermostats are wonderful for taking the chill off off on Fall mornings .
 Keep-Warm oven with special low setting lets you hold meals ""table-ready” for hours without overcooking . Burnerwith-a-Brain* that automatically prevents scorching .
 Members of Winchester Post, 97, The American Legion, and Aberjona Post, 3719, Veterans of Foreign Wars, gathered at the Winchester War Memorial to pay tribute to the service dead of all wars . Winchester Post was 97, 97 .
 Flanked by the colors are, left to right, Walter Appleton, commander of Winchester Post, and Robert Swyiner . The colors are shown at the end of the ceremony .
 Acting as escort to the veterans are regular and auxiliary police and members of the fire department . Acting as escorts are regular, auxiliary police, members of fire department and regular officers .
 Trumpeters from tin* Winchester High School Baud were Peter Moulton and Terry Cron burg .
 Lynch JHS Committee Asks $ 31,992 at Town Meeting November 27 Town Meeting . Selectmen met with Selectmen at their regular meeting Monday night to discuss additional expenses .
 Selectmen Express Approval f Paying Excess School Bills Town Accountant Continues Inquiry Into Validity Of School Expenses . Winchester’s paying “the balance of unpaid obligations of the Johnson Road-Ridge Street School Building Committee that are now due and arc not under
 Mr Clarke attended the meeting of the Selectmen at which the motion was discussed and voted . Mr Clarke attends the meeting and attended the vote .
 Mr Clarke advised the Selectmen that while under the terms of the special act of the . Legislature their action was not legally necessary, passage of the motion would indicate clearly how the . Selectmen felt about the matter .
 The signature of the Town Accountant and the State Director of Accounts on warrants to pay excess expenditures is required before the Selectmen can finally approve the bills and authorize the Town Treasurer to pay them . The Town Treasurer is required to sign the warrants on excess expenditures .
 Chairman of the Board Sherman W Saltmarsh at first expressed his opinion at the meeting that passage of the motion would be unnecessary, but concurred in the consensus of the board .
 Additional expenditures found desirable by the committee because they can now be purchased with Federal school aid at 30 cents on the dollar, total $17,623 . Additional expenditures were found desirable because they could now be bought with Federal School Aid .
 $9,000 for additiona 1 construction items, $666 for architect’s fee, and $7,957 for school furniture and equipment . $666 also for architect's fee .
 Revision of hoys’ basket trucks in locker room, $410 . Metal ceilings in boys’ toilet rooms to replace composition tiles already destroyed by boys in acts of vandalism, $500 . Metal ceiling in boys' toilet rooms replaced with composition tiles . $500.
 Wall fan in foods room, $600 to | on March 5th ballot, correct situatibn of obnoxious odors filtering through school . $600 is needed to prevent odors from entering the school .
 Cut into bank in football field to correct situation in which goal posts are too close to brook, $400 . Cut into a bank in a football field for $400. Go to the bank to fix the problem, which cost $400 each .
 State Representative Harrison Chadwick will introduce the bill in the House of Representatives . John M Harrington, chairman of the By-Law Revision Committee, will be introducing the bill . The bill is expected to be introduced in the state legislature .
 The referendum reforms, four in number, were approved by Town Meeting in April, 1961 and in a referendum by the Town at large on May 15 . It is hoped the Legislature will act on the measure quickly enough to permit the referendum question to appear .
 The Red Cross Bloodmobile will be at the Church of the Epiphany on Monday, November 27 from 12:45 to 6:45m. Requiring the signatures of 3% of the Town’s registered voters on petitions for referenda; Clarifying and simplifying the language
 For those who have yet to donate that first pint of blood, here is an opportunity to assure yourself and your immediate family of blood coverage for the next 12 months .
 It's easy, it's not time-consuming — approximately 45 minutes — and you will have the wonderful feeling of giving that precious lifesaving fluid . It’s easy to give the precious fluid, and it's easy to do .
 No personal injuries were reported to police at the scene of the accident .
 Starr of 58 Bright Road, Belmont, was in collision with his front door . Starr was hit by Starr's front door in Belmont . Starr of Belmont was hit with Starr's door in the collision .
 Mr Starr told police that he had pulled over to the westesly side of Washington Street when his car and one operated by Mrs. Starr pulled over . Mr Starr said he and Mrs Starr's car pulled over on the side of the road .
 Poliee estimated damage to Mr Starr's car at $150, Mr Guaranccia's at $50, and Mrs. Starr's $50 . Mr Starr’s car was damaged in the incident .
 Town Pays $25,000 for a 1.1 acre lot of land on Dennett Road, which the Town will use as a playground . The South Border Road Corporation has received a payment of $ 25,000 .
 The Town’s purchase of the property was authorized by the Town Meeting of March, 1961 . The Town purchased the property in 1961 . It is now owned by the town .
 The negotiations for the sale of the land were conducted with the South Border Road Corporation by Town Counsel Vincent P Clarke and the Board of Park Commissioners .
 The corporation received a rebate of $31.97 for the full year’s taxes it has already paid to the Town . The Town received the rebate for the year's taxes they have already paid .
 The rebate covered the period from October 9 when the Board of Park Commissioners decided to take the land until December 31 of this year . The rebate covers the period between October 9 and December 31 .
 Winchester special Juvenile Officer James Cogan asked the Star to convey his congratulations to Winchester youth on Hallowe’en night . Cogan: Winchester youth will be able to celebrate Hallowe'en .
 Officer Jim said there were only four minor complaints about Hallowe’en pranksters . The officer said the pranksters were prankers .
 Town has authorized the construction of an elementary school in the Johnson Road-Ridge Street area . The Town has given full authority in relation to the construction .
 The Board of Selectmen hereby approve for payment the balance of the unpaid obligations of the Johnson Road-Ridge Street School Building Committee that are now due and are not under any legal restrictions amounting to $21,502.11 .
 Forty typewriters for typing rooms, $7,400. for in simple majority vote in referenda to approve a given Town Meeting action; and Requiring the signature of 20 ' r of the Town’s registered voters to reverse an action of Town Meeting . The $7
 League of Women Voters of Winchester has studied planning needs for the Boston area for one full year . League Open Meeting November 28 To Discuss Greater Boston Planning . Winchester has taken no official stand in favor of a specific plan .
 Public interest in comprehensive planning in some form is increasing . Because* of critical transportation problems, increasing urban renewal projects, population shifts, and pressures for changes in the tax structure, public interest in mores comprehensive planning is increasing.
 The League will hold an open meeting at the Lynch Junior High School Tuesday, November 28th, at 8:00m. For this reason, the League will be holding an open . meeting .
 The panel of experts will discuss “Planning for Greater Bostuii” are Reverend W Seavey Joyce, dean of the College of Business Admin* istratjon of Boston College . Ralph Kaminsky, director of the Greater Boston Economic Study Committee, Howard Whit
 Written parental consent for those 18 through 20 is required EXCEPT those who are in the Armed Forces or married . Written consent is required by those 18-20 .
 After your first donation you will be mailed a card showing your blood type . Yes, after your first donations you will receive a card with your type . Donations can be made at a local blood drive .
 Beyond this period blood is specially processed into useful medicine or derivatives which arc always in great demand . Blood is then processed into medicines and derivatives which are always in demand .
 For donor and recipient safety each donor relates facts about his medical history, such as past illnesses . Donor and recipient must be aware of each other's medical history .
 Blood pressure, temperature, pulse, pulse and weight and hemoglobin are determined . Blood pressure is also determined by temperature, temperature and pulse, weight and weight .
 1962 Warrant To Close On January 8th . Deadline for submitting articles to be included in the Warrant for the regular 1962 Town Meeting .
 There will be two vacancies on the Board of Selectmen, among other posts, to be filled at this election . W illiam H Uenchey of the Fourth District Court in W oburn was the guest speaker at last week's luncheon meeting of the W inchester Rot
 The judge made a humorous approach to his subject by saying that it was easier to prepare a speech and come to Winchester to make it than it was to say "no" to Charlie Murphy .
 I he judge had an address prepared, hut had to “go it blind” due to the fact that when he got to the speaker’s rostrum he found that Mr Murphy had ‘snitched’ his notes and would not return them .
 Judge Henchey was non-plusscd at the theft, but showed it not at all at all . He said he was pleased with the outcome of the case .
 Fourth District Court serves the police of seven communities, three state police barracks, Registry of Motor Vehicles inspectors and the Metropolitan District Police . He stressed the importance of the court which serves seven communities .
 Judge Henchey: Woburn needs a full-time court and the present court quarters are not large enough . He says court quarters need to be larger than current quarters .
 There is now a hill before the General Court to make the court at Woburn a full time court . He told the Rotarians that there is now an opportunity to expand the court .
 It is in session mornings and one evening a week for the benefit of probationers . Probationers are able to report to the court without losing a day’s work .
 Judge Henchey is commencing his 25th year at Woburn . He has won the reputation of a wise and humane disciplinarian . The judge has won a reputation for his role as a wise judge .
 On July 25, 1961, the executive secretary of the Supreme Judicial Court wrote the clerk of the court in Woburn, Massachusetts . The clerk was told that the quarters were one of the problem children of the courts system .
 Harry Ciarcia Lodge, 1592, Sons of Italy, receives the lodge’s Mother of the Year award troui Mrs. Mrs. Ciarria .
 William HENCHEY, continued on page 6 -Vlaggiu, uoat. venerable of the lodge, at a uiceling held November 7 at Sum of Italy llali. William Henchey, continued to the page 6 of this article .
 Winchester Emergency Committee has mailed Winchester residents appeal brochures describing WGBH plans for rebuilding . Winchester residents are urged to help WGB and Channel 2 rebuild after fire .
 Listeners and viewers who are grateful for the excellence of the WGBH and Channel 2 programs are being asked to contribute toward a goal of over $1,500,000 needed for a permanent building and equipment . The goal is to raise enough money for new equipment and permanent building .
 To date $285,000 of the needed $1,500,000 has been mailed to the station from the listening area . To date the station has received more than $300,000 from listeners .
 Brochures and information about the townwide appeal for funds to help rebuild WGBH and Channel 2 are available at the Star Office .
 On November 28 Congressman Bradford Morse will confer with constituents in Winchester Town Hall during an informal lunch hour from 12:30 to 1:30m. (sandwiches and coffee will be on sale)
 He will welcome one and all who have problems in which he may be helpful, he says . He says: "He will welcome all those who have a problem with him."
 The Ruth (V Porter Company) is a blend of the old and the new . Lon^-Fstablislied Realty Company Blend of Old and New . Company blend of old and new .
 Winchester real estate firm has been in continuous operation since 1981 . Winchester Real Estate Company is now in its 81st year I of real estate service service .
 The firm j has already transacted over $12,j 000, in Winchester sales in 1901 . Winchester has transacted more than $13,000 in sales .
 The Ruth C Porter Company maintains its offices in the building in which the building was Constructed back in 1812 . The Ruth Porter Company was built in the same building in the 1812 building .
 Mrs. Murphy's building now consists of four stores and three offices, all occupied by thriving business .
 The sales staff consists of Richard Murphy, Marian Ferriman, Charles T McCarthy, Flor cnee M Salyer, James F Quine, all of whom are residents of Winchester .
 Gertrude H Murphy, is a longtime resident of the town, and after 25 years with the company, is still very active in local real estate . Murphy is still active in the real estate industry . Murphy: "After 25 years, I'm still active"
 The Ruth O Porter Co. maintains another rapidly growing office in Sudbury, where business is conducted in the same friendly, competent and honest manner that has been the foundation of the company's continued growth and success .
 It was only a pile of leaves burning, no onr knows why i or how, on the streot >in front of j the house .
 At the last meeting of the school committee the committee voted a tribute to F Meredith Cooper . The tribute will be incorporated in its minutes and in the town report .
 "As a teacher he possessed those qualities of competence, dedication and sympathetic understanding which epitomize the best in his profession," said the former teacher .
 His leadership as head of the department of social studies was responsible for the substantial developments in that department in the past few years . His leadership is responsible for significant developments in the department, he says .
 He quietly, effectively and unselfishly gave of his time and efforts to his pupils, his town’s government, his church and his family . A gentleman in every sense of the word, he quietly gave .
 C Holy Name Society elected one of its members to treasurer’s position on archdiocesan level of officers for a term of two years . The honor was highlighted by the honor of having one of the members elected to the treasurer's position .
 Franklin G Flahive of 49 Russell Road was duly elected to take the office December 3 . Franklin G
 Mr Flahive addressed the group following Mass . He stressed the importance of being an active Holy Name man on the parish level .
 Coming events are the convention at the Bradford Hotel, Boston, December 8, and the second annual dinner at Blinstrub’s January 28, 19(12)
 Guild of The Infant Saviour Daughters of Guild members who will usher at the illustrated lecture by Mrs. Mrs. Daughters . Guild members will usher . Mrs. Gwyneth is the author of an illustrated lecture .
 Mary Ann Johnson, Patricia McDonald, Christine Brigham, Peggy Hoffman, Frances Winterson, Jean Marchant, Mary Armstrong, Patricia Marchant and Mary Armstrong .
 The Guild extends a cordial invitation to all to hear this lecture . Tickets may be obtained by calling Mrs. Mrs. John McDonald .
 The award will he presented at the association’s annual Awards Banquet, this year being held at the Hotel New Brunswick at the corner of Massachusetts Avenue and Norway Street .
 The banquet is open to the public . Tickets at $5 may be secured from Frank Finigan at the high school, PA 9-4800, or Ml 34404 .
 Big Selection ZZ TOYS 66c| Plenty of V S Z TOYS $1.34 GIGANTIC PENNY SALE . Selected List 1 Buy 1 at Reg. AND ) NONE IN 1 SELECTION .
 Woburn buzzed in on that really bad fire that destroyed a private dwelling on Porter Street . Two engines, one to fill in at the station at one to actually cover the fire, which started in the backyard of the house .
 Captain Connolly and firefighters Paul Haggerty and John Nash covered in at Woburn, on Engine 3, while on Engine 2, Lt. Lt. Connolly covered in on Engine 4 . Lt. Nash was on Engine 5 and Engine 3 .
 Joe Connolly and firefighters Bob Haggerty and Joe Riga went to the fire . Joe Connelly and firefighters Joe Rigo were also on the scene . The fire was caused by a single lightning strike .
 Winchester's Engine 2 responded to another fire in Woburn, this time at 15 Mount Pleasant Street . Winchester’s Engine 2 was covering in at the Wobrun station . Winchester's Firefighters responded to the first fire in the town .
 This one apparently started in a bedroom on the first floor of the house, and was brought swiftly under control . It was brought under control quickly after the incident .
 Building permits issued for week ending Friday, November 10 . Winchester engines returned home at 4:35m. No sooner than there was another call from 93 Grove Street of this town .
 Winchester Toastmistress Club Denton W Randal, Jr. Don Orione Fiesta ©bttitams — try A Captain .
 William Randall of 10 Everell Road, former proprietor of Randall's ice cream, candy and catering establishment on Mt. Mt. William Randall . William Randall was owner of the ice cream and candy shop . Randall's is located in Denton .
 WinThe Common Room, Church of the Epiphany, was the meeting place for the Winchester Toastmistress Club last Monday night, November 13 .
 Pamela Papadinis showed us how stained glass is cut into the various shapes . She studied stained glass in her home in New York .
 Dorothy Staffer talked about “Indians’ Rights and Rituals” covering all phases of Indians’ lives from baptism, courtship to marriage . Staffer also talked about the importance of Indians' rights and rituals .
 The Winchester Toastmistress Club is composed of women from Winchester, Medford, Arlington, Woburn, Malden and Melrose . The club is comprised of women .
 The club invites all women interested in self-improvement to come and see the club at work . The club is open to members of the public for the first time .
 Mr and Kerrigan announce child, David day, November 7 at the Richardson House . Charles Hunter 60 Lorena Road, the birth of their first Charles, on Tues.
 Joseph H Kerrigan of Stoneham and Manchester-by-the-Sea ening, Chester Hospital following a heart attack . Kerrigan was taken to Chester Hospital after suffering from a stroke .
 He was born September 2, 1892, in Prince Edward Island, Canada . He spent his boyhood on Peak’s Island in Casco Bay, Me., later living in Boston and Somerville .
 Harry A McGrath, Jr., of Winchester and Winthrop, died* Tuesday morning, November 14, at the Baker Memorial Hospital after a brief illness . McGrath attended Portland High School, Roxbury High School and graduated from Somerville .
 Captain Philip Frederick Hauck, USN, of 41 Canterbury Road, died Monday, November 6, in Washington, D.C., where he was attached to the office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Hauck was head of the Atlantic and Caribbean Division .
 Roswell M Bout well, 3rd, of Sheffield Road is a hostess and member of the Ladies’ Committee in charge of the New Members’ Tea at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston .
 In 1914 Mr Randall came to Winchester and joined his father in the ice cream, candy and catering business on Mt. Mt. Randall .
 The business built an enviable reputation for the quality of its products and the cleanliness of its quarters . The business prospered and built a reputation .
 After his father’s death in 1921 Mr Randall took over the business in 1921 . He continued to run it successfully until he retired in 1948 .
 He first lived on Lloyd Street and later lived on Everell Road address . He later lived at Lloyd Street, later at his later addresses .
 He was also a member of William Parkman Lodge of Masons, the First Congregational Church and its Men’s Club .
 On September 15, 1921, Mr Randall married Lucy Hardy of Winwho of Win who survives, with two HARRY A McGRATH, JR the last tea in November a year ago . A number that has helped increase the Museum membership to more than 10,000 .
 He was born December 9, 1920, in Boston but grew up in Winchester, Massachusetts . He graduated from Winchester High School in the class of 1938 . He was a member of the class that graduated from high school .
 He was attending Boston College when World War II broke out . From high school he went to New Hampton Preparatory School and went to Boston College .
 He enlisted on the day following Pearl Harbor in the Naval Air Corps . He later served in the Army Air Force and Navy Air Force .
 While in the Army he was in charge of athletics for Air Force personnel in North Africa and designed a golf course for their use in that theatre . He designed the course for the use of the Air Force .
 An ardent golfer, Mr McGrath commenced playing with his father in father-and-son matches at the age of six . The pair continued in this yearly competition until the younger Harry entered the service in the service .
 The senior Harry was one of those influential in instituting the father-and-son tourneys at the age of 13 . Harry was influential in introducing the tourneys .
 Smith Club Candle Sale, tomorrow at 6 Everett Avenue. Smith Club candle sale . Will be held in honor of President Obama .
 The Winchester Friends of Don Orione held their weekly meeting on Monday night, November 13, at the Barbo Auditorium . A Fruit grouping by the Winchester Friends was held by the group .
 Plans for Don Orione Home for the Aged Fiesta were developed further . Plans for the home for the aged Fiesta have been developed further.
 This fiesta will take place on Tuesday, November 28, at the Sons of Italy Hall on Swanton Street, and the dinner will be served from 6m. to 9m.
 Don Orione Flying Kitchen will hold a benefit dinner in honor of the Italian community . The event will be held at the Orione Center in New York City .
 There will also be a display of religious articles on the second floor with priests of the home .
 Persons interested in attending this fiesta are invited to contact committee members . The event will be held at the end of October 31 .
 Angelo Maictta was chairman of the board . Chief Joseph Derro was also chairman . Mr and Mrs. Leonard Barbo were present .
 Aldo Minotti Miss Eunice Maietta and Robert Biggio were married to Mr. Andrew Biggio . Mr Biggio was married to Mrs Maieta .
 The donation will he $5.00 per person . Geri Buzzotta and Robert Caggiano will be donating .
 The proceeds will be used to continue the work and expand facilities of the Home for the Aged . Proceeds will go to help build the national shrine to the Madonna and help build a national shrine .
 With your help we can have a very pleasant evening and at the same time assist this charitable and noteworthy cause . With the help of the public, we hope to raise money for a charity .
 Captain Hauck was the son of Mrs. Francis E, final report on UNICEF Halloween says .
 He was born August 23, 1913, in Brooklyn, N.Y., and spent his boyhood there . He graduated from James Madison High School and the United States Naval Academy in 1935 .
 In 1941 Captain Hauck was attached to the Battleship Utah when she was sunk by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor . Hauck survived the attack on the Utah .
 He received a letter of commendation from the Secretary of the Navy for his rescue of shipmates .
 Francis E Rogers of 29 Elm Street, a lifetime resident of Winchester, died Monday evening, 13, at the Winchester in clevcl ma November 13 t Hospital . Rogers was prominent in local Knights of Columbus circles for finy years . He then was assigned to the USS Duncan, a
 Metcalf Union announced yesterday that the generosity shown on Halloween by citizens of Winchester, Winchester, residents may be protected from tuberculosis . He was born February 11, 1880, in Winchester town Chester schools, retirement 16 oping countries .
 At the Winchester Star some UNICEF Trick or Treat program of the Unitarian Church School . The Winchester Star. School School School .
 In . terms of the aid given to 56 million needy children and mothers by the United Nations Children’s Fund in . the U.N. Fund in grew up in the being educated in the Win Win .
 The oldest living member of Winchester Council, 210, Knights of Columbus . Mr Rogers had served as Grand Knight as trustee and as inquisitor during his 52 years membership .
 A regular attendant at meetings until his health failed, he was especially active in promoting the Council’s welfare and particularly interested in the degree work .
 He was a member of Pope Pius X Assembly, Fourth Degree, Knights of Columbus, and of St. Francis of the Order of the Cross . He was also member of the St. Louis Cardinals and the Knights of the Union .
 He and the late Luke P Glendon were co-workers in the Knights of Columbus and the railroad as well as close friends . He and Glendon worked together in Knights of Christopher and were friends .
 He is survived by a niece, Miss Helena M Rogers, with whom he made j Chester, and daughters, Mrs. Mrs. and Mrs. Chester .
 Thomas H Hoover of North Canton, Ohio, has eight grandchildren and eight grandchildren . Hoover also has a sister, Margaret, living on Peak’s Island; and a brother, Roy, of Newton, Ohio .
 Earle MacNeill Randall lost his life in a plane crash while serving with the Marines at Quantico, Va., after Wbrld War I . Funeral services were held Tuesday afternoon at Ripley Chapel .
 A daily glass of milk for 5,900 children for a month . Penicillin to cure 7,000 children of yaws, a crippling tropical difor their “very own” perfect gifts for everyone .
 Captain Hauck commanded another destroyer, the USS Bennett, built at the Charlestown Navy Yard, in which he participated in seven Pacific campaigns .
 From December 1944, to January of 1947, he was an instructor at the Naval Academy in Annapolis . He then attended the Armed Forces Staff College at Norfolk, Va. He was also a Naval Academy instructor .
 Captain Hauck was assigned to the USS Worcester, a heavy Cruiser based in Boston, in 1952 . Hauck came to Winchester in 1952 to make his home in Winchester .
 In 1953 he commanded a destroyer division based at Newport, R.I., then for for for a ALL GIFT BOXED KEY CHAIN .
 $4 50 personal loud Shiverick . An unusual and inexpensive gift . $450 personal loud .
 Navy veteran of the Spanish-Amcrican War died Tuesday morning, November 14, at the Winchester Hospital . He died after a year of poor health . He was a Navy veteran .
 He was until his morning at 8 o clock from the Lane Funeral Home with Requiem High Mass celebrated at St. Mary's Catholic Church .
 Captain Hauck was commanding officer of the USS Rockbridge, an amphibious assault ship . The Rockbridge took part in the Marine landings in Lebanon during July of 1958 .
 He commanded Destroyer Squadron 10 and participated with units of his squadron in the opening of the St. Louis Cathedral . He was also a member of the Royal Navy .
 In November of 1959 he was assigned as chief of staff to the Commander of the Cruiser Force of the United States Atlantic Fleet . In July he returned to Washington last July to the office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, his final duty post .
 On June 8, 1937, Captain Hauck married Virginia Hustvedt, daughter of Vice Admiral and Mrs. Vice Admiral Hauck .
 Hauck survives, survives, with Card of Thanks . Hauck thanks friends for "beautiful flowers, spiritual bouquets and other expressions of kindly sympathy"
 Mr Hopkins was born in Concord, Massachusetts, graduated from Boston College with the class of 1915 . He graduated from the Bentley School of Accounting and Finance .
 He was associated as a payroll auditor with the American Mutual Liability Insurance Company . He worked for the insurance company .
 A resident of Winchester for the past 20 years, Mr Hopkins was a resident of the town for 20 years . Let us answer the phone in our office while you arc out. ford Railroad .
 He was a member of the First Congregational Church . He held the 50-year medal of Massachusetts Lodge of Masons of Boston .
 He leaves his wife, Clara; a son, Frank T Shiverick of Winchester, Winchester . He leaves behind a daughter, Mrs. Mrs. Barbara, and a son and daughter, Frank .
 Mrs. Ruth Van Landingham of Pomona, Calif., is survived by two grandchildren, two sisters and two sisters . She also leaves behind two sisters, two brothers and a sister-inlaw .
 Family services will-'be conducted Thursday forenoon at the Bennctt-Norris Chapel by Dr. Dr. Michael Bennett-norris .
 Paul Ward died Sunday morning, November 12, at her daughter’s home after an illness of three months . Paul Ward of 28 Stone Avenue, died at the home of his daughter, her mother .
 She spent her girlhood in Nova Scotia . She later lived for many years in Lowell and was employed at Pollard’s department store .
 Funeral services were held on Thursday, November 9, at the Chapel at Fort Myer, Va. Besides Funeral Services were held at the chapel at the base of the Army base .
 Joseph E O’Donnell t\, pastor of the First Baptist ’hwrrh, officiated . The service was held at First Baptist 'Hwrrh'
 Satin finish gold tone top make* this a most attractive motch book cover, for pocket, purse gm OO or home use .
 Funeral services will be held riday afternoon at 2 o’clock at le McLaughlin Funeral Home in foburn .
 Burial will be in Calvary The Winchester Star 3 Church St, Winchester . Personalized stationery for every one .
 Massachusetts parents should be alert for signs of streptococcal infection, forerunner of rheumatic fever .
 Massell offered the following Civil Defense chaplains and social welfare workers . Massell also offered a number of social workers for the Civil Defense .
 "I or her agency volthe child of it as quickly as pos . unteers should an emergency arise," she says . The agency is responsible for the child's welfare .
 Waldo Pisco, acting director gible wil , RO f ar . of the Civil Defense Agency for Boston, administered the oath .
 A common sign of streptococcal infection is a sore throat . But not every sore throat is a “strep” infection .
 A special service on Thanksgiving Day has been announced by First Church of Christ Scientist Winchester Winchester . By following these directions on when to call the doctor, parents Christian Science Thanksgiving Service is available .
 Thanksgiving service will be held in church edifice on Thursday, November 23, at 11:00m. Local members have invited the public to attend this Thanksgiving service .
 If your child gets a sore throat Grove Street branches off, and is the home of Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Some say it is the oldest home in Winchester, Virginia . Call your docin Winchester. Winchester .
 Mukes identification more difficult than usual for a dog .
 The house was built by Deacon John Symmes and later occupied by his sons, Luther Richardson 2 and Luther Richardson 3 . Luther Richardson died suddenly at the age of two .
 In W* ad are three vnistptptUd words. Cut in the stone are his initials, L.R.S DA 2-8785 DA 2 -8785 ""fVEESS^ Sp#n> FRED ASTAIRE Will Give You A *
 Haldtn Stodloi 17 Pimant St. St. is a dance studio located in the city . Preient students and Previous Contestant* Are Not Eligible for the competition .
 These signs and symptoms help your doctor decide if he should examine your child for strep infection . The symptoms include strep fever, strepiness, fatigue, fever, and streptonia .
 Only your doctor can tell if your child has a strep infection . Your youngster isn’t likely to have all these symptoms . Only you can tell your child if you have strep .
 Your job is to report any of these signs and symptoms as soon as you notice them so that your doctor can start treatment right away . Report any signs of these symptoms to your doctor .
 This is how you help the doctor protect your child against rheumatic fever . This is the first time you've seen a doctor who has treated your child with a form of fever .
 Those selected will attend a special course of training in basic military fundamentals at one of the combat arms schools . They will then attend a basic course in the branch on which he has been appointed .
 Winchester Art Association sponsoring watercolors and woodcuts by Robert Grady in Winchester Library . Winchester Art . Association sponsoring an exhihii tion of water .colors . and woodcut by Grady .
 When asked by some of his Winchester students why he has departed from the strictly representational art demanded of beginning students, he explains the attitude of those who paint more creatively .
 Nature is used as a point of departure, and the artist progresses to more creative expression, perhaps to more abstract forms . The artist is using nature as a starting point to express himself .
 Some of the pictures in the library start to depart into more abstract forms, but the symbols of nature are still recognizable . The library contains more than 1,000 images of nature .
 His woodcuts, especially, are strong, simple, and may appeal to some more than the watercolors . The woodcuts are strong .
 The woodcut “Bob” attempts to show the strength of his father’s face and hands, and it succeeds in both expression and design . It is a woodcut attempt to show his father's strength .
 The areas of design are first indicated in color, and, while still wet, the outlines of boats, figures, etc., are drawn in ink, which runs some what into the watercolor . The outlines are drawn by ink in ink .
 The "Pond" has been purchased by the De Cordova Museum for its permanent collection . The “Pond’s’ ‘Pond,’ has been bought by the museum .
 All these pictures are worthy of much study by the aspiring painter, and by those who wish to understand more about different types of art .
 These pictures will hang in the North Reading room until the end of November .
 Registry of Motor Vehicles announces the opening of a temporary office in Woburn . The office will handle 1962 registration applications only .
 Inspector Anthony J Melaragni of Winchester, who is in charge of the Woburn office, announces that no operators’ licenses will be handled there . No operators' licenses will also be handled at the Winchester office .
 The Woburn office will function under the Malden office, which John W Avjian is supervising hearings officer . The office will be based in Malden .
 The Woburn office is open Monday through Friday from 8:45m. to 5m. EST . Established ten years ago as a convenience to local registrants, the office is now open from 8am to 5pm .
 Winchester Police Department holds an annual concert for the benefit of the department’s relief fund . Winchester Police held the event on November 7 in the memorial auditorium of the high school .
 Seven acts of professional enter tainment wore presented with mu sic furnished by Ruby Newman’s Orchestra . Ruby Newman's Orchestra under the baton of Fred die Guerra .
 Anden’s Performing Poodles, re cently featured with the Liberace Show . Pat Theriault, wizard of the banjo Paul Winik and Edna Mae, de lightful dancers General Grant, modern decep tionist Vicki Taylor and her boy
 The Tandem Club of the Church of the Epiphany announces a night of Polynesian feasting and viewing . Pacific Panorama planned for the night .
 John W Ellison, renowned chef of Chinese cookery, will prepare the following menu for your gastronomical pleasure .
 Mrs. Far Dow-Foo Gai Tong will be a dark Oriental secret that will come to light in Mrs. Dow's novel . The novel is based on the characters' experiences in China and the United States .
 The appetizer, Don Far Dow-Foo Gai Tong, will be served instead of juice from 7 to 7:30 in the Suter Room . Donald Van Roosen is Pro .
 Russell Russell has made several trips to our fiftieth state and has recorded the sights, scenes, people and personalities of the land of the hula .
 Epiphany to celebrate Epiphany Day . Epiphany will be held at the end of the year . The event will be part of a celebration of Epiphany .
 Please make reservations by Saturday, November 25, by calling the Thayers, PA 9-1126 or the Bensons, Pennsylvania 9-4461 . Reservations are required by phone at 9 a.m. ET .
 The teaching staff of the Noonan School were entertained at a luncheon Tuesday, November 7th, by the school's executive board . The luncheon was held in the school auditorium .
 Colorful decorations and table settings of candles and pine were arranged by Mrs. Mrs. J. Smith . Mrs. Smith arranged the table settings and decorations for the occasion .
 The food was prepared and served by these mothers to the executive board of the Parents’ Association and to the teachers at Noonan School .
 Mrs. Meigs, secretary of The Fortnightly, tin hoar about tho Middle East by Mrs. Ralph R Meigs . Meigs.
 The speaker was most attractive in a red ceremonial costume trimmed with gold thread and braid .
 She said one of the most amazing facts was the way people, and especially women, follow the same customs of more than 3,000 years ago . She said she was amazed by the customs of people and women in the world .
 She spoke of the women visiting wells at 4m. each day and carrying water-jug home on their shoulders .
 She felt that the women knew of the world’s progress and were hoping for a chance to be more like other countries . For all that, she said, she felt that she felt .
 Henderson visited friends in Beirut, Lebanon, which was not quite as bare and sandy as some other Arab countries . Henderson: "I'm glad to see people in Beirut again, but I'm not sure if I'm going to see them again, again"
 The climate in the hills above the city was cool and delightful, she said . The Dead Sea is 1,500 feet below sea level . However, it was hot in July in July, but the climate was cool in July .
 These Arab countries have very religious backgrounds in each of their particular religions, but are very different politically . The Arab countries are very similar politically .
 Visitors are not allowed to return to one of their countries one they pass over the boundaries into another state . Visitors are also banned from returning to their homeland .
 Bethlehem has many Christian churches, and only one minaret, but that is unique . Bethlehem has a unique minaret . Bethlehem's minaret is one of the world's most famous minarons .
 She had a lovely water-jug with a delicate pattern in color, a testament with an olive wood cover, and some cutlery with carved wooden, bone or horn handles . She also had a beautiful water jug with a lovely pattern of color .
 Savings Bond Program has been lucky in having the dedicated support of thousands af American women . Savings Bond program has been the subject of many of the nation's most recent scandals .
 Their cooperation has from the War Bond tours of Hollywood’s brightest stars to helping to operate the Savings Stamp Program for the small fry . Their wonderful cooperation has since included tours of the stars and tours of film stars .
 Many a boy and girl wouldn’t have a full Savings Stamp book, but for Mom . The special talents of American women are American women .
 Savings Bond Program is run by the army ot women volunteers . Many a Bond would not be sold, but for the women volunteers who put their strength be* hind the program .
 Every U.S. Savings Bond yon buy is guaranteed to grow by Uncle Sam . Every United States Savings Bond on sale is guaranteed by the government .
 Savings Bond Program we salute the volunteer spirit of the Women of America . Savings Bond program we salute women of America's volunteer spirit .
 By buying bonds and encouraging others to do eo, we help build a more secure future for ourselves and for our country . We are committed to investing in bonds and investing in our own money .
 America's newspapers have published Savings Bonds ode at no cost to the Government . Buy them where you work or bank ft. J «*%C yC Honorary Chairman of National Women’s Advisory Commit too for Saving Bonds .
 A I I turned out for last Monday’s meeting at h*r very attractive C abot Street home .
 Lyle j Longworth reveals success of “Morning, j Noon and Night in Suburbia’s” success . The j to realize that their donkeys and recent M.S.P.C.A. benefit fashion dogs .
 In addition to organization flying the American the fine humane work being done flag in a foreign land . The organization flies the American flag in the foreign land.
 Gibson describes the shocking incident at the “Duck Feeding Station” across from Norumbegu Park . Gibson then described the shocking situation . Gibson: "It's not unusual for a duck to be fed at a duck feeder station"
 Mr Walter Koe of Wayland, Maine, is the "Buck for a Duck" man . His hobby and life work it has been. C nor anyone else does anything about their feeding .
 Gertrude Groesinger of the Animal Rescue League has worked for years in the pet placement department . She has been in charge of placement placement for more than a decade .
 She conducts a weekly program, describing her pets-for-ndoption at the moment .
 tlu* phones aie . ringing with calls from eager people who have fallen in love (by radio) with some animal she has inentioned . Long before she goes off the air, she has been in contact with some of the world's favourite animals .
 When the full amount is paid, you will receive the toy reserved for you . Make additional payments at any time prior to Christmas, and you can receive a toy .
 BEAUTY PARLOR ONLY Florida — Full of Juice Yellow Variety — Adds Extra Zest Unbreakable 25"" Doll — Hair Dryer — Swivel Chair — Hair Styling and Beauty Accessories .
 Only Works Like a Real Car - Ignition Key, Windshield Wiper, Signals, Horn, Shitt, Brake, Antenna, Gauges, Etc. Yellow — Firm and Flavorful – Firm and Flavoured .
 Winchester selectmen should not serve beyond the three-year term for which they art* elected . Winchester must come to grips some time with the issue .
 The Star was discussing this single three-year term thinking with a particularly capable former town officer recently and found he was not at all sold on it . The Star found that the idea of a town officer being a mayor is not alluring .
 "We were interested and pleased to get his concurrence. As we have questioned its value, we were interested," he said. "As we have had several occasions questioned the value of its value."
 The three-year term for selectmen was not primarily enacted here to prevent continuity in office . It was intended to protect continuity of office, not to prevent change .
 It was adopted to relieve a candidate for the hoard of the stress and expense of standing for re-election for a second term or more . Rather, it was adopted as a way of relieving a candidate of the .
 Desirable candidates were becoming increasingly reluctant to wage the campaign necessary for election more than once, and it was felt that if a candidate could be elected for three years, instead of yearly, more and better candidates would be attracted .
 Most selectmen in the days preceding the voting of the three-year term ran for no more than three years . This was not always the case. Most selectman in the . days before the voting, the . elections were held in the early days .
 As the years rolled by and the duties of selectmen became more and more complex and time-consuming, incumbents seldom served for more than three years . There were exceptions, notably that of Walter H Dottcn, who served for seven years .
 Holding office as a selectman today however, is entirely different from such service in the days of Messrs. Messrsrs. William Jennings and Mrs. Jennings . Jennings: "Holding office in such an office was entirely different"
 Winchester has become accustomed to getting news al>out Town Hall . Administering the government of a town of some . some Is The Truth . Winchester is a small town with a population of some of the world's smallest .
 We suppose that everyone realizes that the people have a legal right to know what their elected, or appointed, officials are doing . They expect their local newspaper to report these doings .
 The Star calls reporting the truth "in bad taste" in the majority of cases . It seems to be a lot of cases you're far out on a slim limb .
 There are at least two things that have to be said on this subject of reporting Town Hall news . Anyone who doesn't want to see the truth published is probably concerned with something other than taste .
 By and large most Town departments are not only cooperative with the Star in reporting news but happy to be. The Star is happy to report from the Town of Rock Springs .
 The Star has enjoyed increasingly productive news-gathering relations with the Board of Selectmen and the Town Accountant .
 The expression “Red or Dead” has a fair measure of rhyme but precious little reason . The expression has been used in the U.S. for decades .
 It reveals a shocking lack of faith in the competitive power of American society, a naive belief in Soviet omnipotence, and a rather casual attitude toward death .
 To suggest that the only alternatives open to adult Americans are mass death in nuclear war or capitulation to Soviet domination is to confess a belief that under conditions ot peace one doesn’t believe that we can win the ideological and economic battle with the Communist system .
 It seems to us that in any competition with the Soviet Union, time, wealth, and a big head start put us far out in advance . To the Star thi.s. is the sheerest nonsense. ( liven the productive capacity, the revolutionary economy, and the intellectual
 To concede that unless we and the Russians blow each other to smithereens we’re going to he bossed by the Kremlin, contradicts all known facts . It shows a willingness on the part of American defeatists to take Soviet claims of omnijK>tencc at
 Anti-war people are playing the Kremlin game more effectively than Mr Khrushchev . As wc suggested, this ‘red or dead’ slogan also shows a pathological attitude toward death .
 A minority of escapists have acquiesced in the idea of death, without so much as a quiver of protest against the nuclear policies that are leading both Moscow and Washington to mutual suicide .
 For many selectmen three years’ service is enough, hut there have been in recent years several who were deterred from seeking re-election simply by the prevailing dogma that, “No one runs for a second term”
 Precedent or tradition, if you will, is only good so long as it serves those in whose interests it ris invoked . Precedents or tradition only serve those in the interests of those whose interests are invoked .
 The electorate can safely be trusted to decide whether a candidate for re-election should remain in office . The electorate is trusted to make a decision to keep a candidate in office, says David Cameron .
 If he can persuade enough voters he should be reelected, that his re-election will serve the Town well, it is the Star’s feeling that a belief in the sanctity of precedent should not prevent him from giving further service to the community .
 School committeemen jrretty generally seek re-election for a second three-year term with no criticism . School committee members are re-elected to a second term with little criticism .
 In fact most seem to feci that they are equipped by previous experience to render more valuable service to their committee and the town after their re-election . In fact, they seem to be equipped with previous experience .
 Town officers like the collector of taxes, treasurer, assessor and park commissioner extend their service in many instances way beyond the three years served by selectmen . Town officers such as treasurer, tax collector and assessor, to name only a few, extend their services .
 Selectmen do not feel that their appointive officers like the accountant, town counsel, and town engineer should end their service after three or six years . Indeed the selectmen do . Indeed, selectmen feel that they do not want their appointees to end .
 A selectman, in the most important office of our town government, can't extend his service beyond three years because of an unwritten law that has no rational justification . And yet a selectman can not, or does not extend his . service beyond . three years, he says,
 It seems to us that in performing their legal duty to make records of their meetings and decisions available to the public, these Town officials are doing a real service to the Town . The Town is performing its legal duty, making public records available .
 The Town can make wise decisions, after all, is if these decisions are based on facts . The only way the Town can decide is to use facts, and that they must be true .
 W. inchester can get the facts out if your Star goes after them and makes them known . And the only way to get them out is to go after them, and make them known.
 A few good citizens still believe printing the news al>out Town Hall is unpatriotic, sort of an invasion of official privacy as it were . But there are some good citizens .
 Its the Town's business, and anyone who doesn't think so shouldn’t be running it. i i i 1 Now, as to this matter of press responsibility, I'm not sure what I'm doing .
 Winchester officials are in a good position to know that the Star is frequently in possession of information . If published prematurely or handled sensationally, it could damage the interests of the Town and hurt a lot of people, officials say . Winchester officials should be aware of the risks of publishing information prematurely
 News of this potentially harmful kind is the exception rather than the rule . But news of this kind of news is not the only one to come out of the news .
 Most of the news coming out of Town Hall should he published, and will be, will be published . Most news coming from the Town Hall will be from the press conference .
 We should not make the mistake of confusing “controversial news with sensational news,’s not sensational. And we should not confuse ‘controversial’ news with ‘sensational” news. We need to be careful not to confuse sensational news with controversial
 "Let us look to our strength, both material and spiritual, with confidence and maturity," says Pope Francis . Let us look for strength with confidence, maturity and maturity, he says .
 I veil if one side managed to gel in a surprise attack, it would destroy itself with the radioactive fallout from its own bombs . I veil. I veil .
 Let's also get off the defensive, and concentrate on living rather than planning for death . Let’s also get . off the . defensive, let's also focus on living, and not planning for . death .
 In mutters of revolution, we’re still way out ahead. Thanks to enlightened people in our society we're still free. We're still way ahead. We’ve still got a lot of freedom thanks to our enlightened people .
 Albert Horn, teacher of piano for 20 years both in Winchester and Boston, has moved into handsome new studio quarters at the recently renovated Center railroad depot .
 The new studio is spacious and nicely decorated, equipped with a Sohmer grand piano . The studio is located in New York City .
 Mr Horn begins a new chapter in a lifetime of piano instruction . The fire in the old Waterfield Building on May 4 in which his studio was reduced to ashes .
 Mr Cohen’s pupils have played with the Pops and have themselves taught future concert pianists .
 Mr Horn is hopeful that more adults can be persuaded to take piano lessons . Mr Cohen turned out most of the professional musicians in Boston, Mr Horn says .
 Mr Horn has the best wishes of his friends and associates as he begins teaching piano in his new quarters .
 “FRIENDS” MANNING THE “CHUCK WAGON” at Manchester Field . The “Chuck WAGon’s” is a team of friends and fans .
 The Winchester High School Band and Orchestra raise money for the benefit of these popular teen-age musical organizations . Be advised that this very popular gastronomic rendezvous is the famous “Chuck Wagon’s”
 The “C ; huck Wagon” was built by Rotarian “Al” Elliott, the “Homespun Boy” and presented to the Friends of the Band and Orchestra by the Winchester Rotary Club .
 It is not exclusively the property of the ‘Friends’ and can be used by any other responsible local organization . The "Friends" are not exclusive to the "Friends' property .
 The “Chuck Wagon’s” has been a great help to the “Friends,” for before it was available workers had to dispense food and drink from hit or miss tables and counters on the ground . The ‘Friends’ is now a
 "It got good and cold standing on the ground throughout a football game," coach says . Working under such conditions was hard enough, he says .
 The “Friends” were finding it harder and harder to get workers under the old conditions, but the “Chuck Wagon’s” has changed all that . The ‘Friends’ were found to be hard to get out of work under old conditions .
 The "Chuck Wagon" is a popular attraction for doughnuts, hot dogs, coffee and hot dogs . It is also known as the "Chuck wagon" for hot dogs and coffee .
 The Wagon is the Mecca for the hungry and thirsty at football games . The money that goes into the till benefits the high school band and orchestra .
 Zen is “the art of seeing into the nature of one’s own being,” says Suzuki, Zen . Zen allows us passage from bondage to freedom, says Suzuki . Zen is the art of ‘seeing’ into nature of our own being .
 Fundamentally, by helping us to transcend the illusion of self, of our individual separateness from the rest of existence, we can transcend that illusion . We can transcend our separateness, of being separate from others .
 "True wisdom is the realization of this unity, first in theory, ultimately in our lives," he says . True wisdom is true wisdom, he says, and true wisdom is in theory and practice .
 Wc. try to contain within static dogmas and concepts a life whose supreme fact is change . Wc try to . contain within . static dogma and concepts . A life whose . supreme fact . is change. Change .
 Zen master Zen Zen: Our knowledge of ‘reality’ is a knowledge of mere words, which are to the Zen adept, at best “fingers pointing at the moon,” not the moon itself . Zen master: "Our knowledge of reality” is a
 We are crippled by the pain and sorrow that arise from craving attachment, and, once again, the illusion of self . Imprisoned by man-made fictions, we are crippled, says the author .
 Zen tells us, we must realize that no one can help us but ourselves, no master, no intermediary . Zen says, "We must realize we must help ourselves" Zen says: "No one can be helped by anyone else, but ourselves"
 This was Buddha’s recognition, as it was Jesus,’ that the kingdom of God is fully as much as much within you as without . The kingdom is fully within you, as well as without, says Buddha .
 Zen patriarch Seng Ts’an says we must abandon “completed” systems and dogmas . Next, says the Zen patriarch, is abandoning dogmas and completed systems . We must abandon "completed" systems, dogmas.
 "To know reality we must pass beyond the limiting illusions of intellect and emotion into a state of direct awareness," says the author .
 This is a word problem whose aim is not to reveal a completed truth but to jar the mind into supra-rational awareness of reality . This is the aim of this word problem, not revealing the truth .
 Zen believes that once questioned, Zen believes, life’s unity is shattered . The point, among others, is the transcendence of questions themselves . Zen believes life's unity is broken when questions are questioned .
 The Lankavatara Sutra adds that the wise lose wisdom when their knowledge does not become love and sympathy . The wise are not changed into self-control, the Lankavati Sutra says .
 This is a condition of one's whole being in which life's apparent opposite's are “seen’s as its real ONE . Having passed beyond ego, wc not merely realize our oneness with ALL conceptually, hut ARE one with all .
 The archer, as Maurice Herrigel put it, is the target, free of effort and will, at once the instrument and the object of his arrow . The archers are the target of their own effort and their will, as well as the instrument .
 Zen abbots and patriarchs intended to point a moral. I like very much the fine stories of the Zen. abbots, patriarchs . Zen. monks . Zen is a Buddhist tradition .
 It is said that one of the greatest Zen ‘teachers’ got up cold one morning and having no fuel, threw his wooden Buddha into the fire, before his disciples .
 Huen Sha was about to start a Zen sermon when a bird sang nearby . Similarly, a bird sings nearby when a Zen speaker begins a sermon .
 Suzuki, again, “abhors anything coming between the fact and ourselves,” most especially words . Suzuki: “We’re not going to be able to live with the fact or ourselves . We’ll never be able’t live with words
 To try to explain with words with words, the great scholar writes, is like chasing your shadow . The great scholar says, "To try to understand with words is like trying to chase your shadow"
 It points the way to that condition of wisdom taught by the Buddha, in which a man is unmoved by sorrow or joy, foils hate with love, and lives rather than teaches truth .
 The Winchester Star, left at your Residence for one year, was published in 1954 . It was left at the home of one year .
 OLDest NEWSPAPER PRINTED in WINCHESTER serving the Community . Largest Sworn Circulation of the year .
 The New Waterways Committee Would very much appreciate the publication of this letter in order that the residents of Winchester may be kept apprised of the latest developments .
 At the Adjourned Annual Town Meeting of March 24, 1958, the Town voted a sum of $12,500.00 to be used in dredging and improving the Aherjona River from Swanton Street to a point near the Winchester Post Office .
 All work so done would be with the assistance of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, under Chapter 91 of the General Laws . All work would be done in Massachusetts .
 At the Adjourned Town Meeting of April 4, I960. The Committee informed the Town that under Chapter 91, the Commonwealth was interested in projects involving Hood control only .
 On October 20, 1961, the Town was informed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Waterways Division that bids for the project had been received . The Town of Watertown was informed that bids had already been received for a project .
 The low bid was for $29,200.00, and engineering and contingency fees of $7,900.00 would bring the total cost of the project to $20,500.00 . They advised that the low bid for the project was $29.00 and that engineering
 The contract would he awarded and the undertaking would he under way . They further advised that upon the receipt of the Town’s check for 6(K» of this amount, or $18,250.00 .
 Inasmuch as the appropriation for the work fell $5,750.00 short of the needed amount, the Committee was in a dilemma . The Committee was unable to come up with the money needed to complete the work .
 The New Waterways Committee decided that., time-wise, it had only had two choices . After deliberation with the Board of Park Commissioners, the committee decided that. After due deliberation .
 The first, and not acceptable, Was to inform the Commonwealth that the . payment of $18,250.00 exceeded the authorized expenditure, and that the undertaking . must be postponed pending a subsequent Town Meeting when the additional funds might be allocated .
 This seemed unwise, in that there would be a great possibility of the Commonwealth putting Winchester far down the list of proposed projects, and the opportunity to obtain State aid might be lost in the foreseeable future . Winchester is one of the most important universities in the state of the country .
 The second choice of our Committee was to try to make emergency funds available in order that contracts might be signed immediately . Emergency funds were made available to sign contracts immediately, the committee said .
 On November 12, 1961, the Town of Winchester Finance Committee approved the transfer of $5,750.00 from the Town Reserve Account to our budget . The transfer of the money was approved by the Town's Finance Committee .
 We can now negotiate a contract with the Commonwealth, and work, we hope, will commence soon . We hope to see a contract soon .
 Ted Kennedy's speech at Winchester Senior High was criticized by David Kush . Kush: "Under only one circumstance should a confirmed political candidate (one who has filed candidacy papers with the secretary of state) be allowed to speak"
 We feel that the administrators were concerned with our “Mental fitness,” our open-mindedness and refused to knuckle under to public sentiment about political opportunists . We feel they were concerned about our ‘Mental Fitness’ and ‘open-minded�
 John Maybury, Robert B Hamilton, Richard Amoroso, John Marascia, Joey Sehmader, Thomas LaPointo, Robert Murray, Tony Shields, Mike Hammel, John Lee, Jeff Lyman, John Perrault, Harold Mugford, Helen MoU
 Sorokin’s theories on creative altruism offer better foundations for our continued existence than fallout shelters, automaton thinking, and fear and hate complexes . Fromm's “The Art of Loving’’ offers better foundations than fallout shelter . Sorokin and Vivekananda
 Kate Greenaway Keepsake is available on sale for £35.99 .
 Thank you again for laying in on the line for us so clearly, no matter how distasteful it may be to have to think about war and its consequences .
 I hope I may have some reprints, following those of your famous editorial of last summer . I hope you may have reprints of this summer's edition .
 If you are pointing out the shortcomings of shelters as a means of saying that a federal program of public shelters is an admission of bankruptcy in foreign policy and statesmanship, there are many who will agree with you .
 It is a bitter disappointment to pay all those billions in taxes for “defense” only to be told to take cover . International politics is now likely to be continued by that other means called war .
 At the same time, it does not do do do to say that no shelter can possibly help . At least one shelter can't help, but it does do do the same thing .
 A well-designed home shelter could make all the difference between survival and no survival . If that bomb you describe as falling on City Hall in Cambridge were to fall as many miles east of Boston, then you have a situation of neutron moderation and sodium activation .
 I believe that the choice has to be an individual and personal thing, and that the prudent man will do the prudent thing even though it cannot guarantee him complete protection . The choice must be a personal and individual thing, he says .
 Thank you for your impressive editorial on fallout shelters in the issue of the Star . What you said was to the point and timely. What you wrote about is to be the point .
 I loDked in Vain for news or editorials in the Boston papers on the one subject suitable for the day and for our times .
 Chief issue discussed was the problem of finding a place to buy meat or to shop for Christmas on the holiday of peace .
 The economic considerations seemed to take precedence over the eternal and spiritual values . The economic . considerations seemed . to take . precedence .
 It was disappointing to me to read the church page on Saturday and to discover that not one sermon topic made use of the word “peace,” or vaguely referred to the problems of peace . Not one sermon discussed peace or peace in the sermon .
 I feel that many voices should be raised today in this whole business of keeping our world safe and sane world . I feel many voices need to be raised in this business of protecting our world, he says .
 V Father Joyce will outline a broad statement of the need for planning . He will tell how individual civic groups gradually united for more effective action .
 Mr Whitmore will dis cuss the relationship between local governments and metropolitan problems from the point of view, of local city governments .
 Winchester will ultimately decide whether or not it should join with other communities in solving mutual problems . Winchester will be faced with the decision as to whether to join forces with others to solve mutual problems. Winchester will have to make the decision .
 The League will present this program to the public . Winchester voters will be able to make an educated choice from among many alternatives .
 It was with keen interest that 1 read the editorial in your paper on fallout shelters . 1 read an editorial on the issue of fallout shelters in the UK .
 Norman Cousins has written a number of articles in the Saturday Review on the same subject . Norman Cousins' views on the issue of race relations in the UK have been consistent with his views .
 It might be pointed out that “The Reporter” magazine of August 17, 19(51) in . speaking about the use of computers in Air Force New Nursery School . Recognizing the need for additional nursery school facilities in Winchester, Dr. Dr. John Sutter said
 Committee to investigate the possibility of operating a week-day nursery school for three and four year olds . John W Ellison, rector of the Church of the Epiphany, has appointed a committee .
 Tentative plans call for the school to operate five mornings per week, under professional supervision, and with the assistance of mother helpers on a cooperative basis .
 Committee would also like to hear from women who might be interested in employment as parttime helpers . Committee wants to hear about women who want to be part-time helpers.
 A perfect rendezvous for rulaxation wit h friends or business associates . A perfect place to meet friends and business associates.
 UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM is located in New York City . Beautifully appointed fur banquets, wedding receptions, business meetings. dances or luncheons.
 "It is not easy to stand by not knowing what will come, or when it will come," says David Cameron . It's not easy not knowing when it's coming, or where it will happen, or if it will .
 In the larger affairs of mankind, many of us have a feeling of helplessness. In this case, we have u feeling helplessness . We are helpless. We need to find a way to deal with the world's problems .
 We desperately hope to hear the magic news that will keep our world intact . However, it is not possible to remove oneself from the seriousness of the human predicament, not even in one's summer retreat .
 This is not to say that I have not appreciated the summer weeks for recreating . This summer is not the first time I've been in the UK for a summer holiday .
 "One is fortunate to have a hideaway, not underground, but far removed from the feverish activity of town and city life," says the author .
 It was most refreshing to be living for several weeks at the end of a seldom travelled road, far from traffic lights and sounds, from city illumination .
 I can understand why many people today permanently retire to the country fairly early in life to get away from it all . I can also understand why people are retiring in the country early in their lives .
 "It was glorious for a time, but the other world, the actual world, is there waiting, and all the time becoming more and more complicated"
 Shortly after the commencement of the summer, the crisis in Europe came to a head in Beilin . The crisis began shortly after the summer .
 "Several times I wondered seriously whether there would be a Winchester to come back to. Several times I thought seriously about whether there was ever a Winchester . Winchester Winchester was the last Winchester .
 Another cartoon depicted a young couple looking for a home in a housing development . The cartoon shows a couple looking to find a new home in the development .
 Shelter Manor, it was called, looking very much like one of the cemeteries without headstones . Shelter Manor was called . It was called Shelter Manor and looked like a cemetery without headstone .
 On the cover was a picture of a man building his underground hideout of brick and mortar . The cover of the book was a photo of the man building a hideout .
 This booklet is illustrated throughout with specific plans for building a shelter of modest cost . This booklet was illustrated throughout .
 We know that forces hostile to us possess weapons that could destroy us if we are unready, That is why we must prepare. But we know that . forces hostile . to us possessing weapons could destroy . us if . we were unready. We must prepare .
 Operation Survival was the story of the experiment conducted by the news men underground on an island in Boston Harbor . Operation Survival is now known as Operation Survival . The experiment was conducted underground on a Boston Harbor island .
 I can believe they discovered important things about themselves and human nature in such close quarters. "I can believe that they discovered some of the most important things they discovered about themselves. Some of the things they found out about themselves, human nature, and their relationship with others."
 In the year of our Lord 1961, the major threat of mankind is a nuclear explosion . In 1961, a bomb that can destroy acres and acres of living earth is a major threat .
 Man’s primary concern seems to be to find a safe hiding place from his fellow man . Man's primary concern is to find safe hiding places .
 We must be convinced that the threat of nuclear power is the most serious menace to civilization thus far in human history . Certainly we must . certainly we must be . convinced that nuclear power .
 Already the possibility of an accidental border incident leading to something more disastrous faces us . The possibility of a border incident leads to a more disastrous outcome .
 We deem it imperative that immediate action be taken to effect an international agreement to stop all testing of nuclear weapons” — this from our scientists . “Impergency’s imperative” is taken to action, scientists say .
 Currently there is a tremendous amount of talk about the reasonableness of non-atmospherie testing, the necessity of keeping ahead of the Russians . Russia is the only country in the world to test its nuclear missiles .
 We can follow the advice of our government and the example of our governor. Surely we can follow our own advice, the governor has said. We need to be more like the British government .
 We shall be able to live in them, we are told, for days, weeks, or even months . We are told we can live for days or weeks, weeks or months in them .
 The question is raised as to what kind of the world will be waiting for us. We are not sure if we will be able to live in a new world. The world is waiting for them.
 "No one really knows anything about the alternative to peace, war," says David Cameron . "Peace is the alternative," he says. "War is not the alternative"
 No one, in our land, knows what it is to see our home and towns ripped apart, to live in constant dread of death from the skies . To be sure, we have been through two world wars, some of our families have experienced precious loss, but no one of us
 We do not know except from photographs and word pictures, and, of course, no one anywhere in the world can appreciate what a nuclear war would be like . No one can appreciate the experience of nuclear war, says author .
 Hundreds of square miles would be covered with contamination . The deadly effects would last not for hours or weeks, but for months and even years . The contamination would last for months or years .
 An old ami valuable Victorian couch owned by the family of the late Admiral and famed Explorer Richard K Bvrd of Beacon i I ill has been returned to the family by Goodwill Industries after being' missing several weeks as a result of a combination of errors .
 Hv handicapped workers and later Lt. Lt. of the Army were sent to pick up clothing and other household articles to be repaired hv. Industries .
 Richard F Byrd, son of the famous admiral, discovered the tragic disappearance of the family heirloom . at the facts of life honestly in this place. at the truth of life .
 "It is the time now for us not to be depressed, but to be serious," he says . "We need to concentrate our efforts on building a world where it will not be necessary for all nations to spend billions and billions of dollars for armaments and defenses"
 Too many people today are reading a quick headline and saying, “I guess it will be war.” "I guess war will be War," says President Obama . "Too many people are reading quick headlines and thinking, ‘I guess,” says Obama .
 I have no right to tell you how you should feel, what you should think, or what you need to do about the present situation . I'm sorry for you, but I'm not telling you how to feel or what to think, I'm here .
 We must make some evaluations of our prejudices, some better evaluations of what we read and hear . We must evaluate what we think, what we see and what we hear, say .
 "We must insist that all lines of communication with all people of the world be kept open," says President Obama . We must insist we keep open communication lines with the world, he says .
 We must realize the way to safety is not as simple as booklets on how to make an air-raid shelter tell us . In addition, we must realize that we must also realize that it's not as easy to make a shelter as a shelter .
 Peace on earth is peace on earth as it operates in our houses, in our towns, and in our nation . We must know what it truly means, certainly not peace without oppostion or differences . Not peace without verbal conflict or verbal conflict, but peace without extremes of ideas .
 This kind of peace can operate on a large scale if we agree it is high time, and if we work at it as hard as we do at gardens, summer homes, golf, bridge and organizations . The peace is possible, but we need to work hard to achieve it, says
 Now is the time to be at the constant business of promoting and supporting all forms of world interchange, parliaments, governments, congresses, conferences, conferences . To keep on creating avenues of face to face meetings that can lead to better understanding .
 What a wonderful opportunity we have in our land of opportunity and democracy is to take a lead, not in pride or arrogance, not to be the best in this or that material aspect of living, but to lead in sympathy, love, service, understanding, humility and trust . What a
 "We can blaze new trails, new wide open roads rather than narrow, dark underground enclosures," says President Obama . "Please God, please God, find a peaceful solution to the world's problems," he says .
 Sitting spot of late admiral, of a prophet of doom; but I do . Causing additional difficulty in believe we cannot expect religion to expect religion .
 Goodwill Industries men believed they had found the much wanted couch only to learn it had fallen off one of the trucks enroute to a customer and smashed into several pieces .
 The handicapped people put the couch together until it looked like new . Comdr. Comr. John Defterios of the U.S. says he is proud of his work with the disabled .
 Miss Cenci had been looking for such a Victorian couch for more than ten years, she said . She said she was looking for the couch for 10 years .
 Bird, dogs, snakes, bears and other pets occupy the studio with her . The studio was occupied by a total of thirty-three pets .
 Miss Cenci was not disposed to part with her new possession until she learned it had been the property of the late Admiral Byrd .
 She would agree to the couch being moved out if she could select another item at one of the Goodwill Stores, “something unusual,” she insisted . The couch will be moved out of the house if she can buy it at Goodwill .
 Miss Cenci selected an elephant leg, two-feet high and about fifteen inches in diameter, holding a kettle container . The elephant leg was two-foot high and two-in-a-half in diameter .
 The couch is back in the Byrd Homestead at 9 Brimmer Street, Beacon Hill, and Miss Cenci is happy with her stuffed elephant’s leg .
 Yes, you may eat a regular meal; but refrain from fatty foods such as butter, eggs, cream, mayonnaise, etc. Don’t eat butter or eggs, eggs or cream . Bloodmohile: Don't donate to charity .
 Your family should notify your local blood program chairman or call your local Red Cross Chapter, PA 9-2300 .
 Winchester Bowladrome told police that some time Saturday night someone painted a three by four foot square of blue paint on the wall . Mr Ralph Marchesi of the Winchester bowladrome said someone painted the blue paint .
 Winchester Theatre reported four sections of a chain link fence near the theatre destroyed . Four sections of the fence were destroyed Tuesday evening .
 Police found two links of chain fence damaged behind both the Theatre Mobil Station and Reardon’s Texaco Station near the theatre . Police found the damage was caused by a damaged chain fence .
 Galaxie and Falcoi MOTORS Winchester have a new name . The name has a new car .
 Parents with teenage sons and daughters are invited to come in for information about several attractive thrift plans . Parents with teen boys and girls will be able to find out about thrift options .
 Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 Church Street will host events November 16, 10m. to 5m. Winchester will host a live auction at the Co-Operative Bank on November 16 . Winchester will also host events on November 15, November 17, November 18, November 25, November
 Collejre Club Art Croup will meet at the entrance of the Addison Gallery, Andover, just before ten o’clockm. November 17, Friday .
 Library will be open Friday from 10m. to 9m. and Saturday from 10 m. to 6m. as usual . Library will also be open on Friday and Saturday as usual.
 The Fortnightly Woman’s Club at Crawford Memorial Methodist Methodist Hall, American Home Day .
 Troop 9. extend cordial invitations to the mothers of nil the girls to attend . Troop members, friends and the girls of Troop. 9. invite mothers to attend.
 December 1 and 2, Friday and Saturday, Unitarian Players present “The Pleasure of His Company,” 8:30m. in Metcalf Hall . December 1, 2, Saturday and Sunday, December 3, Sunday, Sunday .
 Scalp Clinic for Men specializes in hair and scalp treatments . Jean gives great pleasure in the opening of the clinic .
 William J Pearce is serving on the annual Family Night Program sponsored by Wentworth Institute Alumni Association, Friday evening, November 17 at 8m. in Wentworth Hall auditorium . The program will be held at 8 p.m.
 Harvey of Lloyd Street, who has been quite ill with a heart ailment at the Massachusetts General Hospital, was reported improved this week . Harvey was reported to be in a stable condition at the hospital .
 Joseph S Donnell Jr. of 13 Cabot Street is serving aboard the guided missile destroyer USS Sellers, commissioned, October 28, at the Boston Naval Shipyard .
 When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-8000 . For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview
 Lewis Foster of Lloyd Street entered the New England Baptist Hospital on Tuesday to undergo surgery . Foster was taken to the hospital for surgery on Tuesday morning .
 William H Daley, Jr., Malden district manager for John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company, has retired under the Company’s pension plan . Daley has retired from his position as district manager of the company's Malden office .
 Mr Daley will be succeeded by Lynn district manager James F Penza .
 Salvatore Paul Caraviello of 44 Warren Street and Camille Grace Gravallese of 20 Ledyard Road. Marriage Intentions Salvatores Paul Carviello and Camilla Grace Gravallsese of . . Gravallses .
 Leonard David Kaplan of 16 Alton Place, Brookline and Judith Smith of 6 Oakland Circle. Smith of Brookline, Massachusetts, won't be surprised by the outcome of the vote .
 Roger Kenneth Worthen of 15 Seaview Avenue, Swansea and Bonnie Louise MacLellan of 7 Parker Road. Roger Kenneth . MacLillan of Swansea, Swansea, won't be surprised by the outcome .
 Antonio and Antonio Gironda of 5 Columbus Road observed their Golden Wedding anniversary Sunday November 5, at the Christopher Columbus Club . Antonio and Antonia Gironda were married in 1978 .
 Two hundred guests gathered to extend congratulations and enjoy the Girondas’ hospitality .
 A feature of the buffet table was a handsomely decorated anniversary cake, which Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Martha and Mr. Martha's cake .
 They were married November 5, 1911, in Sacred Heart Church, Boston . They have lived all fifty years of their marriied life in Winchester .
 The couple celebrated their anniversary at St. Mary’s Church on their anniversary day at 4:30, after which their reception and party was held in Columbus Hall .
 Cynthia Ann Hart is engaged to Edmund Colinan Beebe, Jr., son of Mr and Mrs. Cyril Spearing Hart of Winchester . Cynthia Ann's parents Cyril and Cyril are pleased to announce their daughter's engagement .
 Miss Hart graduated from Penn Hall Junior College last June . Miss Hart is a graduate of Winchester High School and was graduated from Junior College .
 Mr Beebe, Jr., prepared at Governor Dummer Academy and was graduated from Hobart College in June, 1961 .
 He is a Second Lieutenant in the Air Force Reserve and a member of Sigma Phi fraternity .
 Something new for the men has come to town . Scalp Clinic for Men specializes in hair and scalp treatments . Jean Jean gives great pleasure in the opening of the clinic .
 Peter Lonigro of 10 Loring Avenue said someone removed a snow tire from his garage sometime between November 6 and 11 . Police say the tire was removed by someone in his garage from his driveway .
 A rim, four lugs, and one hub cap had been removed from a Chevrolet sedan . Mr Needham Brown of 26 Mystic Valley Parkway reported the incident on Tuesday . Mr Brown said the car was removed from his vehicle sometime Monday .
 Firefighters attended to a smoking washing machine at Jake Horn’s house at 26 Hemingway Street . The washing machine reportedly caught fire .
 Daniel F Blanchard of 4 Dix Street, has been elected to the Board of Directors of the Tufts Teachers’ Association . He was elected by the association .
 A recent “no fix” law requires a quarterly audit of all tickets issued by the police, whether or not they result in court appearance . Though no additional clerical provision has been made, the new law requires quarterly audit .
 The Woburn Court will have to audit thousands of such tickets quarterly . It is expected that the court will also have to auditors thousands of tickets quarterly.
 Even prior to the adoption of the ‘no fix’ law, the court had outgrown its facilities . Even before the law was adopted, it had been outgrown .
 Other proceedings that come before the court include commitment of insane persons, petitions for allowance of marriage of male under 18 and female under 16 . Petition for attachment of motor vehicles, permission for attach ment of wages for personal labor or services .
 The Woburn Court is ranked 14th of the 72 district courts based on 1960 census figures . It is the only district court in the UK that has a jurisdiction of 72 courts in the country .
 The area population served by the court has increased from 77,000 in 1950 to 125,000 since 1961 . The population of the court in the 1960s has increased to almost 100,000 .
 Four with two full time judges and 27 with smaller area populations than the Fourth District that are designated full time courts are eluded in the thirteen larger courts . In eluded are four with two judges, two full-time judges, 27 with small area populations .
 The Fourth District Court of Eastern Middlesex was ranked 26th in a 1950 report . In 1950 a comparable report of the Administrative committee of District Courts ranked the Fourth District .
 Winchester Lions call Winchester Lions, PA 9-6584 or PA 93548 . Winchester Lions need light bums to keep up with the needs of others .
 The Star's editorial “Fallout Shelters: Let’s P'aee the Facts” is, in my judgment, a great public .
 I had occasion to visit the Park ; impression which I received at the . hurst Elementary School and the . recent meeting at the Vinson-Owen school devoted to Civil Defense . This is quite in contrast to the . impression which . I received . at the hurst elementary School
 The dedication of the teachers and their Pennine interest in our children deeply impressed me. I was impressed by the dedication of teachers and the interest of our children in our schools .
 The whole atmosphere was permeated with the philosophy of giving our children equality of opportunity and the best possible education . The pupils were given the 'best possible education' and 'equality of opportunity'
 It was apparent that the education of our children has received considerable thought and well planned . The education of children has been thought and planned for years, it was apparent .
 As I observed the devotion and graciousness of our teachers, I could not help but admire their professional stature . I could help to admire the professional stature of teachers .
 Winchester has a decent and friendly community, excellent school plants, dedicated teachers, and above all, our wonderful children in whom we place our hopes for the future . Winchester has much for which to be thankful, including a decent, friendly community .
 Here’s hoping that we will eventually realize the great injustice done last March and make some effort to correct it before it is too late .
 Mr Norman Cousin’s editorial in the Saturday Review of October 21 ‘In home, after home throughout the country the question of fallout shelters has become a profoundly important and perplexing issue.’
 "No one can quarrel against a decision by a citizen to prepare today against possible danger tomorrow," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He was entitled to full and factual information before making up his mind . But at least he is entitled to the facts before deciding on whether to support his decision .
 The facts given us by Mr Sullivan should certainly incite much discussion in this community, says Sullivan . The facts will certainly incite discussion, he says .
 Norman Cousins has been quickened by editorials written by Mr Norman Cousins in the Saturday Review .
 I recommend his articles on “Shelters, Survival, and Common Sense” found in the issues of October 21, 28, and November 4 .
 'I hope that well authenticated information concerning the feasibility of fallout shelters will be offered by the Star not once hut many times'
 Grace T Wills 5 Agawam Road was appalled at the lack of realism demonstrated in the appeal to us to build fallout shelters in this area . Grace Wills was appalled by the 'lack of realism' of the public appeal .
 May I suggest that, as important as it is, your emphasis upon the futility of fallout shelters is only the beginning of this article . The author of the book, The Guardian, offers his view of the situation in the world .
 If we really want to protect not only our own children, as precious as they are to us, hut the children of the world . Americans have got to do some real soulsearching and intelligent thinking about world affairs .
 We have got to rededicate ourselves to our American Dream, which includes concern for all humanity, and find out how to make it effective in political practicalities . We need to redouble our efforts to make the American Dream effective in practical practicalities, he says .
 If and when the U.S. people rise to that crucial challenge, the politicians will respond, and mankind will really bless us now and for years to come . If the American people rise, they will respond to that challenge .
 No woman really loves housework, but in order for a home to be a home it has to be clean . Cleaning is a big part of the life of a woman .
 Others do it as a real necessity like a girl coming on the bus from Boston, another from Billerica . Others say it's a good thing to do to get on a bus .
 It would be nice at Thanksgiving time to do something*nice for these girls, such as presenting them with a bag of fruit or a small turkey .
 If some of those who hire these women knew the stories behind their going out in bad weather to earn -a few dollars, they would be more thoughtful . The stories behind these women's stories would be different .
 I wish everyone could read it — and certainly trust that no Winchester person has skipped it over ightly . The Winchester author hopes everyone can read it .
 I strongly advise people to buy extra copies of the book and pass them around to their friends . The book is available on Amazon.com for £20,000 .
 In the first place no shelter will save you if you are under the bomb’s destructive area . No shelter can save you from the bomb's destructive area, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The area de pends upon the size of the bomb— the larger the bomb the greater the damago . The area pends on the size, the larger a bomb is the greater a damago.
 A bomb twice large does not have double the coverage, roughtly only one and a half . But a bomb twice ns large does . Not having double coverage, the bomb twice the size is not a large bomb .
 It is known that no means — at present — are available for transporting a 50-megaton bomb . Further, that 20- megaton takes a plane to carry it .
 With our welldeveloped and successfully proven anti-aircraft missiles very few planes would get through our outer lines of defense — which are of a scale far beyond the average person’s conception . The U.S. has a well-developed system of well-prepared anti-
 Our antagonist wants to destroy our large military air bases, missile installations, and submarine yards, says President Obama . The U.S. military says it is under threat to destroy its bases west of the Mississippi .
 He will derive no benefit from destroying large cities merely be cause they may be a source of future planning, of electronic or sci entific development, he says .
 These latter are the things he wants for himself and they would be of no use to him buried under rubble . He would be better off with his life in the rubble than with his family's life in rubble .
 He unquestionably will get through with many smaller megaton bombs via missiles and some planes . The U.S. president will be able to get through the megaton bomb range .
 These will be destructive enough to cause serious disruptions in our accepted manner of living . These will cause serious disruption to our accepted way of living, says author of the book .
 They will cause dangerously distributed fallout conditions and serious loss of life . They will be dangerous and dangerous, say officials .
 The normal well-constructed fallout shelter will withstand 10 pounds per square inch pressure . A well constructed fallout shelter can withstand pressure of up to 100 pounds per inch .
 Adding 15% to the cost will strengthen it to resist 35 pounds per square inch, which in turn will save many more lives . Adding 15 per cent to the price will strengthen the strength of the device .
 The estimated loss of life in a nuclear attack depends upon who does the estimating . The estimated death toll in an attack depends on the estimate .
 With the benefit of fallout shelters this is reduced to 10% or say 20 million people . But that's still better than 60 to 80 million people, says CNN.com.com's Tom Charity .
 If you listen to fringe group "peace at any price," you may find yourself without means of protection when you need it most .
 As our strength, and the enemy’s strength, grew greater, certain groups came to the conclusion that civilization is doomed . Civil defense is a futile gesture and that there is no place to hide, the author says .
 Indoor shelters don’t require them because walls and floors have absorbed and filtered so much of the particles that only the radiation remains . The radiation is so low that the radiation inside the house is not visible .
 No doors arc needed in a basement shelter for radiation protection . No doors needed in the basement shelter .
 Absorbtion of radiation if you are in direct sight of the bomb is one thing . Absorbment of radiation is one of the things you need to do .
 If you are behind something substantial or in your fallout shelter where you should be, in anything but an un detected surprise hurst, you will be protected to tho degree that your shelter is safe from blast .
 The 5 megaton bombs are the largest that can br carried by missiles . They are said to have a good chance of survival in any thing but a direct hit, or a near miss .
 If you are not exposed to di rect radiation, you have nearly an hour before fallout hits you . If you're not exposed, radiation will hit you within an hour of your exposure .
 "All the statesmen in the world cannot assure us that agreements will be kept," says Putin . Putin: "All statesmen can't assure us of keeping agreements"
 Theodore J Boecker 49 Wildwood Street Director, Civil Defense, Winchester on Government Operations of Au1 leaders will he encouraged to settle t Such an impression would create 1 their differences short of mutual panic and cruelty of the most slaughter .
 The group says stop testing — stop building bombs, in short stop war . Then there is the group who say stop testing .
 But we are not going to throw away everything we have to fight with and so be like sitting ducks for Mr K to bag. But we will not go to fight for everything we've got to fight against .
 Another group says, in effect, not to build any shelters — it aggravates the enemy and makes him want to fight . Others say, not building any shelters will aggravate the enemy .
 Recruiting is compulsory — you take the courses, you make trial runs, you follow instructions in detail or else . Recruiting is compulsory - you take courses, make trials runs, follow instructions, or else. Recruitment is compulsory .
 We were told that after two or three days, short trips can be made outside a shelter . In ten to fourteen days it is safe outside. We are told that in ten to 14 days it will be safe outside .
 Plans are well advanced to ship food out of central warehouses within two weeks . Plans for food to be shipped from central warehouses in two weeks is well advanced .
 Any food in metal containers or under good cover will not become radioactive . Any food under metal containers will be radioactive .
 In fact it is urged in nulear reactors to shield humans working around them . In fact, it is not only urged to do so, but it is also urged to shield people around it .
 The Star welcomes Mr Boeckcr’s letter on fallout shelters printed above and is glad that Winchester will have the debate which the subject of human survival deserves . Charged particles may fall into either one, but in a reasonably short The Star is glad to welcome the debate .
 First, let us agree that despite confusion in the press, fallout shelters are not a matter of opinion . Despite confusion, despite confusion, fallout shelter is not a subject of opinion, it's not opinion .
 Scientists not committed to defending political strategy of the present or past Administrations have testified candidly and courageously on this matter . Scientists are not concerned with defending political strategies of the past or present Administrations .
 92 per cent to 94 per cent of the American and Russian people would die in a 30,000 megaton ull-out mutual attack, experts say .
 Winchester is eight miles from Boston . It is within Boston’s destructive area . Winchester is within the destructive area of Boston .
 If a 20-megaton bomb were dropped near Boston, everything in a four-mile radius would be totally destroyed . All frame houses in Winchester would be levelled, and basement shelters would be useless .
 Even if one succeeded in obtaining shelter in less than one minute, he would emerge to a radioactive wasteland in which, all food was contaminated and all homes, hospitals, and buildings were levelled . All food and buildings in the radioactive wasteland were contaminated .
 It would be a lawless world of epidemics, hunger, marauds and disease, says David Cameron . The world would be lawless, it would be ravaged by epidemics and hunger .
 There are no present means for carrying a 50-megaton bomb, says Boecker . No intercontinental missile that can carry a 50 or 20 megaton bomb .
 There is at present no missile that can carry a 20 or 50 megaton bomb from Russia to U.S. or vice versa .
 The United States and U.S.H.R. hoth have bombers designed to carry two 25-megaton bombs each . But the United States has bombers capable of carrying two 25 megaton bombs .
 U.S. and Soviet intercontinental missiles are capable of delivering only 5 megaton bombs . Mr Boecker says that United States and Soviet . intercontinental . missiles can only deliver only five megaton . bombs .
 Scientists say the only obstacle to mounting larger warheads on missiles is engineering . The only obstacle is making missiles light enough material to permit projection, they say .
 The consensus is that such a development is either accomplished or imminent . It is either a development that is either achieved or imminent, or is imminent .
 The civil defense head assures us that the enemy “will derive no benefit from destroying large cities,” because after victory, he will need the facilities of these cities . After victory, the enemy will need these facilities, he says .
 In an all-out war neither side will dare risk sending anything less than all the bombs it has, lest the other side gain a partial advantage like, say, two million survivors .
 The strategic separation of the city and defense bases will not hold true in nuclear war . Indeed, the separation of city and bases is not true in a nuclear war, experts say . The U.S. should not be allowed to use nuclear weapons, they say .
 A map in ‘Air Force’ magazine of September, 1961 shows that there are missile bases in every state of the Union . Most of the bases are near heavily populated urban and suburban areas .
 All Winhester frame houses will be levelled even in a hypothetical 20-megaton attack on Boston . basement shelters, with or without ‘baffle,” simply won’t save anyone, the Star said .
 Even supposing that you could build such a foolproof shelter the crucial question is whether you will he able to reach it in time . The crucial question in this case is if you will be able to get there in time.
 Within a radius of 25 miles from the Boston blast, you would be exposed to a fatal dose of radiation in a fraction more than one minute . The Boston blast took place 25 miles away from the site .
 Even if you take two minutes to get to your shelter, even if you should bolt the door quickly after you, you would face death through radiation sickness .
 Mr Boecker says that without shelters there would be a toll of 80 per cent of American lives . Without shelters, there would have been no shelters in America .
 94 per cent of Americans, even with shelters, would perish in a 10,000 megaton attack, Rand Corporation says . But according to scientific testimony, the majority of Americans would die in such a massive attack .
 Chief of Naval Operations Arleigh Burke says it is “improbable’t that the majority of Americans could attain* shelter in time . Burke: It is ‘improbable that’s possible that most Americans could get out of the country in time for shelter .
 Even if shelters could be made foolproof against existing weapons, there is no reason to suppose that enemy technology could not devise more devastating weapons to make bigger holes in the ground .
 Mr Boecker is optimistic regarding our chances of survival in a world without food, homes, hospitals or means of production . He is optimistic about the chances of surviving in the world .
 He suggests that we could take trips outside of our shelter within three to four days of the nuclear attack . Similarly, he suggests we could also take trips out of the shelter .
 Clearly he is assuming a very small attack, and a single one, while neither possibility is likely . Clearly he's assuming a small attack is unlikely .
 He is assuming a rapid decay of radioactive materials, whereas a number of books on the subject, including Professor John Fowler’s book “Fallout,” reviewed in the Star on May 6, 1960, show that such radioactive agents as Strontium 90, Cesium
 Mr Boecker fails to indicate the probability that the H-bomb attack will be accompanied by bacteriological warfare, he says .
 There arc bombs now available to the great powers capable of chemically inducing mass disease and even fear over vast territories .
 The fallout now in the atmosphere as a result of the tests has reached critical levels in several areas of the country . From the tests suspended in 1958 alone alone 3,600 cases of leukemia are estimated .
 The radiation threat to the human bone structure and genetic system increased by the Soviet Union’s recent terroristic bomb tests need not be labored . Radiation threat to human bones and genetic systems increased by Soviet Union's recent bomb tests, says author .
 Mr Boecker refers in bis letter to “peace at any price ‘fringe group”* cringing and moaning and weeping before the Soviet Union. Finally, Mr Boeckcker refers to a “Peace at any cost ‘Fringe group.”
 Mr Boecker doesn’t view the probability of human suicide with equanimity . Such arguments aside, surely he doesn't view the likelihood of human death .
 If war was still a tactical possibility open to the minutemon of Lexington, it would be sheer genocidal madness for modern man . The Lexington, Kentucky, Lexington, war would have been sheer madness .
 There is a middle ground between ‘moaning’ and ‘sneaking’ on the one hand . Still Disturbed would be destroyed by the fallout from its own bombs .
 Khrushchev may have threatened to “bury us,” but he knows that he will sleep in the same grave . Mr Boecker reminds us that he may have warned us, but he may still sleep in a grave .
 All evidence and testimony presented by objective nonpolitical experts indicate that they will not save us, and for this reason are a cruel deception . "For this reason, they are not saving us," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "All evidence and . testimony presented in this way indicate
 If carried to their logical conclusion, nuclear war will produce nuclear war, he says . He says the policies will lead to a nuclear war .
 Anyone who suggests to informed adults that there is, is already hiding from the facts . There is, indeed no place to hide, and anyone who suggests there is there is no hiding, is also hiding .
 Your Editorial, “Fallout shelters: Lets Face the Facts,” presents one of the most misleading, harmful, irresponsible and near treasonable arguments for not having self protection that I have ever had the misfortune to find in print .
 If a single family, who might have otherwise done so, is dissuaded from building a shelter afteF reading your editorial, you have done your community a tremendous disservice .
 There may indeed be valid reasons for not building shelters based on individual beliefs and circumstances, hut none of them are mentioned in your editorial .
 Thermo-nuclear devices will start to drop in the U.S. community if thermo-nuke devices start to fall .
 Not all the people will he killed and property can be replaced . However not all of the people he killed will be replaced by the loss of their property .
 With more shelters, more people will live, says CNN.com.com . It is undeniable fact that more shelters will be needed for people in need .
 The air intake pipe will very definitely pipe radioactive air into the shelter, says CNN iReporter . You tell us that the pipe will be used to blow radioactive air .
 Consultant says he has never observed any concern over the activity level of air, with its short half life . Air has a short half-life of life, with a short amount of oxygen .
 The concern is about the radioctivity of airborne particulate matter which would be sucked into an improperly designed intake system . What is the concern is that the radio-activity of the particulates would be picked up by the air .
 Entrance of the heavier particles can be prevented by the use of a downward pointing air inlet, two or three feet above grade level . Air inlet can be used to prevent entry of heavier particles .
 Civilian Defense opinion seems to be divided on the need for a filter to remove residual fine matter . Civilians are divided on whether a filter should be used to filter fine matter.
 A fire storm might suck all of the oxygen out through the ventilating system . You say that a fire storm may suck out the oxygen from the oxygen .
 "I would rather die of anoxia than of the third degree burns that would be my lot if I were outside. In that case, I would rather than die of that kind of burns," he says .
 As far as failure of anyones builtin oxygen supply is concerned, one does not need electricity to induce high pressure oxygen to flow out of a bottle . High pressure oxygen can flow from a bottle in a bottle.
 There are plenty of us who can remember, with no great affection, the old one holer of country fame . There are still plenty of people who remember the one-holer of fame .
 This device is not as chic or as free from oli factory stimulus as the tiled and chromed counterpart we enjoy today, hut it is functional . True, this device is . not as . as well as the . tiled, chromed-and-blocked counterpart we
 Don't forget that a spade served the same purpose for many a combat soldier . And as long as we are on the subject, don’t forget that .
 Water with induced radioactivity would be safe to drink in a few days . This means that water with induced radioactive radioactivity is safe . It is possible to drink water with radioactivity in the near future .
 As with air, the major problem with water is that it may contain other materials of fairly long half lives . Water may contain materials that have a long half life, such as water .
 Filtration and simple distillation will render sufficient potable water for survival . Simple distillation and filthation will render potable drinking water for survivors .
 Not for luxurious living, but for raw survival which is the immediate issue . "Raw survival" is not for luxury living, it's for survival, it is for survival .
 Grant at least that not ill stockpiles in the entire country will be destroyed . Grant hope at least not that not all stockpiles of the country's .
 There is at least a chance that the government of these U.S. will eventually distribute food to the disaster areas . Also grant that there are at least some hope that there will be food distribution .
 If the foregoing possibilities exist, the least one can do as a responsible citizen is to provide my family with sufficient niation . If the above is true, the most important thing is to ensure your family is to be provided with adequate niation.
 You deride the fact that there are differences of opinion regarding the number of people that would be killed in an all-out attack, as though not knowing the exact figures were a valid reason for doing nothing . Not knowing exactly how many people would die in an attack is not a valid
 Cambridge City Hall may not be ground zero for the city hall scandal . The city hall has been a source of controversy in recent years .
 Winchester residents have adequate fire and fallout shelters . An error of a few miles one way or another would make a great difference to Winchester residents . Winchester residents should be able to stay in the safest place possible .
 In the closing paragraph an appeal is made for rational negotiation by the world’s statesmen to avoid war . The closing paragraph of this article concludes that the world's statesmen should avoid war.
 The attack on Pearl Harbor took place during ‘peace’ negotiations . The father-of-one says he will initiate action that will increase the chances for survival of his children by 1% .
 Yes, let us act now in the name of reason and sanity for our children and future generations to come . Let's act now, in the event that others, not as wise as we, act without reason, sanity . Yes, yes .
 "All of us want to do anything we can to insure the safety of our children, ourselves, and others," says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 As one authority stated, the only realistic alternative for persons living in heavily populated and defense areas is to migrate . The only real alternative is to leave the country, experts say .
 "I realize this is a very personal matter that each must resolve in his own heart," says President Obama . "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm very sorry for it," he says .
 For myself, I feel I will be doing a greater service for my children, and inseparably, for people in general, if I spend what time and energy I have in working to prevent a war that would necessitate the use of bombs .
 There arc positive things that individuals can do if we will study and think through the issues, and be willing to express ourselves, says Dr. David Perry .
 Turn Toward Peace is a new* national effort, which has New England headquarters in Cambridge, and is made up of many unrelated national organizations .
 No pat solutions are offered, but the central thesis is that there are alternatives to surrender to Communism or the threat of war . There are actions that count which people can personally undertake, such as taking action .
 It is not wrong to be concerned with the question of survival, says David Cameron . It's not right to be worried about survival, he says, but it's important to look after .
 You are to he commended for your forthright editorial on fallout shelters November 9 . You are also to be commended .
 Such realistic appraisals of nuclear destruction are needed to stir people to speak and work for peace, rather than preparing for war . Such realism is needed for people to work and not prepare for war, says David Cameron .
 I believe this same energy can be dirceteted toward convincing the government that public opinion supports serious negotiations and statesmanlike acts for peace . I believe that this energy can also be used to convince the government .
 I did not make clear my principal objections to the present parents' association set up in the Winchester elementary schools . For example, a national group ffort called “Turn Toward Peace” was called ‘Turn Towarment” I didn’t make clear that
 "I have actively participated in parent-teacher organizations in five different schools in four different communities, first as a teacher and now as a parent."
 I have never been accused of being anti-social, although I do admit to being tremendously concerned about my children’s preparation for adulthood . Their physical, emotional, mental, mental and social, social, educational, moral and spiritual development .
 After having served as a committee chairman last year, I have asked to remain on the sidelines as a helper this year only because of pressure of church work . I've asked to stay out of the sidelines this year because of the pressure of work .
 I feel that this explanation is necessary lest it appear that I am merely a carping onlooker . It is necessary to explain why I am not merely an onlooker, but I am here to explain .
 The accent appears to be on socializing and fund-raising for equipment which should be provided by our tax money . Having seen other home-school organizations performing a real service for mutual understanding to the ultimate benefit of the children .
 I do not object to enjoying a cup of tea with my children’s teachers, but if I am to take the time from my busy day for such an occasion, I would like to hear a few words from the teachers about their programs and objectives and ask questions .
 I note in the Star that some of these teas do include such a discussion . Some of the teas include such an issue of discussion .
 This, I think, is worthwhile because it can help the homes and schools do a more effective -job of educating . This, for example, can help to help schools and homes do a better job of educating children .
 A closer reading of my original letter would show* that my objection was to the fact that socializing was the sole purpose of the gathering . A closer . reading of this article would show that I objected to socializing being socialized .
 I questioned whether we can afford this luxury in today’s terrifying world. ‘I questioned whether it can afford it in today's terrifying world,' she said . ‘We can't afford it,’ she said, ‘but we can’t afford it
 It does not make sense to me to hire a baby sitter in order to go to the school for light refreshments and superficial talk, with instructions to avoid discussing school work . I'm not sure why I should hire a sitter to sit with my daughter .
 "If this means that I have a distorted sense of values, then I plead guilty," he says . "I plead guilty. If this . means that . I'm guilty. I'm not going to be able to defend my values," he adds .
 Socializing is an incidental outcome of the parent and teacher working together in concern for the child . Socializing indeed has its place in the home-school relationship .
 To place the social element foremost is a case of the tail wagging the dog . The social element is important in a dog's life, according to the author .
 Several of these groups present dynamic, stimulating programs . But teacher participation is usually indirect, and teachers participation is often indirect .
 Joining a nationwide organization would make us more aware of the opportunities for home and school cooperation . Joining the organization would be a good way to help children in the community, author says .
 Far from eliminating the social angle, it would place it in its proper relationship to the total program, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It would surely “broaden our horizons” and just possibly disturb any complacency that might exist about our Winchester schools . It would be a good way to ‘broaden’e the horizons of our schools,’s director says .
 The people of the world recently voiced righteous indignation concerning Soviet testing in the atmosphere . The world has expressed righteous indignation over the Soviet testing .
 The U.S. is considering similar tests, emulating Russia to a certain degree, because of what is described as possible military necessity .
 It might be well to keep in mind that there are effective forces other than military superiority . The U.S. should be aware of effective forces such as military superiority, says President Obama .
 It needs to be more j bring an end to further pollution alistic confrontation of the nuclear j them tea, aspirin and a place to lie widely known and supported . .
 You refer to them as Cynthia F Cooley Irene J Hoglund to create through candid debate a | if they were lepers and dangerous . To create a climate of reason in which world to others. To create . candid debate to create a . climate of . reason .
 Another highlight of the ceremony was the presentation of the Pioneers of Underwater Sound Award to Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister was presented with the award .
 Beranek heads is comprised of a group of scientists and engineers engaged in research, consultation, and product development in acoustics and many other areas of the pure and applied sciences .
 The citation for the Sabine Award stated “For twenty years he has brilliantly served his fieid as scientist, teacher and supervisor of student research, author of outstanding books and consultant to architects .
 His published works include major contributions on acoustical measurements, anechoie chambers, acoustic materials, building structures, noise control and noise control .
 A fifth volume, “Acoustics of Halls for Music,” will be published in 19(52) The fifth volume will also be published .
 In 1944, he became the second recipient of the Biennial Award for his contributions to the advancement of theoretical and applied acoustics by the publication of scientific papers while under the age of 35 .
 He also served as president of A.S.A.A., helped organize and edit its magazine called ‘Noise Control’ He was also president of the organization and served on the editorial board of its journal .
 A fellow of A.S.A.A., he contributed widely to the society's program on standardization and technical development . He was a fellow fellow fellow of the society . He died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 He formed the Systems Research Laboratory at Harvard during the war to combat the threat from Japanese Kamikaze planes . He also formed the systems research laboratory at Harvard .
 He was technical director of the Acoustics Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1947 to 1954 . He worked at the MIT until 1954 .
 Beranek helped form the Professional Group on Audio of the Institute of Radio Engineers . He was the first chairman of the first group on audio .
 He received the Presidential Certificate of Merit for his World War II contributions . He is a member of Sigma Xi and Eta Kappa Nu, honorary fraternities .
 He has served on committees of the National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, and Department of Defense . He has also served as a member of committees of national academies of science .
 Visiting Day for Lynch Junior High School is announced today to be set for Saturday, November 25 from 10m. to 2:30m. Visit Day will take place from 10:10m. until 2:15m.
 Barbara Bailey is the Chairman of the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee of which she is ‘’ the Chairman .
 Visiting Days are times set aside for the general public to look over the new buildings in which they have invested . Winchester School Department hopes many citizens will take advantage of this opportunity to become acquainted with the fine new schoolhouse .
 Public is reminded that the new School Administration offices are also at the Lynch School . The Lynch School is located in Lynch School's Lynch Center .
 Between seven and eight hundred parents attended the regular Open House held a week ago Wednesday evening . That interest in the School runs especially high .
 The new McCall School is located in McCall's former home . The new building has a great expanse, functional versatility and functional versatility .
 Northeastern I diversity's 40-aere campus in the Baek Bay of Boston will look like this when the development program is completed in 1970 . Northeastern's development program will be completed in the 1970s .
 New facilities include addition to present Science Building, chemistry building, elassroom building, new dormitories, two multi-level buildings for oil-street parking, outdoor athletic areas, outdoor . areas, music drama and fine arts center, chapel, laboratory school for the College of Education
 Nikita Khrushchev has had from time to time to extol living conditions in Russia under the communist regime and to belittle life in the U.S. The United States is that leading bastion of capitalistic ideology and imperialism, Khrushche writes .
 Other communists have followed the Khrushchev line which prompted Nikita to two six-hour speeches that painted the rosiest sort of picture of the communist future . Nikita Nikita's speeches have been followed by the 'Krushchev' line .
 Wyman School Junior Red Cross was held on Tuesday morning, November 7 . The first council meeting was held in Wyman, Wyman .
 President, Paul Martini; Vice President, Peter Rozett; Secretary, Barbara Devaney; and Treasurer, Peter Ellison . The board will meet at the end of the year .
 Peter Ellison speaks about doing a kind service for others to earn membership . Peter Ellison spoke about doing the kind service to others who earn membership. Peter Ellison: "It's a job of service"
 The president gave a short talk on courtesy, kindliness and thoughtfulness to others .
 U.S. Census Bureau official gives assessment of conditions in the United States . Mission 8-060J was published in U.N. News and World Report . Mission was conducted by U.K. Census official .
 Census Bureau representative isn't based on propaganda, he says, but on the future of America . Census Bureau rep: "The appraisal of the Census Bureau's representative is based on . propaganda, disseminated for the soothing of people in this country," he says .
 Official and incontrovertible census figures form the basis of 'the appraisal' of the census figures . Census figures are based on 'the appraisability of the population'
 These figures show a younger typically American who is settling in cities and suburbs and is having it better than ever before financially . The figures show that a younger, typically typically American, is settling into a city and suburbs .
 31 per cent of all families in America are now in the $7,000 to $15,000 a year income bracket . Only eight per cent were in it 10 years ago, compared to 8 per cent in 10 years .
 Seventy per cent of all Americans are now living in cities or suburbs of them . 70 per cent now live in the suburbs or cities .
 Premier Khrushchev, in a recent statement placed the Soviet Union’s population at 220,000,000 . Premier Khrrushchev in a statement said that the population of the Soviet Soviet Union was 220,00,000 in the 1960s .
 Census figures indicate the population of the United States will reach 214,000,000 in 1970 . Census figures show the population will reach 400,000 by 2010 . Census data shows the U.S. population is expected to reach a population of 214,00 in 1970 and 2010 .
 Americans are tending to become more and more alike . Mere numbers of population, however, are not so important as the fact that Americans are becoming more like .
 In the past population tended to be regimented along ethnic lines . Now inter-marrying racial and and national origins are becoming less apparent .
 In 1900 about 90 per cent of all Negroes in America lived in the South . For instance in 1900, about 90% of all African Americans lived in South .
 Last year only (50 per cent still lived there with many of the other forty per cent coming to Northern cities . 50 per cent of the population still live in the UK .
 American people generally are becoming more mobile, one out of five moving each year, often out of state . One of five people in the U.S. move each year .
 Census authorities discount the claim that retired in great numbers are flocking to Florida and California . Census authorities say retired people are moving to the states to retire .
 The last named has a lower percentage of retired persons than the national average . The national average has a less than 50% of retired people .
 Several states, including New Hampshire and Vermont, have about as many people over 05 as Florida . Several states have more than 50% of their population .
 In the face of Russia’s growing agricultural problem, American farm acreage is maintaining its size and productivity . U.S. farmers are still growing in Russia's agricultural problem .
 Our problem is in the decline in the number of farms and farmers, experts say . Small farms are being consolidated into fewer big farms, they say . The number of farmers in the country has declined in recent years .
 More Americans are being born than ever before and they are living longer, resulting in higher percentages of both young and aged people . More people are now living longer .
 Over a 10 year span births have brought the median American age down from just over 30 years to just under 30 years . This in the face of increased longevity .
 The average American family is smaller, 3. persons, with relatives having a greater tendency to live in separate homes . The average family size is 3.3 persons .
 In real income, what money would buy in 19(50, the increase was from $4,000 to $5,600, making for a markedly better standard of living . The increase in real income makes for a better standard living .
 Families in the $7,000 to $15,000 bracket has risen percentagewise from 15 tu 31 per cent . Families in that bracket have increased from 15 per cent to 31 percent . The rise in income support for families in the bracket has also increased by more than a
 Factory workers are now middle class by income, standards, standards . Their children go to college where years ago they were fortunate to go to high school . Now factory workers are middle-class .
 The typical American family lives in a house they own, usually of five rooms, usually in the suburbs or city fringe . Owning a car, radio, TV and many appliances, the typical American American family owns a house .
 They may have a mortgage on their home and owe for their car and some appliances . They may also owe for some of their car, some appliances and some other things .
 Census figures show that the average American family’s income, even in terms of purchasing power, is up appreciably in the past 10 years . The average family's income has also increased in the last decade .
 The income of the Negro family has risen faster than that of the white, though it still is not near the white level . The income is still not as high as the white .
 The census report shows that America has its problems, it is true, but it is also a fact that the good old United States A is still a pretty fair place to live and prosper .
 OLD FARMERS ALMANAC Now on Sale at the Winchester Star 35c Also PHILLIPS BROOKS CALENDARS $1.00 The Winchester Star 3 Church Street PArkview 9-0029
 Jennie Palmieri, Rat Trap 103, National Order of Alley Cats, of Medford, to be held Saturday evening, November 18, at the Hotel Lenox in Boston .
 The National Order of Trench Rats and the Order of Alley Cats are auxiliaries of the Disabled American Veterans . The Order is organized to further child welfare work . The order is an auxiliary to the disabled American Veterans.
 Past Golden Rodent Morgan will serve as toastmaster at the banquet . State Department of Disabled American Veterans will also attend the event .
 Messer tell the Star they haven’t heard yet whether Priscilla will be appearing in my of the Charles Playhouse productions this year, as she did last year . Messer tells the Star she hasn't heard yet if she will appear in the productions .
 Free public lecture on Christian Science in Stoneham, November 19 . Christian Science Lecture In Stoneham .
 The lecture will be given under the auspices of The Mother Church, The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Massachusetts .
 Arrangements for the lecture are being made by local members of the Church of Christ, Scientist .
 Miss Aultman was first named to The Christian Science Board of Lectureship in 1952 . She was an authorized teacher and practitioner of Christian Science .
 Since that time, she has lectured throughout the United States, Canada, and countries overseas . She has since lectured in the U.S. and Canada .
 More than 1,000 student body presidents, student newspaper editors and honor students in international relations attended the two-day session . Students representing nearly every state in the union attended .
 United States Senator Joseph Clark gave the closing address . Senator Clark was chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on International Organization Affairs . United States senator Joseph Clark .
 The student participants also met with delegates from the Nigerian, Philippine, Irish, United States and Soviet Missions to the U.N.
 Wills had decorated the tea table I with a beautiful arrangement of I ivy, clusters of nuts and fruit, j lighted by green candles .
 Everett W Goss, the treasurer, thanked the club for the money made at the luncheon to benefit the veterans . Everett Goss thanked the treasurer for the funds .
 She said that they would be grateful for good used playing cards for the hospitals . She said they would also be grateful that good used cards were donated .
 Warren Whitman spoke in favor of freeway, for which there would be Federal aid, and asked members to sign petitions . Whitman: "There would be federal aid"
 Miss Corrine Mead of the Gardens and Conservation Committee asked those interested in some form of garden group to meet after the auction at the next meeting .
 Most interesting costume dolls of Ozark Mountain region were bought at a fair in Noel, Mo. Michael Hintlian of the art committee had arranged a table of most interesting dolls of the Ozark Mountains .
 Harold E Bergquist gave an excellent and comprehensive report of the Federation meeting held at the New Ocean House, Swampscott, last May .
 Hatch said that the next meeting will be on Monday, November 27, beginning with an auction at 10:30m., followed by a snack bar in charge of Mrs Hatch .
 Associated Industries of Massachusetts is newly elected president of Massachusetts . Greer of Wilmington, vice president of Wire Belt Co. of Winchester, was elected to president of Associated Industries in Massachusetts .
 Mr Greer had returned from Europe only a few hours before . He told of flying over a large city, one half of which was brightly lighted and full of people, and the other in darkness .
 Herj lin with a 27-mile, five-story high j wall topped by barbed wire . The lighted side of the wall was | West Berlin .
 They are trying to penetrate the ultra-violet rays surrounding the earth’s atmosphere in hopes of finding answers to the moon . They are also trying to find the origin of life in the solar system . They hope to find answers to moon's mountainous surface and make bearings .
 In 1044 Chinese scientists discovered ‘super nova’ — crablike nuclear — moving 6000 miles per second, and still far away . Super nova was discovered by Chinese scientists in 1044 .
 Mr Greer felt that each one would have to arrive at their own values . He felt that the Bible was the best guide, because there mankind had found many answers .
 W e take precious diamonds from outmoded, often unsafe mountings, and put them in new, fashionable settings that restore their brilliance . LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE of EVERY DESURANCE OF EVERY DESERT •lt-m ^ .
 For the first time, visit the weekly Newsquiz . Use this week's Daily Discussion to help you understand today's featured news stories . Back to the page you came from . Send us your photos .
 Information showing the place and time for the examination will be posted on the bulletin board of the local post office .
 If you are interested in taking the test, be sure and watch for complete information at -your post office . The test will be available at your post office in the fall .
 You actually make a mosaic with Tile Craft by number . Brown Ride To War, by Henry R Pyne Theatre World 1900-61 Triumph, by Hy Steirman .
 The Church of the Open Bible is located in Burlington, Burlington, Vermont . The Sunday J Churches is located at Winn Street, Burlington . It is located on the corner of Winn Street .
 Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those ’vvith small children and limited incomes, need help at Thanksgiving and Christmas if these holidays are to be happy occasions in accordance with the American tradition .
 To help Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food and clothing are earnestly solicited . Winchester Winchester friends are asked for donations to help their less fortunate Winchester friends .
 Winchester Winchester PArkview 9-3000 tu&rS-tf WINCHESTER UNITARIAN CHURCH . Mystic Valley Parkway and Main Street PArkView 9-0949 Rev. Rev. Winchester Parkway . Phone or come in 36 Cbtiroh Street Winchester
 Comer Mt. Mt. Roswell Harding, Executive Hostess, was the founder of the First Baptist Church . The church was founded in 1903 .
 Grades L through 3 will be dismissed before the sermon for a story time . Story time in the Michelaen Room, Crib Room facilities .
 The availability here and now of the healing power of the Christ, Truth, will be stressed at Christian Science church services this Sunday .
 Luke’s uccount of the healing by Christ Jesus of the “woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, und was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself’’ “Woman which had been infirmary eighteen years
 Baldwin W Callahan, ""Minister of Mi«sions und Stewardship"" of the Mush. Callahan . Callahan was the official minister of Mi »sions and Stewardhip of Mush .
 The Senior High P.F. will visit the North Street Church in Medford, Massachusetts, 8:00 a.m.
 The Union Thanksgiving Service will be held at the First Congregational Church . The service will take place on November 11 .
 Donations for the Thanksgiving Baskets for the less fortunate should be brought to this service . 10:45 a.m. Donations should be made to the charity .
 Nursery, Kindergarten and Primary Departments of the Church will also present their donations . 5:30m. Nursery and Kindergartners of the church will present donations at the end of the event .
 Attend this Thanksgiving service and make this Thanksgiving one of sincere gratitude to God for HLs blessings . Attend this service .
 1962 "calendar towels" size 17 x 18, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 Some of the homes sold by Ruth C Porter Co. were sold by the company . Ruth Porter's first home was sold in 2007 .
 In 1961, Ruth C Porter, Co. sold some of the homes sold by the company through October of 1961 .
 We felt this would be of interest to you who are contemplating the purchase or sale of a home . This is the first time we've seen this property in the U.S.
 Eleven more of the homes sold by I Ruth C Porter Co. Page Eleven More Of The Homes Sold By I Ruth .
 In 1961, Ruth C PORTER, CO., Realtors The Sign Of Leadership Richard H Murphy James F Quine 33 Thompson Street . Since 1931 Gertrude H Murphy Charles T McCarthy Marian R Ferriman Winchester, Mass. Winchester .
 Dr. Terzaghi and Ferris Voted Moles Outstanding Achievement Awards . Dr. Ferris was awarded the "Best Moles" award in 1961 .
 The announcement was made at a dinner meeting of The Moles, an association of leading figures in the tunneling, dambuilding and heavy construction industry .
 Formal presentation of the honors will be at the annual Moles' Awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel next January 31 .
 Terzaghi and Ferris make up the 22nd pair of honorees elected president in 1953 and hoard in a series that started in 1941 and chairman in 1960 . Ferris was elected chairman of the board in 1960 and Terzagli was elected president of Italy in 1953 .
 He played prinnumbers among its winners former President Herbert Hoover, Robert Moses, Ben Moreell, Peter Kiewit, Harvey Slocum, John Bruce Bonny and Lou Perini .
 The award is considered the highest recognition that can be accorded for service to the American construction industry . KARL TERZAGHI was awarded the award for his work in the construction industry.
 Announcement of the selections was made by Eugene G Rau, Award Committee chairman . Announcement was made at the request of Eugene Rau .
 Terzaghi was born in 1883 in Prague, then Bohemia, and has wide experience in teaching and in the execution of significant engineering projects in Europe and in this country . He has been awarded a Nobel Prize for his work in Switzerland .
 Reclamation Service driller worked on construction of the Celilo locks on the Columbia river .
 In 1916 he returned to Europe and taught at the Imperial School of Engineers in Istanbul . It was while there he developed most of the basic principles of modern soil mechanics .
 For five years he was engaged in a massive program of air base construction for the Navy in the Pacific Area . For the next five years, he worked for the U.S. Navy .
 President Obama directed a program covering more than $360 million worth of procurement, shipping and construction . He marshaled the forces of American contractors .
 Mr Ferris joined the Raymond company, then known as Raymond Concrete Pile, in 1946 . He was cipal roles in organizing and managing the $350-million Spanish bases program, the huge Hyperion outfall project off Los Angeles .
 Women’s Republican Club members and guests were welcomed at the home of Mr and Mrs. Roberta and Ms. Boba . Members of the Republican Club were invited to their home on Wednesday evening .
 After several announcements the speaker of the evening, Mr Vincent F DeCain, was intdoduced by Mrs. Mrs. deCain . The speaker was in tears when he was overcome by the beauty of the night .
 Mr DeCain’s subject was the much-discussed Connally Amendment, which will certainly come up for Senate action this year .
 This amendment may well be the bulwark between the integrity of the U.S. judicial system and the invasion of foreign power under the guise of the International Court . The amendment could be the 'bulwark' between the United States and foreign power .
 "An amendment to this charter is what we are fighting for now and have been for a long time," she said . "We're fighting for an amendment to the charter," she added .
 Six words of the amendment mean freedom of our country and our way of doing things., “Disputes with regard to matters . which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of the United States of America as determined by the U.S.” The amendment says disputes are “
 This is all-important, otherwise judges of any member country in the World Court would rule . This is important for the judges in any member member country to rule .
 ‘one worlders’ advocate repeal in the name of ‘rule by law’ they would hand over our country’s sovereignty. Yet when the “one worlder” advocate repeal they would give over our sovereignty. ‘One worlders would hand
 Write your congressman, state your demands so they will learn that you are standing for the United States of America and our way of life .
 Winchester Unitarian Choir under the direction of Mary Ran ton ton Witham will present a twenty minute pre-service program on Sunday mornings for the next six weeks . The Winchester Choir will perform on Sunday morning .
 The choir will sing from the works of the great masters . The programs will include many un usual carols as well as the traditional ones .
 This Sunday, Novem her 19, at 10:40, the Unitarian Choir will sing the following selections from Mendelssohn’s oratorio, St. St. Louis . The choir will sing selections from the Mendelsssohn's orator
 The soloists are Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffrey, tenor; Sidney Blanchardard, Jr., baritone . The group sings The Lord Is Mindful Contralto, Baritone and Choir .
 Mail servicemen’s names and addresses to WINCHESTER HOM EFRONTERS PUBLIC LIBRARY NOW Name of Serviceman Rank Serial Number Military Address Home Address .
 Em Ray “V-for-Victory” Hayward is a retired English teacher and faculty manager of athletics at Winchester High School, now living on Chebeague Island in Casco Bay, Me., . He used to like to stir folks up during his years in Winchester .
 We recall the time he nearly succeeded in getting a four-inch advertisement for tickets to the Woburn game, placed squarely in the middle of the hack page of the Star .
 The late “T.P.” went upstairs to the press room three steps at a time, instead of the usual two, when he saw that page of the press proofs . “The late ‘T.I.P.'’s’ went upstairs
 He invited the editor, then more or less of a cub reporter, to give a few tips to reporters for the high school newspaper . Another time he asked the editor to give some tips to other cub reporters . The editor is now an editor at the school .
 We visualized five or six more or less uninterested hoys and girls waiting for us to get through, with our helpful hints . We were shocked as we opened the door of the high school room designated to find the entire class in journalism .
 Any large number of youthful listeners can be terrifying to the uninitiated . When you add a sprinkling of English teachers to watch your split infinitives you have the makings of an oratorical blue funk .
 Had we known in advance what the odds would be, we would have done much better. Suffice it to say that had we known the odds, we'd have done better .
 Hayward rating as a stirrer-upper, and we might also add feuds with the late ‘Squire’ Franklin, a bosom buddie, but not beyond the humorous touch . These two examples should indicate the Hayward rating .
 There was no malice in his approach to his victim, nor did he harbor a grudge when the joke was on him . The victim was not harmed by the joke, but by his actions .
 Wodehouse heroes, when the girls at the Star sewed together all the button-holes of a suit that “Raymie” kept at the office for dress-up emergencies, are heroes . The girls kept the suit in the office of ‘Raymie,�
 If we paid through the nose for our transient success, we were sure that “Raymie” was still our friend . If we were paying through the . nose for success, , we would be sure that Raymie was still .
 "Raymie" was a stirrerupper in the old days and he is still at it in his new home environment on Chebeague . All this notwithstanding to the contrary, “Raymie” was a stirring .
 In connection with the battle to get the bridge Mr Hayward pen ned a small brochure telling of the supposed visit of a newspaperman to Chebeague and his attending a baked bean supper there .
 At the supper he met Chebeague advocates of the proposed bridge and recounted their arguments in a very clever bit of propaganda .
 Winchester friends who remember the Hayward flair for writing can imagine the excellence of the booklet . Winchester friends can imagine how the booklet would have been published .
 Mr Hayward is currently on the Chebeague Island Bridge Referen dum Committee . The members of the committee will once again attempt to get the 42,000 signatures necessary to have the building of the bridge put on the State ballot .
 A referendum petition presented earlier in the year failed bacuuse too many names were thrown out for legal technicalities . The referendum petition was presented earlier this year .
 The Portland Press Herald for November 4, sent us by another former Winchester teacher, Otis Leary, ‘now retired to Pine Point, Me., shows a picture of the Refer endum Committee with old Ray “V-for-Victory” in the middle with
 Dewey Hall is the first of four buildings in the Vermont College Second Century Building and Development Program . The Vermont College has a new building program called the "Second Century Building"
 Virginia Brooks of Wei leslcy and Cynthia Knox of Winchester, Winchester, are among those watching closely .
 Miss Elizabeth Bonnaffon’s fourth grade presented to parents, friends, and members of four other classes a delightful program on Friday, November 3 .
 Mary Tonello, as a little German girl, continued with the narration of “Hansel and Gretel” The entire class participated in the play .
 The play was done almost completely in music, with Miss Jeanne Loudon, music supervisor, as accompanist . Miss Loudon was music supervisor .
 Hansel, Paul Donahue, Gretel, Dorcas Joslin; Gretel and Gretel; Mother, Ann Dieterich; Father, Kenneth Titilah; Sand Man, Walter Johnian; Birds, Ronald Cavallo, Sally Hayden; and Witch, Kathy Mar
 Joseph Campo, Chris O’Dair, Jon Tobey, Paul Shanley, Ruth Edmands, Susan Ewing, Theresa Gigliotti, Ruth Ann Nault, Bernadette Neary, Kathv Noel, Linda Salera and Jean O'Neil .
 F.’ers split up into buzz groups and discussed the problem of alcoholism . F.C. F.F.C.'ers split into groups to discuss the problem .
 At the end of the evening, ideas were pooled and many interesting facts were brought to the attention of the group .
 Next Sunday at 8 p.m., there will he he a corporate Communion followed by breakfast in Hadley Hall .
 Saint Mary's Sodality held their regular meeting on November 7th at 8m. Saint Mary’s Sodality met at 8pm .
 Father Turke announced there would he he a cartoon show on November 26 at St. Francis' Catholic Church . The show will be held at the church in November .
 The reception for the new members of the Sodality wlil be held on December 5 .
 Father Turke gave a very interesting talk on the life of Saint Theresa and how she accepted her trials in life with complete humility and simplicity .
 Sodalists should apply this virtue to their own lives, says Sodalist leader . He reminded them that they should apply it to themselves .
 Russell Kirk, political scientist and educator, will discuss “The Liberal vs. Conservative” on Friday . Junior Guild Santa Sale Paulist Fathers Sponsor Debate United States Senator Eugene J McCarthy .
 November 24, at 8:15m., at the Paulist Information Center, 5 Park Street, Boston, Boston .
 The Junior Guild of the Infant Saviour will hold its annual Christmas ‘Santa Sale’ on Tuesday, December 5, from 7 to 11m. in the Oval Room of the Sheraton Plaza Hotel in Boston .
 Hand-knit gifts, holiday decorations, toys, and gifts for all the family are a few of the features that will he offered . Hand-knives, decorations, and toys are among the features of the new project .
 Santa Claus will be on hand with his bag full of goodies to greet the guests . Santa Claus is expected to greet guests at the event .
 St. Bernard’s Church, West Newton, under the direction of Mr Daniel Mazeika, will entertain the shoppers with carols .
 The directory lists all unions in 16 Northeastern states that filed organization re ports required under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act . Union internationals, intermediate bodies and locals in 16 Northeast states are included .
 Massachusetts leads New Eng land in the total number of reporting union organizations with 1814 . Massachusetts leads the state in the union land in total reporting organizations . Massachusetts has 1814 union organizations .
 Connecticut has 801, Rhode Island 329, Maine 303, New Hampshire 235, and Vermont 186 .
 The Carpenters Union leads Massachusetts with 96 union organizations . The Textile Workers Union leads the state with 95 organizations .
 Some 14 different railway unions in the Bay State have a combined total of 141 . However, the three electrical unions (IBEW, IUE and UE) have 117 .
 In Connecticut, the Machinists Union is first with 49, but the combined total of electrical unions is 74 . The combined figure for eight railroad unions is 54, and the combined figure is 54 .
 Rhode Island is led by the Steelworkers with 43, but the combined total of the two textile unions is 48 . Rhode Island leads the state's textile unions with 48 .
 In New Hampshire, the Shoe Workers lead with 2, followed by the Textile Workers with 20 . Textile workers lead with 20. In N.H.
 The Stone and Allied Products Workers union has 16 organizations in Vermont . Seven railroad unions have a combined total of 39 .
 David C\ McLean is son of Dr. and Mrs. McLean . McLean Globe Worker Under Newspaper Fund Program David C. Mclean . David C
 A student at Bowdoin College, McLean received a $500 grant, and worked at the Boston ( ilobc) office .
 The project, in its second year, was designed to appeal to students in colleges where relatively little recruiting for newspaper careers has been done .
 Promising young men who thought they were interested in newspaper work, hut who lacked contacts in the field, were asked to apply for summer jobs .
 The Newspaper Fund served as a clearing house and screened the applications . The newspaper fund is used to screen applications for the project .
 Some students were directed to newspapers which were willing to employ one or more of the trainees for the summer months . The trainees were asked to train in order to be employed by newspapers .
 Other applicants were encouraged to seek summer news jobs on their initiative . The initiative is based on a summer news initiative .
 The individual newspaper made the final choice of the student and offered him a summer job . The student was offered the job by the individual newspaper .
 All arrangements were made between the trainee and the newspaper employing him . All arrangements for salary, hours and duties were made .
 Paul Swensson, executive Director of The Newspaper Fund, said that the summer’s efforts with the program are measuring up to expectations . The newspaper Fund is a nonprofit that supports journalism education and journalism .
 Many of the students, benefittng from their experience, are making plans for careers in journalism .
 Many editors have arranged for the students to continue their work on a part time basis during the school year . Students will be able to continue to work part time during the year .
 Students invited to apply for jobs next summer after graduation . Others have invited students to apply next summer for summer jobs .
 Letters which The Newspaper Fund has received from college students and the editors summarize the progress of the program . Letters from students and editors highlight the progress in the project .
 I had turned down a chance to go to Europe, preferring to try for a newspaper job under The Newspaper Fund program . I was offered a job in Europe but turned down the chance to work in Europe .
 The experience was my baptism in covering something about which I was utterly ignorant, dealing with a story on the spot and having to finish it quickly, and working side by side with the regular reporters . It was my "baptury in covering"
 trainees will become newspapermen after completing their formal education . trainees are determined to learn all they can in every aspect of their education .
 Craik W ark. director; Larry Smith, director: W illiam Rird. president; Theodore von Rosenvinge, treasurer, treasurer; James I Cusack, District I state vice president; Franklin Lane, internal vice president .
 Winchester Junior Chamber Of Commerce meets at Red Cross House . Second general meeting held Wednesday, November 8 . Newly elected President William | Bird .
 President Bird announced that I at a Board of Directors meeting on November 5, James Ferriman was elected secretary and Theodore von Rosenvinge as treasurer . President Bird also announced that he was named secretary and treasurer .
 Charter Night Buffet Dance to be held at the Town Hall December 9, from 8 to 12m. December 9 .
 Winchester Jaycees will officially swear in the new officers . Re presen tatixes will present the Winchester Jayccees with its charter . State Jaycenees will also present the state Jaycensees with their charter .
 PA 9*1981 nov3-tf A bufTet and dancing to an exciting jazz orchestra will spice the evening’s activities .
 Tickets may be obtained from Lindy Lane and Jim Ferriman at PA 9-4136 . Tickets may also be obtained for Lindy and Jim . Lane .
 President Bird next introduced District I State vice-president, James Cusack . President Bird then introduced District II State vice president, James .
 Mr Cusack commended the excellent progress made by the Jaycees in Winchester . He encouraged its members to visit other chapters to exchange ideas and projects .
 Winchester Jaycees will meet on November 30 at 8m. at the Red Cross House . Winchester Jayccees are the largest of the Jaycies in the world .
 Anyone interested in joining the Jaycees is cordially invited to attend . Anyone who wants to join will be invited to join the Jaycitees .
 Upon graduation from college and the successful completion of the four-year military science course the Cadet is eligible for commissioning as a Second Lieut, the United States Army Reserve . The Cadet can also be commissioned to serve in the Army Reserve.
 Cadet Shea is studying for the degree of B.S. in Business Administration . She hopes to graduate with her degree in business administration . Shea is currently enrolled in the University of Florida .
 Postmaster Thomas J Gilgun launched his 1961 ‘Mail Early For Christmas’ campaign . Gilgun said today as he launched the 1961 “Mail Early for Christmas” campaign .
 Postmaster: Here are the things to watch to help in getting every Christmas card and package delivered before December 25th .
 Be sure each address is complete with full name, street and number, city, zone and state . Be sure that the address is accurate .
 Remember, also, that you can include your Christmas card or letter inside your gift packages if you will add the appropriate First Class mail stamps to the postage for the package itself . Add the appropriate stamps to your gift package if you want to include your card .
 By doing this soon, you’ll save lots of time that might be spent standing in line later on . By doing so, you'll save time that may be spent waiting in line .
 All cards sent by 4 cents postage may include a personal handwritten message . They'll be forwarded or returned, if necessary .
 It’s socially correct to do this, and enables both you and your friends to keep your mailing lists up-to-date . It's social correct to keep up with your friends and enable them to keep their lists updated .
 Postmaster predicts that this year’s Christmas mail will set an all time record . 850,000 pieces handled in pre-holiday season of 1960 . Postmaster points out the importance of planning your Christmas mailings now .
 Christmas cards and packages dispatched and delivered before Christmas Eve . He said that through the excellent cooperation of the public during recent Christmas seasons, he has been able to get all of the cards .
 s-m-l-xl, all $17.95. Available in wide choice of exclusive plaids and handsome solids . Available in a wide selection of exclusive .
 Always VIRGIN WOOL Rc^ii tors an ft longs Pendleton Shirts 13.95 Lady Pendleton Skirts Jackets Slacks Sweaters .
 Smith College Club Open House at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Matignon Turkey Bridge . Smith College Open House was held at Mrs. Robinson's home .
 Townspeople and fellow suburbanites wandered about enjoying the lovely candle and flower arrangements from the workshop of master arrangers Mines .
 Tomorrow, November 17, Open House will be held at 6 Everett Avenue, the home of Mrs. Mrs. Everett . The event will be a free party .
 Those who missed the first Open House are cordially invited to drop in at 6 Everett Avenue between 10:00m.m. and 4:00 m. m. M.
 Those who did come to the first Open House should conic again to see the new Creations .
 The annual turkey bridge and whist party will be held on Friday, November 17, at 8:00m., in the Matignon High School cafeteria . Matignan Guild, Cambridge, will hold the party .
 Several turkeys will be awarded and there will be a selection of choice prizes . The event will take place in a bid to raise money for a local charity .
 NEW: Send a one-year subscription to the Winchester Star for $4.00 . MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. 3 Church St. 9-2696 .
 The quick first touchdown that followed the recovery of the opening kickoff, and the recovered fumble by Wakefield of a recovered fumble, gave Wakefield a lift that they never relinquished . The Sachems had stopped the Warriors on their own side of midfield .
 You'll have to go back a long way to find a game in w r hich Winchester was so completely outseored . Winchester was beaten by a combined score of 1-0 in the first round of the series .
 The Warriors’ 28-12 victory over the Sachems last year was the worst a Knowlton-eoached team had absorbed in 20 years until last Saturday . Last year’s defeat was a record-breaking defeat for the Warriors .
 Winchester teams have yielded 40 points through the years . Winchester teams haven't yielded more than 40 points in the past .
 Wakefield, with a flat ball, kicked a skimmer that hit Ned Niblock, big Winchester center and bounced from his chest well back into a converging nest of Wakefield boys . Wakefield kicked the skimmer into the nest, hitting Niblock .
 The stands sat stunned by the quick turn of events . One of them came up with the ball as the stands were left stunned .
 The Warriors then scored in se\ ven plays, one of them a five yard penalty for offside against the Sachems . The Warriors were awarded a penalty for an offside penalty .
 Simensen scores two tries for Wakefield . Wakefield beat Winchester 21-16 at Winchester . Simensen scored Wakefield's first and five tries .
 Shevlin dropped back to pass for the extra points, but was smeared by the center of the Winchester line before he could get the ball away . Winchester won the game by 17 points .
 A fumble stalled the Sachem drive and when a long pass, that might have meant something was dropped, Bellino had to kick . Rowe and Bellino made a first down after the kickoff, but a fumble stalled a drive . A long pass might have been dropped, which might have
 Bellino took the ball deep in his own territory and made a nice runback to the Winchester 48 where he drove hard into a gang of Wakefield tacklers and had the ball jarred loose . Wakefield recovered, Wakefield recovering .
 Simensen in two rushes reached the 36, Bacon broke through to the 29 and Simensen made first down at the 18 . Simensen and Bacon both made first downs at 18. Simensen reached 36. Bacon broke into the 29. Bacon made first-down at 18 .
 Simensen was a foot short of first down at the eight . Bucon picked up seven points and Simensen picked up eight . Simensen missed first down on the field at the 8th .
 Simensen made first down at the four, as the first quarter ended and Bacon added two . Winchester was giving ground grudgingly, but Simensen was making first down . Bacon added another two points in the first half .
 On the next try Simensen got over off tackle, but the extra points proved no good . The next try was a pass try, but an extra point was not enough .
 Wakefield was offside on the kickoff, and Benincasa ran the second boot buck buck well to the Winchester 46 . Wakefield had Wakefield offside for the kickoff .
 Benincasa made four I ed and arched a pretty pass down reached the two and Winchester the middle to Lennie Timpone, who I was penalized half the distance was all alone . Benincasas' pass was a well-made pass .
 Timpone made a nice jumping clutch at about the 20 and really legged it into the end zone, dragging a desperate Wakefield pursuer in with them . Wakefield host Leicester City in the FA Cup quarter-final on Saturday .
 A 15-yard holding penalty stalled Wakefield after the kickoff, amd the Warriors kicked from their 32 . Wakefield kick kick kick the ball back to Wakefield's 32th-minute kick .
 Two rushes stopped with only three yards and a pass grounded at the 24. Two rushes were stopped with just three yards . Two rushes halted with only 3 yards and one with a fumble .
 Wakefield was really rushing Wakefield on his throws and when he tried another he barely got it away . Colliander was really rushed to make sure he didn't get away .
 Wakefield defender steals the ball from Winchester boy's hands . Wakefield's win over Wakefield saw the ball bounce through a Winchester boy’s hands .
 Winchester got the ball at the Scarlet 12 yard line for a first down . Wakefield was called for illegal use of hands, and assessed half the distance to its goal line . Winchester got a break, for Wakefield being called for an illegal use-of-the-hand use of
 Colliander again hit Timpone with a pass and the tall end was dropped at the two . The match was the first of two in a row for the Irishmen .
 A back-inmotion penalty set the Warriors back to their thirty, but Bacon got through for f^ur and from the 26 shevlin hit Dennis at the five and he ambled over with no one near him . The Warriors were awarded a penalty for fouled by Shev
 Wakefield's Boyd intercepted a wobbly pass at the Winchester 33 . Colliander was smeared on a jumper, and on the next play Wakefield’s Boyd intercepted the pass . Winchester beat Wakefield in the first half to claim the win .
 Shevlin hit Bacon with a pass at the 20 and he was knocked outside at the 14 . Bacon was knocked out of the field at 14. Bacon was the last play of the game .
 Simensen picked up four off tackle and then busted straight up the middle for 10 yards and a touchdown . Simensen's touchdown was a touchdown for the first time in his career .
 Shevlin passed to Bacon for the extra points with the latter making a great diving catch of the ball . Bacon scored the extra point for the second half .
 Bellino gets only four yards on a sweep . Colliander pass was grounded after the kickoff . Bellino got only four on the sweep .
 Colliander then tried a lateral out to the left to Benincasa, which seemed to catch the speedy halfback by surprise . The half-back was caught by surprise by the Italian half back .
 He lost the ball which was recovered by Nardone at the Winchester 37 and the Warriors scored again . The Warriors scored twice in the second half .
 With less than a minute to play, Simensen picked up seven to the Winchester 37, and Shevlin hit Bacon with a pass at the 10 . Winchester had a 15 yard penalty for illegal receivers down field .
 Shevlin again passed this time to Dennis in the end zone, the big end waiting for the ball all by himself . Dennis scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 An attempted pass for the extra points was no good, and the ensuing kickoff was the last play of the half . An attempt to score an extra point was unsuccessful .
 Wakefield lost no time in adding to its score with the resumption of play . Wakefield added to their tally with the second half of play following the break .
 Bellino drove steadily Bellino added a yard on a sweep, j ahead to a first down at the WinHere from the 36 Colliander fadChester .
 On the next play Encarnacao drilled through the right side for the score but a double reverse hokus pokus followed hv a pass for the extra points was no good . The next play was also no good for the visitors .
 Wakefield with a sprinkling of subs in the lineup got the ball as a fake kick on fourth down failed the Sachems at their 44 . Midway through the final quarter Wakefield had the ball .
 Shevlin's 24 yard rollout puts the ball at the Winchester 15 for a first down . The Warriors marched goalward for the first down on the opening drive . Winchester had a 24-yard rollout put the ball in the end of the first half .
 In two bucks Pietrafitta reached the nine and Purcell drove in to the one . Purcell got in two bucks in two minutes . In two minutes he reached the one-dollar mark .
 Lapery, reserve back, bucked the necessary yard for the touchdown . An attempted sweep for the extra points was stopped short of the line . Lapery's touchdown was the touchdown for the second time .
 Nothing went right for the embattled Sachems, who crossed midfield only twice, once getting to the Warriors’ 48 and again late in the game, to the 46 .
 Both times they were forced back across the fifty before having to kick . Both times the teams were forced to kick across the 50 before they had to kick again .
 The Sachems did stop one Wakefield rush at their 10-yard line, in the second half . All America Joe Bellino was heard muttering in his sleep Saturday night, there can be little wonder .
 Winchester Sachems atul tin* Woburn Tanners, ml hot athletic rivals since 1891 sume oik* of the oldest schoolboy football rivalries in England . Boston on Thanksgiving Manchester Field, commencing at 10:15.
 The Orange has had a great season and richly deserves the favorite role . The Orange is the best team in the world and deserves the title .
 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. is on the same program as ‘ ALL KINDS OF SKI JUNK” Winchester Sport Shops is also on the program .
 Warren Berg, actually lives over the line in Arlington, but his sports activities have been Winchester . Both he and his parents are well known in Winchester, and both they are well-known here .
 Both the Exeter and Andover JVs went into their game undefeated . Andover had not been scored upon in their game . Exeter JVs were undefeated in their first game .
 The game was played at Exeter and because of the teams’ unbeaten status and as an omen for the big varsity game on the following Saturday attracted a lot of interest . The match was played as a sign of respect for the teams unbeaten status .
 Wild scored a touchdown for Exeter on a nine-yard buck, with Berg passing for the other . Berg also passed for a touchdown in the second half .
 Pete also scored Exeter’s two-points after touchdown on roll-out option play . Exeter also scored two points after touchdown .
 An adjustable slip clutch protocts against chain breakage or impeller damage . Adjustable slip clutch protects chain breakages or impellers .
 The Sachems have beaten Concord, Cambridge Latin, Lexington and Belmont . They have tied Reading and lost to Stoneham, Melrose and Wakefield .
 There certainly is nothing in this record to warrant naming the Sachems anything but underdogs . The Sachem are not the only underdogs in the history of American football .
 At times the local boys have moved the ball well, even against strong opposition . At times, the local team have moved well, especially in the first half .
 Winchester has never failed to score more than a single touchdown in a game . Winchester has only scored more than one touchdown against Stoneham only once in the past .
 Woburn beat Winchester 41-0 back in 1921 . No other team has ever scored over 40 points in over 40 games against Winchester .
 The Sachems have good offensive potential, but their defense has generally left a lot to be desired . The team has a lot of offensive potential but has little to offer .
 Winchester will be facing very probably as strong a team as any it has met this season; perhaps the strongest . Winchester will face a strong team in Woburn, perhaps as strong as any they have met this term .
 This year’s Orange is better defensively than the great 1957 club that beat Winchester, 2713 . The 1957 club beat Winchester 2713, the same score as the 1957 club .
 Recent changes by Coach White have bolstered the offense for the Tanners . The Tanners were very impressive in their win over Marblehead .
 Eddie Foley is one of the great schoolboy passers of the year . Foley has been at Woburn since the start of the season . Foley is the son of former Manchester United star Mark Foley . Foley was at the centre of the 2012 World Cup for the club .
 Foley is also a good runner, and able to gain effectively on roll-out and option plays . Foley is a strong runner and is a good option runner . Foley has a strong reputation for his role in the running of the football team .
 Early in the season Woburn was hurting for a heavy duty back like Castiglione and Sal Carbone . The backline has been a problem for the club since the start of the season .
 Winchester averages 187 yards, but for all its size the Sachem linemen have generally been outplayed . Winchester averaged 187 yards per game, but the defense has generally outplayed by the team .
 This is, of course, if the weights are accurate, and if those in the starting lineup are able to start . The weights will be based on the weight of the players .
 Winchester will be without a couple of regulars on Turkey Duy because of poor scholastic grades . Winchester will also be without regulars due to poor grades, according to reports .
 Winchester and Woburn have played no team in common, so the prophets are spared the dangerous practice of trying to judge the outcome on the basis of comparative scores . Winchester will be hoping to avoid a repeat of the clash between the two sides in the next round .
 Woburn is undefeated and once tied with Warthen University . Both teams have met about the same ^ort of opposition, and Warturn has won and lost .
 "Go boom'’ is the heavy favorite “go boom’’ in these climactic games, but we just have to throw in a little word of caution . The heavy favorite "go boom'' is often seen in the climactic video games .
 Winchester has nothing to lose against Belmont . The Sachems looked like a pretty fair ball club at times . Winchester will be hoping to bounce back from the defeat .
 A win over Woburn would salve a lot of skun snozzles that have been rubbed in the dirt three times this season . A win against the Swindonians would be a good start to the season .
 We don't believe they will, but, — — there is always that outside chance. We don’t believe they’ll . There is always an outside chance that they will win,’s not sure if they will .
 If Winchester will give Bellino some blocking for a change and the line will give Colliander some protection on his passes, it could be an interesting game Thanksgiving . Winchester could be a big factor in the game .
 Winchester has won 13, Woburn, 7; and there has been one tie since 1940 . Winchester have won 13 of the 13 matches since then . Winchester has also won 7 of the 7 matches since 1940; Winchester has only lost 7 .
 Take a look at the season’s records and you will see why we have to pick Woburn . The club has been in the top four in the Premier League this season .
 Edwin Fenton was a teacher at Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pennsylvania . Fenton is a member of the staff at the Carnegie Institute for Technology . He says he has been teaching at Carnegie since 1984 .
 The second Annual Olympic Hockey Clinic will be conducted by Bill Cleary, Bob Cleary and Bill Riley . The clinic will be held in conjunction with the Olympic Games .
 For further information call Bill Cleary at MI 81391 or Bill Riley HU 8-1092 . Bill Riley is a member of the U.S. Army National Security Council .
 Holy Cross beat Holy Cross by a, 3-1 score | to stay in top position . Mambro and Mario Bnzzotta, dt* j f rated Holy Cross . to stay top position.
 Harvard held third place at this time last week but as a result of taking Maryland 4-0, it is now holding next to first place as Maryland has dropped to seventh spot from sixth . Maryland drops to seventh place from sixth place .
 Notre Dame was fortunate in splitting with Yale but it now holds third place in the ranking . Yale now moves up one step one step from seventh to sixth . Notre Dame is ranked third in the world .
 Richie Tofuri and Johnny Mangano have replaced Roundy Fiore and Rudy Fiore . The two have replaced Rudy and Roundy in the “top ten’s”
 Important matches being lolled off at the Strike Lanes as you are reading this column are California vs Bates, Harvard vs Alabama and Penn challenging Notre Dame .
 Being Thanksgiving next Thursday there will be no bowling . We of the Sons of Italy Bowling League wish all the readers a very Happy Thanksgiving .
 Harvard 29 8 Harvard 23 9 Notre Dame 22 10 Alabama 21 11 Navy 18 14 Maryland 17 15 Penn 17 15 Holy Cross 14 18 Boston College 12 20 Bates 12 20 Army 10 22 Georgetown 9 23 St. Louis University won't win California league standings .
 Rug-braiding, bridge, music and the legitimate stage are her principal interests aside from teaching . Rug-raiding, . bridge, . music and . music are her main interests .
 KIMBO TRADEMARK is a brand new board game in which the play is controlled by the movement of fences . The game is designed to be fun and exciting .
 Student monitors were stationed throughout tho corridors at Lynch Jr. Open House Student monitors . Lynch Jr.'s Open House is located in the middle of a busy corridor .
 The event will take place on November 8 at 7 p.m. High the evening of November 8 to facilitate passage from room-to-room by parents .
 Many parents felt that here in this excellent building was housed every conceivable mechanical aid to education and a staff of teachers .
 Parents were especially impressed by the enthusiasm of tho teachers for the subjects they taught, and their desire* to instil in the youngsters a love for learning .
 Shailer Avery's committee served refreshments in the cufetorium throughout the evening .
 Find out how you can save with the ’62 RAMBLER Charles L Haggerty, Inc. Then talk to HAGGERTY RAMBLer . Then talk about how to save with a '62 .
 Ralph H Earle, Minister of the Second Congregational Church in Winchester, will speak at 9:15 m. m. ET .
 Senior Forum Service this Sunday in Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church . Service will be held at Ripley chapel of the church . Senior Forum service will take place on Sunday at 1 p.m.
 This will he Mr Earle’s first visit to Forum and Forumites are very happy to have him come . Forumites have enjoyed his leadership in inter-church activities and feel that in him they have a true friend .
 Mr Earle is a native of Kansas City, Missouri, and a graduate of Pasadena College in California .
 The . deacons will be Dan Brink and John Deans . The ushers will be Richard Starkweather and Bruce Carpenter . The deacons are also expected to be in attendance .
 These meetings provide opportunity for young people to discuss Forum matters and topics of special interest under the leadership of class leaders .
 Forum cooperates with Boston City Missionary for Thanksgiving sharing project . Forum will provide food for the Boston Missionary’s use .
 Forum members invited to Men’s Club dinner on Tuesday, November 21 . Ken Maynard from radio station WBZ will be the speaker .
 General Laws Chapter 90, Section 14 permitted a motorist to pass a stopped “school bus” after bringing his vehicle to a full stop immediately before passing, and then passing the ‘school bus' at a speed not in excess of ten miles per hour .
 Woburn Daily Timba WOBURN AWAITS THANKSGIVING WHISTLE . Co-Capt. Richey Sweeney and Co-capt. Sweeney were honored with a Thanksgiving cheer .
 Winchester by holding a great team to a six point win played its best game this year . Winchester held on to a 6-6 victory over a strong team . Winchester had a beautiful fall day and it was a great game .
 Wellesley has been beaten only once in the past two years by Dedham, this year’s champions . Dedham have beaten Wellesley only once, in the last two years . Wellesley have won only one of their last two matches .
 Wellesley had Waltham to a 34-0 defeat, at halftime rn their game . It may also interest the readers to know that Wellesley was defeated by the team .
 Choo Choo Collins has yet to be caught from behind from behind . Collins ran 65 yards into pay dirt in the first half . Collins has never been caught behind the line of play .
 Winchester kept Wellesley from invading Winchester’s territory even more than they did . Team elected captains John Newton and Danny McGee kept the team tired up during the entire game .
 Outstanding performances of the day were put in by Scott Baerenwald, Bob Di Pietro, Jetf Hughes, Mike Murray .
 Winchester's coaches Dun MacElwee, Ed Gravalese and Bill Sipp have put in many hours working with the boys this season . Winchester’s coaches are very satisfied with the results . Winchester are looking forward to a successful season .
 Much credit is due also to the team representatives George Rowe, John Martin, Joe Collins, Dave Choate, and Joe Cussen for organizing the program .
 Tom Haley also did an excellent job as manager this year . Tom Haley wore several pairs of shoes out running around running around .
 With many of this year’s boys returning next year we will all look forward to another successful year. We will all hope to continue our success in 2015 .
 The children and young people of the First Buptist Church wish to thank the people of Winchester for their quiet efforts . Thanks For Your Support Of UNICEF .
 In most of the families of mankind, childhood is not a time of play and preparation but a time for premature suffering and dying . In childhood childhood is a time not of play but of premature suffering, dying .
 Richie Rowe, Mike Bellino, John Chane, John Collinander, Richie Rowe and John Colliander named as skipper . Richie Rowe named as captain of the squad . John Collerander: Richie Rowe was captain for the first time .
 Boh Donlon, George Nowell, Dan Mahoney, Toni Mooney, Ned Nib lock lock lock . Boh Dondonlon, Dan Nowell and Ned Niblock are also in lock lock for the second half of the game .
 November 29th 6:30 Dessert and Coffee 7:00 Official Opening of the Booths . Thursday, November 30th All Day and evening. All day and evening .
 Thanksgiving And Loyalty Sunday will be observed this Sunday, November 10 at the First Congregational Church . Thanksgiving and Loyalty Sundays will be held at the church .
 Through the years this occasion has developed into a significant and memorable day in the life of the Church . The occasion has become an important and memorable occasion .
 First Thanksgiving observed by Plymouth Colony many years ago . Members and friends of the Church will join in expression of gratitude and dedication unto God .
 Four choirs will participate in the two services held at nine fifteen and eleven o’clock . The services will be held at 9:15 and 11:11:15 .
 Early reservation holders include Mr and Mrs. Mrs. of the couple . The social hour and dinner will be held at the end of the evening .
 The play is set in a small town in Mississippi a few years prior to the first World War . The play was set in the town of Mississippi just before the war .
 Alma, a minister’s daughter and John, a doctor, are two young people . Alma is a minister's daughter and a doctor . John is a doctor and Alma is the daughter of a minister . Alma and John are both young people in the UK .
 The play is set in New York City, New York, at the end of the year . It is set against the backdrop of a series of events that bring the pair together .
 Alma is played by Kathe Finnis and John by Randall Noreross . The rest of the sizeable cast is made up of Conservatory Drama students . Alma and John are played by students at the Conservatory .
 The Boston Vassar Club Mrs. Mrs. B Hall is a member of the Boston-based club . Mrs. Hall is the founder of the club . She is also the director of a Boston-area school .
 Only a limited number of the less expensive seats are still available for the two Kresge Auditorium performances of the Vassar Centennial Opera-concerto “Command Performance,” starring Metropolitan Opera singers Blanche Thebom and Ezio Flagello .
 QUETICO is the feature film in the Library program this weekend . Quetico is the latest feature film to be featured in the library's film program .
 A million acre area on the boundary of Ontario and Minnesota is being preserved as a natural wilderness . The area is on the border of Ontario, Minnesota and is being protected from harm .
 Christopher Chapman captured in color and with very little narration the essence of one of the most beautiful natural wildernesses in the world .
 The story of twin fawns, Fleet and Shy, from the age of two days to nearly a yefir is told in Mother Deer and her Twins . The book tells the story of the fawn fawn from two-day to nearly-a-half-year-
 First the mother deer cares for and protects her babies and gradually they learn to care for themselves . The mother deer care for and protect her babies from birth .
 Programs are presented at 7:30 Friday night and 10:15 Saturday morning . Programs will be held at 7 p.m. Saturday night and 7 a.m .
 The Association of Advanced Placement Mathematics Teachers met at Milton Academy Friday evening .
 The principal speaker at the meeting was Mr Richard Pieters of Phillips Academy in Andover .
 The qualifications neees sary for a student who wishes to take the Advanced Placement test given in May . He is chairman of the College Entrance Ex amination Board, and explained to the group the qualifications neese sary .
 Miss Thromoulus is teaching the Advanced Placement course at Winchester High School this year . She was a member of a discussion group dealing with the subject matter taught in this course .
 Mr Waite participated in a discussion of the curriculum leading up to the Advanced Placement Course in Calculus .
 Winchester Schools is considered one of the best in New England according to those in attendance . The program followed in the Winchester schools is considered a top New England school . The Winchester Schools are considered to be the best schools in the state .
 Winchester K of C will hold their monthly ladies’ night in the effect of a Thanksgiving dance . November 18 will be November 18 . Winchester will hold a ladies' night in effect of Thanksgiving dancing .
 The highlight of the evening will be the drawing for twenty 15 lb. turkeys to be picked up for Thanksgiving at Romeo’s neighborhood store . The drawing for the turkeys will be a Thanksgiving drawing .
 One more turkey will be awarded for a door prize for a person in attendance .
 The alterations now in progress will have no effect on the dance floor . The alterations will not affect the dancefloor, however .
 Coffee and sandwiches will be served during intermission . A collation of coffee and sandwiches is also being served during the show .
 The “Deac” Goes Overseas Major Robert S Hamilton, USAF, was visiting in town early this week prior to leaving for an overseas assignment in Germany .
 Bowling League rfi I own Bowling League . Last Tuesday produced only one change in the team standings . Bowling League is a bowling league .
 Atlantic Gelatin took over 4th spot and K of C dropped into 5th place . Atlantic gelatin took the top spot in the world . K ofC dropped from 4th to 5th in the table .
 We also saw the season’s high single broken by H O’Neil with a 145, but this was not quite good enough . Five minutes later B Kelley came up with a 147, us five minutes later . B Kelley scored a 147 .
 Gelatin 44 28 12,614 K of C 43 29 12,159 Post Office 38 34 12,503 49er’s 36 36 12,587 Broth-in-laws 33 39 12,086 St. Louis Cardinals .
 W r inn 8 64 11,391 Long Shots 6 66 10,284 . Top Ten Bowlers B Kelley 110. Kelley 110, Kelley 110 .
 With nine weeks of bowling completed and the end of the first, half near, the .fades are 1 the first team to take a definite lead and strong hold for first place honors .
 Captain Ann Caggiano has every reason to be proud of her team record and team members .
 This is the first captaincy for Ann, and capably supporting her are sisters Vi Bruno and Gloria Monterisi, Mae Rolundi, and a newcomer to the league this year, Bette Cam ma rata . Ann is a first captain for Ann .
 In tin* second place position are the Rubies, captained by Rose De Teso, and supported by Virginia Mucinanti, Jennie Amico, Anita Dollotf and Mary Fiorelli .
 Emma is a newcomer to the league this year and has been on the top ten list each week . Emma is on the list for the first time since joining the league .
 Vi Bruno, Gloria Monterisi, and Emma Blanda, three lovely sisters, are to pay tribute to each other this week . Vi Bruno is one of three sisters to be remembered for their beauty and grace .
 One way to improve one's bowling is to enjploy the method used by Rose and Bill Fiore . Rose and Fiore's method is to use the method of bowling bowling .
 Eight juniors from the High School journeyed to South Hadley, Mass, where they were entertained for the day at Mount Holyoke College . The students were entertained by the college .
 Christine Trump, a sophomore, made all the plans with the help of the Winchester students there as hostesses . Christine Trump is a sophomore at Winchester .
 They were Carlie Clark, Stephie Hersey, Janet Monro, Phyllis Rutter, Marcia Smith, Alice Dunn, Joyce Pepi, Anne Dyson . They were . Carlie . Clark and Stephie . Hersey were .
 A busy day, attending classes, swim in the pool, luncheon in the dormitories as guests of the College . A conference with Miss Alice Jeghelian, assistant director of the Board of Admissions, ended most profitably .
 This annual trip is part of the program of the 1 Winchester Mount Holyoke Club . This year's trip is the first time the club has been to the area since 1964 .
 Angela Burkhardt, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Burkhardt of Wellesley, played piano solo at the Wellesley Branch of the New England Conservatory .
 Martin Burkhardt of 9 Albamont Road played “The Jolly Acrobats,” by Rebe, as a piano solo . Burkhardt played the song as a solo .
 Miss Paula Kelch of the Conservatory faculty, flutist, performed “Suite Modale” by Bloch . Guest artist on the program was Miss Kelch .
 Miss Kelch has come to New England Conservatory from Oberlin Conservatory . She was graduated with a major in flute .
 Have your Thanksgiving Dinner at Fantasia— where fifte food and an atmosphere of gracious living has been a tradition for over 25 years . Fantasia is located in Devonshire, England .
 Mystic School fifth grader** board the bus for the Children’s Rook Fair in Boston escorted by teachers and parents and given a send-off by Principal Raymond Hickman .
 Mrs. Julia H Pomeroy, teacher, and Miss Cynthia Hoar, teaching interne; parents, Mrs. Cynthia H. Hoar . Mrs. Pomeroys and Miss Hoar are teachers and internees .
 The fifth grade went to school on Monday, the sixth Tuesday and the fourth will go in tomorrow . The fifth and sixth grade went on Monday .
 Travelling in to New England Mutual Hall and out again by special bus . Groups spent about two hours each browsing among exhibits and listening to speakers and storytellers .
 The children were alert to and critical of what they had seen and heard . They were alert and critical to what they were doing . The children are now in good spirits .
 Monday’s group — average age about 10 — heard a professional TV storyteller tell them a tale and a children's author speak . The group, average age 10, was told a tale by a professional television story teller .
 They were impressed with the expressive talents of the former and clearly felt that the author had talked down to them . They were very impressed with their expressive talents .
 At the extensive book exhibits they had been encouraged to write down their own list of books they’d like to read .
 Some had remembered to include the publisher’s name and a practical few had the prices clearly noted . Others had included the publisher's name and the price of the book .
 Books for teenagers, an “Information Please” book exhibit and a special table for Braille publications were noted .
 They were privileged to attend the session of the General Assembly . After having had a complete tour of the buildings and a briefing of its functions and duties to all nations, they were given a full tour .
 The honored speaker at that session was Prime Minister Jawarlal Nehru of India . Nehru was the speaker at the session .
 Baldwin W Callahan, Minister of Missions and Stewardship of the Massachusetts Congregational Christian Conference, will speak at> the Second Congregualational Church . Callahan is a minister of Missions .
 From 1929 to 1949 he was pastor of the First Congregational Church in Gardner, Massachusetts . During that time he served the denomination in a variety of ways, such as Dean of the Pilgrim Fellowship Summer Conference, and member of the Executive Committee .
 In October 1949, he became Minister of Missions and Stewardship for the Massachusetts Conference . In that capacity is now serving the six hundred churches of the Congregational Church in the state .
 His present work includes both missionary and stewardship promotion among our churches . He is also known for his efforts to promote stewardship of the church .
 He is preaching somewhere practically every Sunday . He speaks to many groups during the week on some phase of current Missionary or Stewardship interests .
 During the Spring of 1953, Mr Callahan was a participant in a six weeks’ study tour of the Congregational work in Hawaii, Japan, the Philippines, and Hong Kong .
 The Union Thanksgiving Service will he held in the First Congregational Church this year . The service will be on Wednesday evening, November 22 at 7:45 o’clock .
 Massed choir composed of choir members from six participating Churches will sing under direction of Mr Robert White, Choir Master of the Congregational Church .
 The Reverend Ralph B Putney of the Church of the Epiphany will give the sermon . The Ministers of all the Churches will take part in the service . The Reverend Putney will be giving the sermon at the end of the service.
 The Mother Church brings you this lecture . Reserved seats are available for those attending their first Christian Science lecture . All are welcome .
 The quiet list of Winchester school events listed two weeks ago in the Star gave no hint of the excitement, preparation on the part of students and teachers, and anticipation among parents .
 The Mystic School Open House was held on Tuesday, November 7, at 7:30 p.m. CT .
 The rooms were decorated with students’ spelling papers, numberwork, essays, book reports, and frosted with various kinds of exciting art work . Rooms were decorated by students' spelling papers and numberwork .
 Parents meeting friends and neighbors in the halls rushed by in order to be “on time’s” for the first bell . Parents were rushing by to be on time for the start bell .
 The harvest table centerpiece spilled over with fruits, flowers, and refreshments of cider and donuts . It was the perfect touch to a windy fall evening gathering .
 Mr Dickman, the principal, was on hand to greet parents early in the evening .
 Later he joined the teachers and parents having refreshments in the auditorium . Later he was joined by the parents and teachers for refreshments .
 Mystic School students polishing silver and rattling tea cups at Mystic School . The past month of October saw the polishing of silver and tea cups .
 Each teacher was invited to the home of her room mother to meet socially all the mothers of her pupils . Each teacher's room mother was invited .
 The guest-of-honor was usually asked to say a few words about her aims for her class and to answer questions from puzzled mothers .
 The following is the starting lineup for the fall teas at Mystic School . The teas will be served at Mystic's Mystic School in New Jersey .
 A last note of appreciation to Mystic teachers who worked so hard to make this year’s Open House such a successful, interesting, and stimulating evening .
 Teachers of the combined fifth grades held at the home of Mrs. Pomeroy . The combined fifth grade was held at her home . The school was held in honor of the students .
 A combined tea for Miss Milliean and Miss Wood, teachers of the combined sixth grades, was held at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Wood . The tea was held in honour of the teachers of both sixth and seventh grade .
 Gerry Barrett and Ted Atkinson extend their string to three victories in a row . At the same time, Ted Atkinson extended his string of victories to three . Gerry Barrett extended his winning streak to three wins in row with victory .
 Ed Sullivan has certainly “come of age” with a brand of play to match his profile . Long recognized as one of the best looking youngsters at the WDBC, Ed Sullivan is currently ranked No. 2 in the world .
 Ed describes his favorite bridge situation, as dummy opposite a pretty girl . As guest editor this week, Ed talks about bridge situations . Ed describes the bridge situation .
 Duplicate bridge differs from contract play, as each N-S team competes against all other N.S teams . Duplicate play is also the case with the East-West teams, as is also with the West .
 Top scores are obtained in one of two ways; either in obtaining the best contract for your team, or preventing your opponents from obtaining theirs . Top scores can be obtained in either way; or in the best way to obtain your team's best contract .
 A perfect illustration of this occurred on Board 2, Section B, of last week’s duplicate session . Board 2: Section B of the duplicate session.
 North A J 8 4 V K 8 6 3 ♦ 9 8 5 A 10 8 5 West East East A A Q 3 V Q 7 4 V A J 10 9 5 ♦ A K 10 7 3 2 ♦ Q 6 * Q J 9 7 * K 6 1
 The AS was led, trumped in dummy in dummy, HQ played and finessed, a small heart continued and taken with the H9, Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Atkinson played the DQ, continued a small diamond to dummy’s DK, AD was played on which declarer parked her losing spade . The last trump was taken by declarer, clearing North of trumps, then conceded the AC, and made six hearts .
 The contract as played can be held to five if North refuses to trump any of dummy’s diamonds in which case declarer must lose hand . Declarer must also lose hand, making North's HK good . The contract is played as played .
 East-West teams were allowed to play this contract in either 4H or 51 1 . The teams were able to arrive at the contract because they were permitted communication at the lower bidding levels .
 West knew he had heart support for his partner, a void in spades (which would probably he the opening lead), diamond control and club support . West also had diamond control, club control, and club control .
 East knew from the bidding that her tcyim had heart and diamond control, she said . "I'm a fit in two suits," she said of her new owner .
 After East opens III, South bids four spades . Let us sec how the results would have been if after East opens .
 Miss Massachusetts, Miss Massachusetts and Tom Killeen of the National Shawinut Bank at the recent New England Fish and Seafood Parade “kick-off** huffrt held at the Parker House in Boston . Miss Massachusetts was Miss Massachusetts .
 Mr Sacra has served as the area chairman lor the New England fishing industry . The bid is a 'shut out bid' by the New Hampshire fishing community .
 Analysis of South’s hand shows a minimum of eight sure tricks, and if there is even distribution in spades he has nine sure tricks . An analysis of South's hand shows there are nine sure trick cards .
 The MOST he can go down is 3 tricks, probably only one, and if his partner has one ace, or a King on the right side, 10 tricks are assured . The MENSENS can't go down at least three tricks .
 If North has no tricks, East-West may have a slam in any suit except spades . Even more important is if North has any tricks, it may have no tricks .
 A small slam in diamonds is unbeatable against any defense as can be seen . Ironically, a small slam of diamonds is a good defense . The diamond is a diamond .
 The newly completed Wedgewood Apartments are located in Winchester Center, Winchester Center . The apartments offer simplified, luxurious, all-electric living .
 Each apartment has a li\ing room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area . Each apartment is divided into two apartments, each has a separate living space .
 Ws, Make an appointment today to set* apartments about which the whole town is talking . $190 up. Ws. $190-a-head apartments are about to be set up .
 Call PA 9-5800 Monday through Friday. oet5-t/t/ COII we thesi Rate Id you ask for in have that, loo. Call 9-844-99 .
 This is a custom-built three-bedroom, two-bath RANCH, with a hay-windowed living room, large dining room, fully equipped kitchen, paneled study in a top location .
 HOMES SOLI) by this office in 1961 . See the home of some of the most famous people in the U.S.
 Ruth C PORTER CO., Realtors S3 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers . Gertrude H Murphy. Murphy . Murphy: "I'm not afraid to call anyone. I'm glad to see someone
 Center-entrance Colonial Colonial Colonial in attractive setting . Winchester, Pennsylvania, is located in the town of Winchmore .
 Six-room apartment available January 1. $175 a month . Four-bedroom duplex in convenient location in convenient area .
 Formerly KATHRYN P SULLIVAN, Realtor 40 Church Street — PA 9-0984, 9-6560 Kathryn P Davis BR 2-3499 Barbara DeCamp and Jean Gibb are real estate agents .
 On the second floor, there are three spacious chambers, and two attractive baths . The second floor is three spacious rooms, and the third floor is a private bathroom .
 Light, airy basement including lavatory and recreation room with fireplace . Laundry basement includes lavatory, recreation room and recreation center .
 Features include pine-panelled living room and kitchen, four twin-sized bedrooms, two baths, two-car garage . Features of this perfectly kept home include pine panelled living .
 Large modern modern Split Level with five bedrooms, two baths and five bathrooms . Mr Duff v. Duff v . Caldwell PA 9-2790 and Mr Duff 9-5550 .
 BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 21 Thompson Street PArkview 9-4240 . We have a sincere buyer who has sold his present home and wishes to buy a good-sized family-type home with four to six bedrooms .
 Big, beautiful new Garrison on 15,000-foot level lot . New Garrison is located in Winchester .
 Oversized living room and dining room, all-built-in kitchen, den, den. four bedrooms and 2Va ti led baths . 2VaTi led baths, 2VA ti led bedrooms, 2Va led baths and 2VA led bathrooms .
 For appointment to see this home call IV\ 9-6100, or Moses —PA 9-2815 Mrs. Moses . For more information call IV/9-6200 .
 Laundromat and Appliance Service 81 Hi^h St., Medford, EX 9-9775 nov9-2 Business OPPORTUNITIES PAINT STORES Expanding National Paint M ami f no tu rer HAS Dealer Franchise Available in Area .
 PArkview 9-5067 — 9-1531 ausl2-tf DRESSMAKING ALTERATIONS See this number Jotting it down . Bulldozer — Shoveldozer Cellar Exoavating — Grading PArview .
 For alterations on that dress You will find me the best. Just 10 min. from vour town for alterations . For alterations, you can go to a local tailor for you .
 WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 nov2-4t ELECTRICIAN ANGELO A AMICO Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. We are happy to make an offer for a job .
 Metal Furnncea Removed, Iron, Rags, also Rubbish Removal . Metal Furnace Furnace removed, Iron removed, and Rags removed .
 Chrome kitchen table ami ""T— — — ■ — — — 4 chair* Excellent condition, $26. MI 6-7067.
 MeJmuc set, two end tables, two kitch. chair* oil heater, mine. item*, bric-a-brac.
 Hnverty, WElls 3-6889. sept 12tf FOR SALE — Reactivated *58 Impalu Sport Coupe. Reactivated . Reactivated by re-activating *58 Impalu Sports Coupe .
 Two English setter*, 1 nuil*. 1 female, registered with the American Field Publishing Co. For sale, setter* and a female setter*.
 New brick ranch home, 3 bedrooms, dining room, living room, electric kitchen.-car garage . For sale: New brick home, three bedrooms, three bathrooms, two bathrooms, one bathroom .
 All makca including Japanese manufacture. years of prompt, courteous service. years .
 Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use . NOrmandy 6-4620. Do It Youthsself.com .
 TeL WElls 3-0062. aug7-tf MISCELLANEOUS YOUR CAR delivered anywhere in Florida .
 One horse sleigh with Swis* bell* in beautiful condition, ('all TUrner 4-3807.7.5) - - - one horse .
 Heating, Oil-burner sales and service can be seen at 26 Maple Street, Chelsea .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling your Authorised Travel Agent . Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work out with you .
 Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartment*. $190 up. Call WElls 3-2334 .
 Widow would like housekeeper to live in for two mos. Call PA 9-6860 .
 HELP WANTED FALL WARD ROBES are in the shop* now . Call PA 9-1258. nov9-2t .
 Knowledge of signal generator* and use of electrical test equipment is essential . Use of signals generator* is essential in electrical tests .
 Far 'J' is the finest, most dependable, most reliable service . Far 'I will do any kind of typing service I will do . Far J is the best service I can do .
 Antiques — Bric-a-Brae China, Glass, Furniture, etc. Call PA 9-5758. or write Nancy K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester .
 Medical aecretary available either full or part-time. years’ experience. Please call PA 9-5946 .
 POSITION WANTED: Two high school senior* will do general outside work including snow shoveling . For Chrlutmas we will set up your Christmas decorations .
 A unique one-mun operation, ideul for man with woodworking experience, suitable for part or full time . Business is a 'one-mun' operation, with part or part time work .
 Price reasonable, which includes machinery, stock and instruction by owner . Includes equipment, instruction and instruction .
 Superior Construction Company PREVENT CHIMNEY FIRES . Superior Construction company is now working in your area to prevent future job losses .
 Dougie Thomson used to carry the mail for the Winchester Sachems football team a couple of years ago . Thomson was named Virginia’s “Back of the Week” recently by the Richmond “Times-Dispatch” in recognition of his fine play against South Carolina
 He was the game’s leading ground gainer with 81 yards in 18 carries . He carried four consecutive times inside the 10 yard line to get over on his touchdown buck from a yard out .
 Late in the game he made two important first downs that helped Virginia to run out the clock with South Carolina threatening . Virginia ran out of the clock in the final minutes of the game .
 A sophomore, he started the season at halfback, hut three weeks ago . He was shifted to fullback in an attempt to get more speed in that position . A sophomore at the University of Washington, he is a junior in the NFL .
 Winchester fans will agree they will get speed with Mr Thomson at fullback slot . Thomson will play in the fullback slot for the club . Winchester fans are pleased with the decision .
 Troop 37 enjoyed a very interesting trip to the Blue Hills Museum . Girl Scout News: Troop went to the museum to learn about the museum .
 Nearly everything displayed were natural things found in the Blue Hills, animals, birds, rocks, flowers etc. One of the most interesting things was the fact that nearly everything displayed was natural things .
 Kristine Uhlig, Gay Aubrey, Nancy Curtis, Judith Snow, Kathy Williams, Betsy Shaw, Joyce Lavalle, Betty Cirur90, Anna Buzzotta, Catherine Gullotti, Theresa Paonessa, Alice Watts, Melissa Colbert, Beverly Erickson, Linda Ciarc
 The office will be closed at noon on Wed. before Thanksgiving and also Friday November 4 due to the Skating party . Girl Scout Cabin is located in the cabin of the Girl Scouts .
 Jane Miller delivered a lecture on the origin and development of a museum . The De Cordova is not a museum, but a lively Art Center with all sorts of goings-on . Miller: "Any community can have an art center"
 The location should be in such a beautiful spot that people will go out of their way to go there, or it should be a central location, easily reached by all . The location, like that of the DeCordova Museum, should he .
 Julian De Cordova bequeathed his property on a hilltop overlooking Sandy Pond to the town of Lincoln . He also donated a considerable sum of money for its perpetual maintenance .
 He made no narrow specifications hampering its use other than the requirement that it be used as a public museum and park .
 One of the finest art centers in the United States has taken form . Fred P Walkey as executive director .
 The building, completely modernized, holds hanging exhibitions, and sponsors all forms of art, drama, music, poetry, poetry and the dance . The building is now a modern art museum .
 Classes are held in all types of creative art for both children and adults . Art classes are held for both adults and children .
 M iss Miller showed slides of museum activities, including exhibits, painting classes, festivals, festivals . Miller also showed slides from exhibits, art classes and festivals .
 She described enthusiastically the unique outdoor summer program of creative arts for children . She described it as a unique outdoor program of creativity .
 She told of the services to the surrounding communities, the talks and exhibits arranged for schools civic groups, and industries .
 A new wing is planned to acco| midate more classes and provide more space for exhibitions and administrative offices . The new wing will be planned to accommodate more classes .
 Membership includes priority on class lists, discounts on the purchases of books and reproductions, access to the lending library, notices exhibits, and other privileges .
 Winchester residents are already members of the Winchester Museum . Many Winchester residents already take an active part in the museum’s activities .
 The current exhibition in the museum at Lincoln consists of paintings by Robert Hamilton and Jack Wolfe . The current exhibit is at the Lincoln Museum .
 In December there will be the National Watercolor Show, and the New' England Watercolor show, in December .
 After the talk at the library, all present at the meeting were invited to the home of Mr and Mrs. George . The meeting was held in honour of the couple .
 The splash party is open to both boys and girls of all uges in Winchester . Winchester is a popular destination for children in the U.S.
 Five kernels of corn will be placed on each plate of Thanksgiving dinner . The corn kernels will be added to the plates of each person .
 The custom dates back to Pilgrim days when each one was expected to think of at least five things for which to be thankful at this season of the year . Each person is expected to have five things they are thankful for .
 The dinners will begin at the Goodwill Day Nursery for the nursery age children of working mothers and continue through the Youth and Children’s Center, Hayden Goodwill Inn for Homeless Boys, the Eliza Henry Home, and the Seavey Settlement House .
 Henry E Helms, Executive Sec. retary, issued traditional ap peal for canned goods and other foods which come regularly from churches, schools, colleges und other sources for distribution to the underprivileged .
 George Denham and Al Salvey will disc-jockey the affair with everyone’s favorite records . The event will be held in New York City .
 Everyone is welcome to utleud and udd to their record collection if they are lucky . Everyone should be able to add a new album to their collection .
 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add to an existing garage attached to the premises numbered 51 Emerson Road .
 The undersigned requests the Board of Appeal to grant permission to add a garage with less than half the side wall in contact with the house .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purport to be the last will of said deceased by MARGARET LOUISE COOP ER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she he appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety
 If you dertire to object you or your attorney should flle a written appearatico in the Cambridge Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on tho fifth day of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Probate Court, To oil persona lntere*ted in the estate of MAHELLK H LORI) late of Winchester in said County, deceased .
 The executor* of the will of said MAHELLE H LORD have presented to said Court for allowance their tirst account . The executors* of said will have presented . to said . court for allowance . They have presented for allowance in their account .
 If you object to the citation you should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock In the forenoon on the twentyfourth day of November, 1961 .
 To al) persons interested in the estate of MARION C MILWARI) lute of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . Lute of . Winchester in . said County .
 A petition has been presented to Raid Court for probate a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of *aid deceased by PERCY BUGBEE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying tlrnt he be appointed admini*trutor .
 To &U persons interested in the estate uf DANIEL C DEN N Err late or W Incheater in said County, deceased . The deceased is an American citizen .
 A petition has been presented to aaid Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased . Boston Safe Depoait and Trust Company of Boston in the County of Suffolk praying that it be appointed executor thereof without giving a surety on it
 If you object to the citation, you must appear before u*. 1 o'clock in the forenoou on the fifth •lay of DoeemJber 1961, the return day of this citation .
 To all persons interested in the trust estate under the will of M A BELLE H LORD of Winchester in aaid County, deceased, deceased . For the benefit of LOUISE FRANCES EBERLE and others .
 Itave presented to aaid Court for nllowanca their first to third accounts, inclusive . The trustees uf said estate Itave was presented to the court for its first-to-third accounts .
 If you object to the case, you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in aaJd Court a Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyfourth day of November 1961 .
 America’s 14,000 banks help our Country by serving as “retailers” for the U.S. Savings Bonds program .
 Banks sell Bonds as a free service, distribute information about them, and furnish voluntary leadership . Some 70% of state Savings Bonds chairmen, 56% of county chairmen are bankers .
 Bond dollars help to keep America strong; and because the program has helped to revitalize the American tradition of thrift— the key to individual progress .
 Two alternatives confront useither to put an end to the arm race, or to the human race . Two alternatives to end arm race: end to arm race or end to human race, end of arm race .
 Man has turned Nature’s cool, refreshing rain into some thing sinister . Man has created a sinister twist on nature's cool and refreshing rain .
 West Berlin construction experts have estimated that fifteen thousand families could have been housed with the materials used in the ‘Ulbricht Wall’ (as the hated structure is called on the Western side) Now they can’t tear it down even if they want to .
 Half an hour after the wall came down, thousands of people would be off to West Berlin .
 To accept the so-called necessity for shelter and protection is to acknowledge nuclear war as a valid instrument of national policy . The U.S. should not accept nuclear war is a valid weapon of war, the author says .
 We must, of course, retain our military potential as a deterrent, but the billions of dollars that will be spent building public and private fallout shelters could be put to far better use .
 Named Zoo Drive Chairman Theodore vonRosenvinge, 3rd, of 4 Parker Road, appointed one of the 17 area Thairmen of the Massachusetts Zoological Society membership drive .
 The appointment was made by Mr Richard H Miller, president of the society .
 Mr Miller declared that every first-class zoo in the world has the support of an active and devoted zoological society . Mr Miller declares that every zoo has a support for an active zoology society .
 Information about membership may he obtained by writing Massachusetts Zoological Society, Franklin Park, Boston 21, Mass.
 Richard F. Dutting of 12 Wildwood Street and August S Niewenhous of 15 Glengarry received certificates last Friday for having completed a nineweek course in practical politics sponsored by the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce . Richard F Duttting of . 12
 Mr Dutting and Mr Niewenhous are project engineers for Camp, Dresser & McKee in Boston . They are also the superintendent of car service for the Boston & Maine Railroad .
 The Chamber’s course in practical politics is designed to assist the individual to develop the political skills necessary for effective participation in politics .
 No one quicker than we to admire woman’s outstanding talents, both social and domestic, or admit that her charming presence lends grace and color to the eternal human drama . The Queen of England will be the next president of the United States .
 Through sheer power of inspiration she has been the instigator of man’s finest achievements in music, art, literature, science, or invention .
 We fear that in imparting inspiration to man, she has, we fear, retained all too little for herself . In fields of creative art man reigns practically supreme .
 The magnificent shell on the Esplanade carries the names of sixty great composers . It is the name of the most famous composers in the world .
 The field of great painting is like that of music, practically monopolized by man, as is that of sculpture . Great art is "practically monopolized" by man . Great paintings are like music and sculpture .
 Even as man’s artistic genius provides for entertainment, so does his in ventive genius look after her convenience and comfort . Even as the artist provides for woniifn's entertainment and pleasure, he looks after her comfort and comfort.
 Consider RUG CLEANING Ca£L PA.906&4 1 CHUfcCH ST COLONIAL Package Store, Inc. Consider Rug CLEANing Ca£l PA. Consider cleaning up your home's furniture .
 Four Corners Shopping Center Woburn WE 5-2322 BCglS-lf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HATL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY PURS — JEWELRY HEALTH A ACC
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality L.'quors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . PArkview 9-1062 FREE DELIVERY ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 Winchester Visiting Nursing Association hold November 10. November 10 is the monthly board mooting of tho Winchester Visitor Nursing Association . Winchester Nursing Association will meet November 10 at Winchester Hospital .
 New Krmland > prettiest nautical sought in a 4c w England anywhere in England . interested in boating enthusiast is being search for 19G2 Boat Show Queen .
 Wellesley Offices are skilled nursing care to pa, show in Boston’s Commonwealth at Wellesley Hospital .
 Governor John Volpc, Mass. Indemnity and Life Insurance Com pany; Governor John A Volpc; and Harold J Tripp, vice-president of Mass. Insurance Company . Gov. John A. Volpc: "I'm not going to be surprised.
 Indemnity and Life Insurance Company. what happens on a typical weekoverboard one day and drowned, day in the life of a business man .
 My lady arises from refreshing sleep in a man-made bed, in a luxurious room lighted by man-controlled electricity . In a comfortable house heated by a heated heating device, the author says .
 She steps into a bathroom equipped with bathtub, toilet, shower, etc., all products of the man-made science of plumbing . The woman's bathroom is equipped with a bathtub and toilet, and a shower .
 She prepares breakfast with man-made kitchen range, toaster, and percolator, with frequent resource to man-built refrigerator .
 Man’s contribution to her comfort and pleasure carry right through the day, up to and including the musical composition of the opera or concert number that may enliven her evening .
 The average woman’s interest narrows down to whether she gets the right service on pressing a button, or whether she must call in some man to make the necessary repairs . Fortunate, indeed, for women that civilization is blessed with men whose scientific minds, inventive genius, and
 A thrifty Scotsman asked the bank for a loan of a dollar and was told he must pay four per cent interest at the end of the year .
 Scotsman came back with a dollar and four cents to clear up his debt, and asked for his fifty thousand in bonds back .
 Mr Belden is a manager of the Manufacturing Radio Corporation of Burlington, Vermont .
 Andover Inn, Peabody Hall and Phillips Academy will be used . Phillips Academy Academy will also be using facilities and classrooms at the hotel .
 The participating businessmen will be spending one week out of every four at the Center for Management Development until March of 19G2 . Sponsored by their respective companies, the participants will spend time at the center for management development .
 This will enable them to interweave learning with on-the-job applications . Students will be able to use their knowledge to learn and apply for jobs .
 Alcoa, Continental Can, and Owens Corn ing Fibreglass are among those also having regional sales offices in this, the first of six buildings to be constructed in Wei lesley Office Park .
 Moore agency, comprised of 19 staff members, has moved in rank, out of twenty-five agencies, from 15th to 4th in new annual premiums in five and onehalf years . Moore agency is comprised of . 19 staff .
 This agency is responsible for solicitation and sales in Massa chusetts, Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont .
 Mr Moore has been a resident of Winchester for 10 years . He lives with his wife Cynthia and their three child ren children .
 Mr Moore is a former vestryman in the Church of the Epiphany . He is also a past president of the Bowdoin College Club of Boston .
 Monday, December 4, will be the date of tho Sponge Workshop, to be held by the En Ka Society . December 4 is the date for tho Sponge Sponge Workshop . The workshop will be held at En Ka society .
 Chester Manimon, 58 Bacon Street, will be the hostess and will welcome any En Ka members who wish to help with this . tients in their own homos or with instruction in maternal and infant care, and family health guidance .
 The nurses are responsible for health supervision in the public schools and parochial schools . Under the board of health the nurses are also responsible for Well Child Conferences, immunization and tuberculosis clinics .
 N A. N. A.’s services in order to promote the health of all Winchester residents . Winchester residents are encouraged to use the services to promote their health .
 Every one I of these fine used ears has been reconditioned by our factory-trained mechanics .
 Arlington Center iVUasioft 3-8000 APE 1 ABA OFF GAS . “Cl i pit” is the new, better way to clip newspapers and magazines .
 The sooner you obtain your medicine, the sooner you will enjoy its health restoring benetits, says the author .
 Temperature dials are marked in fabrics not degrees, including one especially for washandwear . The temperature dial is marked in fabric not degrees .
 Ultra* violet lamp built-in to givu your clothes the sweet, fresli smell of summer sunshine all year . Ultra* Violet lamp built in to give your clothes a fresh, bright summer smell .
 In 1048 Winchester’s assessors commenced a complete revaluation of all properties in town, a revalu ation that took about three years to complete . Winchester's assessors completed the revaluations in 1048 . Winchester is the first town to have reval
 Large area maps were prepared of the various sections of the town showing the individual properties by neighborhoods with their sale prices through the years, the unit value of land per square foot and the history of the assessing .
 Few, if indeed any other boards of assessors have such maps which were conceived and worked out to aid them in their work . The local hoard has maps which the local hoard conceived and developed .
 The maps are a valuable supplement to the usual property cards . They are used exclusively by the assessors in their valuation work . The maps will be used only by assessors .
 In Winchester the assessors arrive at valuations in the field, not around an office table . To aid them in their determination the big area maps go with them on their assessing trips .
 At any time it becomes necessary to look at an individual property in a neighborhood the assessors through their maps appraise; every piece of property in the immediate neighborhood, to see that the valuation of the property is proportionally sound .
 This procedure is followed whenever there is a sale of property or when there is structural change requiring a building permit . This procedure was followed when a structural change requires a permit .
 It is also used to assess new property in accordance with other properties in the immediate neighborhood . It also assesses new properties based on other properties nearby .
 When it is impossible to find comparable property near at hand the assessors cover the maps in the town to find such porperty elsewhere in their effort to adhere to their method of proportional assessing .
 Town Meeting Monday To Consider JHS Funds Town Meeting convenes Monday night, November 2T. at the High School Auditorium to vote on the request of the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee for an appropriation .
 The new junior high school opened on schedule at the beginning of the school year . The school is the first of its three campuses to open .
 Pilgrims completed a long, hard first winter and succeeded in the struggle to raise the crops vital to survival in the New World . The original Thanksgiving feast took place in Plymouth after the first winter .
 President’s Mother Gives Address at McCall Junior High School Auditorium on Sunday afternoon, November 19 . Capacity audience was on hand to greet Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline .
 Joseph P Kennedy appeared to give an illustrated lecture for the benefit of the Guild of the Infant Saviour . She appeared to be giving the illustrated lecture at the Guild .
 A program of classical and semi-classical music furnished by Theodore Janner’s Orchestra preceded lecture .
 Guardianship Insurance Plan For Retarded Children in State takes final step to put new revoluntionary insurance plan into effect . Board of Trustees met November 15 to approve new plan .
 MARC Guardianship Insur ance Plan is an unprecedented move to answer the question of what happens to a retarded child in the event of the death of the parents . The MARC plan is a first step in the fight to protect the mentally retarded child .
 This contact will include all those areas of human need usually provided by parents other than legal guardianship re sponsibility . Contact will include areas of need usually given by parents such as parents .
 The public is invited to attend a meeting of the Winchester LWV Tuesday, November 28 at 8:00 a.m. at Lynch Junior High School . Bradlee Named Member Of Planning Board Experts Air Regional Planning At LWV Panel .
 Panelists will present the subject of Regional Planning from different points of view . Father W Seavey Joyce, Ralph Kaminsky, and Howard Whitmore, Jr. will be the panelists .
 Father Joyce’s interest in promoting more vital citizen participation in government is reflected in his membership in such organizations as the Boston Civic Progress Committee . He is also a member of the American Economic Association, Governing Council, National Municipal League .
 Among the awards that he has received in recognition of his contributions to civic-betterment is the National Municipal League’s “Distinguished Citizen” Award .
 Mr Kaminsky joined the staff of the Greater Boston Economic Study Committee in 1958 . He became first director of Research in 1961 .
 Mr Kaminsky will explain the place of basic economic research in forecasting trends and interpreting needs of the Greater Boston area .
 Howard Whitmore, Jr., was Mayor of Newton from 1954-11.59. He was mayor of Newton, Newton, from 1954 to 11.59 .
 H Gardner Bradlee of 46 Lorenu Road was unanimously elected j triet from 1947-1953, serving also a member of the Planning Board . Prior to this, he was Representative, 6th Middlesex Pis ; , mm Photo by Ityerson H GARDNER BRAD
 Mr Whitmore has been exploring ways in which local initiative could result in better cooperation among neighboring communities .
 This plan will make possible the continued care, comfort, nurture, education and support of retarded individuals after their parents or guardians are unable to do this because of death or other cause . L.W.V.V., continued on page 12 .
 The new chairman of the Board is Mr Harold E Trekell, a consultant engineer of 14 Keeling Road, Wakefield . Mr Trekell is the new chairman .
 Elected secretary was Miss Deborah Barus of 20 Rice Street, Newton Center, Director of Social Services, the Massachusetts Memorial Hospital; and the new treasurer is Adolf F Monosson, of 85 Baldpate Hill Road, Newton, president Berkley Finance Co. Miss Barus is
 Representing the Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Company of Philadelphia which is handling the insurance plan was Mr Howard L Borkow of Chestnut Hill . Representing Fidelity mutual life insurance company of Philadelphia was Mr Borkows . Representating the insurance company was Howard Borkowski of Chest
 By giving a pint of blood to a friend or stranger whose very life may depend on you, give a pint to a stranger . Don't forget to give blood to your friends or family .
 At the Church of the Epiphany from 12:45 to 6:45m. on Monday, November 27. At the church of the epiphany, the service will be held from 12 to 6 a.m.
 A pint of blood assures you and your family of blood needs for the next 12 months . Remember also that a pint is a good reminder of your blood needs .
 Most people wouldn’t think of not carrying hospital, house or car insurance . Most people don't think of carrying hospital or house insurance .
 Call PA 9-2300 for an appointment or drop in at the Church of the Epiphany between 12:45 and 6:45m. on the 27th. on January 27th .
 She was charming, unassuming and charming . She completely captivated her audience with her charm .
 The tea and reception was held in the gymnasium, one half of which was curtained with light grey material as a background .
 Beautiful Oriental rugs covered | * the floor, potted plants and jars of large yellow chrysanthemums flanked a tapestry screen before which the receiving line stood .
 Comfortable arm chairs and a coffee table holding an arrangement of yellow and rust mums completed this area of the garden . Comfortable arms chairs and coffee table were also added to the area .
 The orchestra furnished background music, and members and guests declared it a most enjoyable afternoon . Members of the orchestra provided background music .
 The Guild is very grateful to Koko Boodakian and Sons for their help in the decorations . Of the building committee's balance of $13,148, only $3,398 is committed for construction items, plus an architects' fee of $251 .
 Committee seeks $22,368, including $8,500 to build a fence in the wellfield . Committee also seeks $9,000 to build fence in wellfield, including a maximum of $8k .
 Committee seeking $17,623. F o r “additional expenditures found desirable” because they can be purchased with Federal aid of 30 cents on the dollar during the time of construction . Committee is seeking $18,000 for additional expenditures .
 The committee is also seeking a $5,000 contingency fund and a transfer of $3,500 to its fund from the same amount voted earlier by Town Meeting in connection with a study of possible uses of the Wadleigh School for administrative offices . The committee also wants a $3
 Committee is asking Town Meeting for maximum appropriation of $31,992 . Town Meeting will consider the balance on hand and all other items on hand .
 The final cost of constructing the welifieid fence has not, as the Star goes to press, been determined . It is understood that the $8,500 figure, in any case, is a maximum one .
 A systematic summary of the committee’s appropriation is printed below the editorial to the right .
 S Visiting Day at the Lynch Junior I Ligh School is set for Saturday, November 25 from 10tn. to 2 :30m. The school will be open to students at the time of the day .
 Barbara Bailey, speaking for the Lynch Junior I ligh School Building Commmittee of which she is the Chairman . Barbara Bailey is the chairwoman of the committee, which is based at Lynch Junior School .
 Visiting days set aside for the general public to look over the new buildings have become a custom in Winchester . Building Committee and School Department both hope that many citizens will take advantage of this opportunity to become acquainted with the new school on the Well Field site .
 Between seven and eight hundred parents attended the regular Open House held there two weeks ago . Between seven to eight hundred students attended the Open House .
 Among observations heard that night were remarks on the building’s great size; its functional versatility; the effective use of color to relieve its economically basic construction . The language labs (which McCall also has) and its modernity are modern .
 Lynch Junior High School Building Committee has definitely NOT' over-spent its appropriation . Lynch Committee Has Not Over -Spent . Committee has not 'overspent' appropriation .
 The Star regrets very much the unfortunate wording of last week's news story implying that it had. It had. The Star has been unable to correct the wording .
 Lynch committee goes to Town Meeting for additional funds Monday night . Lynch committee has $13,1 IS balance of available funds still in building account . Town meeting will be held at Town Meeting on Monday .
 The school opened on schedule and is operating efficiently, the school says . What is more is more, its school is operating on schedule, it's operating efficiently .
 Winchester's Lynch committee has observed sound fiscal procedure . Winchester's new junior high school is a fine new school for Winchester, the Star says .
 When it became clear to the committee that it would need additional funds to complete the kind of school it felt the Town wanted, it very properly made no further commitments and prepared to ask Town Meeting .
 There has been no over-expenditure, according to the building committee's appropriation . The committee's summary of the appropriation printed below clearly shows that there is no over spending .
 Wc repeat our editorial judgment of this committee's work published in the Star of April 6, 1961 .
 We might add that if all Town committees and hoards were as cooperative with the Star as the Lynch building committee has been there would be less heat in the conduct of Town affairs .
 Knowlton, vetei an grid coach and director of athletics at Winchester High School, is a grid coach . He is also director of physical education in the Winchester schools . He has also coached and coached high school athletes .
 The presentation was made at the annual dinner of the Football Officials by the outgoing president of the Association, Jan Kozlowski of Dorchester, former Boston Colge football star .
 Coach Knowlton received a standing ovation as he accepted the award and again at the conlusion of his acceptance remarks . The coach received the award at the end of his speech .
 In addition to the plaque, he was presented by President Kozlowski on behalf of the officials with a fine 23-jewel Bulova watch .
 A fine steak dinner put, every one in the right humor for the speaking program, presided over by Jeorgc "Red" Hill, former Harvard player . President Kozlowski as toastmaster .
 Officials prevailed upon to entertain by the mammoth Mr Koslowski . Incidental mention should be made of several vocal selections endered by a quartet of officials .
 Henry Knowlton. ctiiUt, WimJic’shT High School's football coach, accepts plaque designating him schoolboy footbgll ‘’’�Coach of the Year” from Jan Koslowski, retiring president of the Association
 Herbert Black succeeds to the position held by the late Frances Burns, who blazed many trails in the field of reporting of medicine .
 T he field includes coverage of medical developments in hospitals, medical schools and in the offices of the doctors .
 The Globe has been a pioneer in interpreting medical information for the reading public . With the Boston area a center for medical and dental progress, the Globe is a pioneer .
 He was for a number of years the director of high school youth activities at the Unitarian Church . He was also a director of youth activities for the church .
 He has worked on Cub Scout and Boy Scout programs and fund drives . He has been involved in Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts programs .
 Saving at Winchester Saving Hank earn a healthy harvest of dividends every season of the year . Saving Hank earns a large amount of money every year . The Winchester Savings Hank store store is located in Winchester .
 Enjoy this insured “windfall’s” yourself by sharing in the earnings of this MUTl AL Savings Hunk . Enjoy the insured "windfall" yourself .
 He has been ' with the Globe ever since . He has worked as a reporter, a news edii tor, assistant day editor, and now medical writer .
 Herbert i Kenny, a Globe editorial writer, is j now carrying on the course . He says he's not sure how long it will take for him to get back on course .
 Winchester is considered by experts to be a model town so far as valuations are concerned . Winchester is a 'model town' for valuations, experts say . Winchester has the highest valuation in the world .
 This week's picture is used because of its connection with the award of the schoolboy football “Coach of the Year” to Winchester’s veteran football coach, Henry Knowlton . Winchester's veteran coach was awarded the ‘Coach of Year’ at the end
 Shown is the high school football team of 1927, of which Mr Knowlton was captain .
 This team were last to represent Winchester in the now defunct Mystic Valley League . They finished in a triple tie with Melrose and Arlington for the last championship of the circuit .
 Winchester beat Arlington, Melrose beat Winchester, Winchester beat Winchester and Melrose . Winchester beat Melrose 3-2 . Winchester defeated Melrose 2-2 at Melrose 1-1 .
 The league broke up when Winchester withdrew from its meral ‘rship, due to the fact that Arlington, Melrose and Watertown had grown too large for the Sachems . Winchester was then a relatively small school .
 Winchester did well in the league, but really had little chance for the championship . Winchester won the league in 2010, but didn't make it to the title .
 The 1927 team made Winchester football history by playing the first post-season game in which a local team has participated . Winchester's 1927 team played the first, and if memory serves, it was the only game in that way . Winchester has never played a game in a local football post-
 The Sachems met and defeated a strong Ames bury High team on the Saturday after Thanksgiving, on one of the coldest football afternoon’s the editor can remember . Ames bury has a strong team that defeated the team .
 Coach Knowlton, left halfback, played an outstanding game against Amesbury . He was recalled by football fans there for many years . Amesbury fans still remember him as their coach .
 The 1927 team was coached by Wendell Mansfield, now director of athletics at Pomfret School . The 1927 national champions were coached by Mansfield .
 Shown in the picture which was taken on old Manchester Field by the late Frank H Higgins, Winchester photographer, are, left to right, kneeling, “Living” McNeil, end; Herb Ross, end . “Bunker Swain, tackle; Guy Wildberger
 Wendell Mansfield, coach; Ray Halwartz, right halfback; Ronnie Simonds, fullback; Henry Knowlton, left half back; “Arbie” Taylor, quarterback. “Wendell’s” team was coached by Wendell
 Coach Knowlton tipped the beam at 156, but there were few lines that could stop him straight away . He was the first person to reach the top of the beam with a 156 .
 Insurance of the retarded parents may feel the security of knowing that their children will be looked after when they the parents have passed on . The children may feel that their parents will look after their children when they die .
 This plan securely establishes a continuing interest in the retarded child for the duration of his or her life on the part of the MARC organization through this Board of Trustees . MARC will continue to take care of the child through the remainder of his life .
 This applies whether the child is domiciled in a State School, private school or at home . This applies to the child's education at home or in a state school .
 Each participant will receive benefits in accordance with his individual needs . Each participant receives benefits based on his own needs . We are happy to provide an overview of the program .
 Churl™ H Kerrigan, left, is the assistant manager of the Boston office of the 1 ninn Central Life Insurance Company, 60 J .orena Road, Boston . The company president John A Lloyd for achieving highest sales in nation .
 Kerrigan represented national sales force at ground-breaking ceremonies for company's new $8,500,000 home office in Cincinnati . Kerrigan served as national representative for company at groundbreaking ceremonies .
 His car was extensively damaged in the front and towed to Wallace’s Repair shop . His car bears a Maine registration .
 All Army enlistees after December 11, and before January 1, 1962, with a guarantee of up to fifteen days chargeable advance leave, beginning on the day of enlistment and prior to any basic training . The guarantee of advance leave is available to all enlistees .
 Young men taking advantage of this offer by the U.S. Army receive all military benefits during the leave period . The offer includes full pay, free medical care, and PX privileges at military installations .
 Army still allows this group their choice of assignment either in geographical location or field of endeavor . Army still stands firmly by its slogan of “Choice Not Chance”
 Young men interested in enlisting under the Regular Army’s “Operation Holiday” can obtain all the details from Sgt. Sgt. John Sutter . Sgt. Sutter: "Operation Holiday" is a great way to enlist .
 A Chevrolet sedan driven by a 33-year-old mother accompanied by her three children was in collision . Seaman John C McLeod, 20, son of Mrs. McLeod was killed in the collision .
 YellowCafeteria Menu November 27 December 1 Monday — Turkey rice soup, sub marine, carrot sticks, Dutch apple pudding, cinnamon sauce, milk .
 Tuesday — Oven grilled fattfort, home fries, buttered vegetable, brownie and fruit, milk . Tuesday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday . Tuesday . Wednesday, Wednesday .
 Fruit juice, cheeseburger on roll, cabbage slaw, pineapple upside down cake, whipped cream, milk . Wednesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday .
 Chinese chop suey, chow raein, fluffy rice noodles, fluffy noodles, soy sauce, coffee cake, coffee cakes, whipped jello, milk . Thursday's menu includes a selection of noodles, noodles and coffee cake .
 Spaghetti and tomato casserole, cheese cubes, nut cranberry muffin, butterscotch pudding, milk . Friday: Spaghetti, tomato cassole, butteredcot pudding, nut crackberry muffin .
 Tom ftmott oM pointing * dtsorv* only th* boot . i3| frames b y Stevens fotory-to-you prl«Ml Malcolm 6.0 .
 Winchester Home And Garden Club offers two outstanding events to highlight the holiday season . Winchester Home and Garden Club members will meet at the end of the year . The Winchester Home & Garden Club is a member of the Arlington, Virginia, club .
 On Thursday, November 30, at the First Congregational Church, the regular monthly meeting will feature a demonstration of “Holiday Centerpieces” by Mrs. Mrs. Martha Jones .
 The annual Christmas Greens Sale and luncheon will be held at the Baptist Church Hall . On December 6 the annual Christmas Green Greens Sale will take place .
 Both events will offer homemakers colorful and exciting suggestions on home decorations, gifts and accessories for the Christmas season . Homemakers will also be able to find out what to do with Christmas decorations .
 Ham is one of our most popular speakers on the art of flower arranging . Ham is a popular speaker on the subject of arranging flowers .
 Her designs are always artistic and imaginative and are accomplished with an ease . She makes it possible for even an amateur to produce beautiful results by applying her special technique . Her designs always come from a range of different styles .
 Her Christmas arrangements are especially lovely and in her talk on Thursday she will feature table decorations and candelabra arrangements using a variety of color schemes .
 Ham’s talk, the social hour will be omitted for this meeting which will begin promptly at 1:30 m.m. The social hour is omitted for the meeting .
 Winchester looks forward to eaoh year to the Greens sale as an ideal place to start Christmas shopping for distinctive items and ideas on holiday decorating . Winchester is looking forward to a year-long stand-off of the Greens . Winchester will be offering a range of distinctive items for distinctive
 Club members are giving many hours of time and talent to insure it’s being one of the finest in recent years . Club members give time and effort to ensure the event is one of its finest ever years .
 There will be a specialty table with hand-made items contributed by members . John Chipman; In addition there will be an additional special table with handmade items .
 McCall Family Square Dance will take place on December 1 . Friday, December 1 at McCall Junior High School . Students will be able to enjoy a family dance .
 This is the night of the annual family Square Dance . The event promises to be as successful as have these affairs in the past .
 The affair will be under the direction of the inimitable Mr Meurling whose long experience insures a fun filled evening . The event will take place in a bid to raise funds for charity .
 Tickets are limited so get out your dancing shoes, flats that is, and prepare for a lively evening . Tickets for the event are limited .
 Two Winchester girls, Miss Susan Pond and Miss Andrea Chapin, will be junior hostesses at the International wine tasting benefit Wednesday, November 29, at 40 Mt. Mt. Mountain . The Winchester girls will be Junior Hostesses at Wine Tasting Benefit .
 Both girls spent the summer in Europe with the International Friendship League . Both girls were in Europe for the summer with the league .
 Proceeds from the event will go to the promotion of the student letter writing project of the League . Proceeds will be used to promote a student letter-writing project .
 The young bluejacket enlisted at the local Recruiting Station, City Hall, Medford, and took his “Boot” training at the Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, 111 .
 He will receive on-the-job training in one of the many technical ratings of the Navy . He will also receive on the job training .
 A 1961 Chevrolet convertible, a 1965 Rambler, and a 1953 Oldsmobile were involved in a collision on Main Street in last Monday night’s slippery snowy weather near the intersection of Stowell Road and Main Street .
 The driver of the Chevrolet, Robert T Winn of 11 Kirk Street, told police that he was proceeding north on Main Street when his car suddenly started to skid .
 The Rambler, driven by Phyllis B Williams of 18 Mystic Avenues, was in collision with the Chevrolet, and the Oldsmobile, . driven by George D O’Leary of 7 Madison Street, Woburn was . in collision . He told police he
 The Rambler was reported damaged in the rear and front, the Oldsmobile in the front . The Oldsman was reported to be in the vehicle's rear .
 John M Geoghegan of 14 Hemingway St. is home on two weeks leave after completing nine weeks of recruit training at the Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois .
 Geoghegun enlisted at the local Navy Recruiting Station, Medford, under the guaranteed Electronics training program for High School graduates . Has orders to attend a twenty four week course of instruction in the Sonarman rating, ut the Fleet Sonar School, Key West, Florida
 The Knit Shop 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9*1888 . Complete Knitting Supplies, including ribbons and buttons .
 Sue Bennett for her part as Dorothy and Jim Reid for his part as Father in the senior play, “Seventeen Year Old Woman’s” The trophies for the four best actors and • actresses went to Sue Bennett, Jim Reid, Candee Callahani,
 The awards for the best director and assistant director went to Carol Coakley and Mimi Barnes who ably directed the Senior play . The awards were given to the Senior Play .
 The members of the cast were Sally Leighton as Mother, Jim Reid as Father, Sue Bennett as Dorothy, Sandra Simpson as Maxine, and Bill Sandburg as Sidney .
 Thanks and recognition also go to faculty advisors Mr Morse, Mr McLaughlin, and Miss Bronson . Students behind the scenes helped make it such a successful evening .
 Charles M Vanner was hostess for the meeting of the Committee of Safety Chapter D.A.R. on Monday afternoon, November 20 . Vanner is the hostess of the meeting .
 John B Wills poured at the table with his large fruit centerpiece . The pair were joined by a group of friends and family members .
 Paul F Stoneman gave her most timely and excellent summary report on National Defense . Paul F. Stonman gave her best timely summary report .
 Members brought gifts and money to be used by the Hillside School in Marlborough for their Christmas . Members brought presents and money for the school .
 Richard Whittemore brought seven boys with him to take part in a play . Headmaster's son brought them with him for a play at his school .
 He urged all to attend D.A.R. day at Hillside in order to see the new building and of the improvements in older dormitories and classrooms .
 During July and August Hillside conducts a summer camp on the plan of the Y.M.C.A. of which the speaker had been a counselor for a number of years . Hillside holds a summer summer camp for children in the summer .
 This project has proved most popular with boys of the school, as well as others from outside . Some staying both months and others staying for half the season .
 Some of the boys are placed in other private schools on graduation from the 8th grade . Many have been quite successful and made friends for Hillside . Hillside is a private school .
 Mr Whittemore then introduced the boys and their character parts in ‘If wishes were horses’ in two scenes in yard of a farm house in autumn .
 This was well-done and was much enjoyed by all members of the Committee of Safety Chapter . "This was well done and was well enjoyed by members of this chapter," says author .
 Florence Crittenton Bazaar will be held next Wednesday, November 29 at the Dorothy (Jaincy Suite of the John Hancock building) from 10:00m. to 7:00 m.m. The event will take place in the Dorothy Suite of John Hancock .
 All circle members, as well as the general public, are invited to attend . The general public will also be invited .
 Mae Laskey of Beacon Street will put on the annual fashion show at 2:30m. Mae Laskeys will perform at the event at the end of the day .
 Phylis Hanes, fashion editor of the Boston Herald Traveler, will do the commentary . Phylea Hanes is fashion editor and fashion editor at Boston Herald traveler .
 Circle will have a table at the bazaar which will feature their supply of hand-made mittens, bean bags, and a new item, the very useful and attractive ter rye loth bibs .
 James F Walsh of Winchester is chairman of the decorating committee for the entire bazaar . Walsh is also a member of the committee that decorates the Winchester bazaar.
 Discounts if you order before December High Street in Medford Square, at the Winchester Star . Winchester Star.
 Sec our selection of diamond OMEGA watches in models from $125 to $1000 . The OMEGA OMEGA watch is available for $125 .
 Four attractive ladies snatched the apple of] victory away from Barrett and Atj kinson, on November 15th, as that pair made a noble try for a fourth straight win .
 Section A showed the following results on 22 boards and North South showed an average score of 110 . North South had an average of 110.
 Winchester players were mostly left strewn on the battlefield in j Section B . Section B also completed 22 hoards for an average of 110 .
 Barbara Sawyer, chairman of this special event, has reserved the main hall at the Church of the Epiphany for that evening . Barbara Sawyer is chairman of the special event .
 The entire net proceeds from that tournament will he contributed to the ACBL charities-of-the-year, Kidney Disease and Family Service . The tournament proceeds will be donated to the charity of the year .
 Barbara's committee includes Gloria ButterRalph Atkinson, Ann Dean, Hawley, Trudy Mainborgor, Fredna Perkins, Alta Stewart and Carl Sittinger .
 This week we finally caught up with the dub's foremost bridge expert and induced him to come to the podium for us briefly .
 Sons of Italy Hall to benefit tin* Don Orione Home for Frank M (reremonte, Holier Chief Chief Joseph J Derro. Derro . Don orione Home . Frank M . Derro was Frank Orione, Frank M. from the Italian family .
 Fiesta to be held November 28 at the Aged are, left to right . Organisers are working on plans for the event .
 Good boards can also be obtained in duplicate on defense . Remember that good boards are also available in duplicate . Good defense can be duplicated on defense.
 My partner made the proper op ening of the 8S and declarer won with the KS Tf declarer . declarer had cashed the AS before playing hearts .
 Declarer, however, played a small heart to the ace and return ed a heart which my partner took with the king . Declarer's partner took a heart with the ace, but his partner took the king with a heart .
 If declarer had put up the 9D from dummy, she would have saved a trick, but when she played low I also had the chance to play low . We beat the contract two tricks, taking two clubs, two hearts and one diamond .
 Charles Watson has been working on development of a new potion to make bridge players smarter . Watson is believed to be working on developing a new bridge potion .
 “The Old Rugged Cross” still is America’s favorite hymn . McVey: Hymns America Loves Best; Interest in Hymn Singing Increases . “Old Rugged cross” is America's favorite hymn .
 More than 61,000 newspaper readers from coast to coast voted in the recent National Newspapers Hymn Pull . 10,482 of them chose ‘The Old Rugged Cross’ as their dearest religious song .
 Analysts said this large vote doubtless was due to the song’s popularity at hymn sings across the country . Audience Analysts say it was likely to be due to its popularity in hymn sing .
 The third favorite hymn disclosed by the National Newspapers Hymn Pull was “What A Friend We Have in Jesus,” a song which has earned a place in Americans’ hearts .
 The Christian Herald Singer noted the rise in acceptance of “Amazing Grace’s” among American churchgoers . Singer: "Amazing Grace" is now accepted in the United States .
 This gospel song relates how faith provides confidence . It moved from ninth place in the 1960 Christian Herald hymn poll to fifth place in National Newspapers poll .
 The sixth favorite hymn of the 61,445 Americans who voted was ‘Rock of Ages’ The religious song describes man’s confidence in God .
 This hymn was 27th in the Christian Herald poll but moved to 10th in National Newspapers Hymn Poll . It is now 10th on the list of most popular hymns in the UK .
 This year's poll, co-sponsored by Christian Herald Magazine, recorded more than 1,900 hymns and gospel songs . Every state except Hawaii and Vermont, every state except Vermont, recorded songs . The poll is the nation’s largest interdenominational publication .
 McVey: American churchgoers do not prefer one type of religious song to another . He says it's the first definitive survey to determine the hymns America loves best . The survey was conducted by the National Institute of American Missions .
 The last two years have seen a constant controversy between hymnal editors and churchgoers . Churchgoers prefer hymns that have been the most inspiring to them and easiest for them to understand .
 National Newspapers Hymn Poll results show that American churchgoers want to sing sentimental hymns and gospel songs like ‘The Old Rugged Cross’ ” McVey said .
 Mr Haven was the son of Mrs Haven . Another son, Charles J Riley | Wellesley Hospital, is widely known in Winchester as days’ illness .
 He was horn June 15, Peter, and the late Julia ij)02.02. in Somerville, but came to Hogan.02 . He was married to Peter, Peter and Julia, who died June 15 .
 Franklin K Haven of 45 Eliot | Lane. She was horn in Woburn Winchester at the age of four . She was killed in a car crash in August 2013 .
 Former resident of Winchester, I Winchester, died Thursday morning, November 16, at the Newton following a ten July 5, 1877 . Weston was the surviving member of a family of 16 children .
 She was widely known for her interest in community projects, especially those affecting youth . She assisted her son, Charles, founder of Woburn Day, in conducting that popular event .
 Riley leaves four daughters, Eileen Garvey of Woburn, Catherine Phin ney of Billerica, Margaret Collins and Gertrude Eaton . Riley leaves 28 grandchildren, 83 great-grandchildren and one greatgreat grandchild, bom only two weeks ago .
 Funeral held at Cox & Sons Funeral Home in Woburn with solemn requiem high mass celebrated xt St. St. Michael's Funeral Mass Mass held at St. Mary's Church in St. Peterborough .
 Even if an employee works one day he must have a Social Security number . According to John J Rynne, Manager, Cambridge social security office, even if he is an employee one day, he has to have it .
 All employees should show their social security cards regardless of the length of their employment, the author says .
 Foster Homes For Babies and Children of All Ages . Board, Clothing and Clothing anil Medical Care provided by us .
 Commander Edward W Hartung and Department President of the Ladies Auxiliary Margaret R Eikrem were present and expressed their thanks for their invitations . Commander Edward Hartung was present at the ceremony .
 Commander Hurtung stated all members of Middlesex County Council should cooperate with their Commander and President . The Department President brought the greetings of the Department officers .
 He said our organization must assert ourselves by increasing membership . He said it must assert itself by increasing its membership .
 Master of Ceremonies John Pike asked for a moment of silence for all departed comrades . He read the names of three Past Middlesex County Commanders that passed away .
 Woburn thanked the committee in charge and those who attended to help make this annual banquet so successful .
 A catered dinner by Shaw Caterers was enjoyed by all followed by dancing ’til midnight to Charlie McLaughlin’s Orchestra .
 He prepared for college at Boston English High School and was graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a Bachelor of Science degree in civil engineering in 1923 .
 Mr Haven first worked from 1923 to 1928 in his father’s firm of Haven & Hopkins, engineers and architects, in Boston, Boston .
 Recently for more than 20 years he had been New England representative for Jervis B Webb Co., materials handling firm, of Chicago . Later he was associated with the Lampson Conveyor Co. and recently for over 20 years, he was New England rep. He was recently associated
 He was a former member of William Parkmun Lodge of Masons . He was also a member of the Second Congregational Church of West Newton .
 His hobby was antique clocks and he made some 25 to 30 grandmother and Massachusetts mantel clocks . He also made Simon Willard banjo clocks .
 "An excellent craftsman, his models were beautifully done and universally admired," he said .
 In 1927 he married Elizabeth Carpenter of Newton and Martha’s Yineyard, and after their marriage they lived in Reading until 1939, going from that town to Newtonville . After their marriage, he moved from Reading to Reading, then from Newtonville, then Newtonville.
 Recently he married Marguerite Blanchard of Wellesley, who survives him with two daughters, Mrs. Mrs. Blancheard .
 His mother, living in Woifeboro, N.H., and two brothers, Roger W., of Wayland, and Dr. Haven, of Wellesley, are among his four grand-children . He also has two brothers and two sisters .
 Memorial services were held Sunday afternoon at the Second Church Congregational in West Newton . The minister, Dr. Dr. James Moore, was the minister of the deceased .
 Funeral services were held Friday, November 17, at the McLaughlin Funeral Home in Woburn with the Rev. James A Cullen of Winchester . The Rev. Cullen was a member of the Winchester family .
 Dr. Ftizgerald died November 14 at the Deaconness Hospital at the age of 85 .
 She came to this country as a girl and for 75 years made Woburn her home . She has lived in the UK since she was a girl . She was married to a man who died of a heart attack .
 She assisted her husband in conducting the business in emergencies often driving one of the old horse-drawn hacks in all sorts of weather .
 She continued the business after her husband’s death and into the era of the motor-driven cabs . The business is still in the Fitzgerald family, being run as a taxi business by her son, Frank .
 Fitzgerald’s care of her family and as her own children grew up she continued her interest in her grandchildren . Fitzgerald continued to care for her grandchildren as she grew up . Fitzgerald's care of the family and her love of her grandchildren led her to be a grandmother .
 Thanksgiving Reflections Page Four . The Winchester Star looks at Thanksgiving in its entirety .
 Pilgrims gathered together for the first Thanksgiving feast through the dangers, suffering and death that beset them . It is thanks to God; gratitude to the Divine Spirit that has brought those gathered together .
 Thanksgiving to these same Pilgrims was not primarily a time for rejoicing, though they had every reason to rejoice . Thanksgiving was a time of rejoicing for the first time of year .
 It was a time to he grateful for the blessings of a Divine Providence and to ask God’s help in the years that were ahead . Rather than a time of gratitude, it was to be grateful for blessings of Divine Providence .
 The Pilgrims felt they had much for which to he thankful, and it was significant that their thanks was of giving, not getting . The Pilgrim's thanks were of giving not getting, not receiving .
 They wanted to return to the nc responsible for their well being something of the gifts they had received at His hands . They wanted something to be returned to them that had been given to them .
 Today Thanksgiving is much more the holiday than it is the holy day . The emphasis has been placed more on the mundane than on the spiritual aspects of the day .
 Thanksgiving has become a day for having fun rather than an occasion for acknowledging our blessings . A glance at the observance of Sunday today, and a comparison with the Sabbath conduct of bygone days, indicates why Thanksgiving is more fun than a holiday .
 The pilgrims, in their own way, enjoyed themselves on that occasion, and of course in olden times any sort of feast was the best sort of pleasure . The pilgrims' feast was a feast of the best kind of pleasure in old times .
 Governor Bradford called attention to the good things to eat and drink that were a part of the observance . Governor Bradford on that first Thanksgiving called attention . The first Thanksgiving was the first Thanksgiving of Thanksgiving .
 Pilgrims did not permit their holiday rejoicing to set aside, or even overshadow, the principal reason for the first Thanksgiving, which was gratitude to God . The first Thanksgiving was a Thanksgiving of thanksgiving to God, not rejoicing .
 In our enjoyment of Thanksgiving we would do well to remember the Pilgrim conception of this day . To remember the ‘giving’ part of Thanksgiving, to pay tribute to the Divine Providence which has blessed us .
 We have every reason to he thankful on this Thanksgiving, thanks to freedom of speech, freedom of worship and freedom of the press . We are especially grateful for the strengthening of that feeling of brotherhood that is prompting the more fortunate to help those in need .
 "The beginnings of mutual understanding and tolerance among men, creeds and nations is yet another reason for deep satisfaction"
 Let us not entirely forget the more sober side of Thanksgiving this year . Thanksgiving is a sober holiday .
 Perilous as arc the times, and dangerous as are the days in which we live, we still have much for which to render thanks . We still have a lot to give thanks to those who have helped us to survive .
 "The heritage we have received from our Pilgrim fathers, in itself is cause for thanksgiving and the dedication of ourselves anew to the principles for which they were willing to risk their lives in a strange new world," says President Obama .
 When liquor stores open and grocery stores close on Saturday holidays, the time has come to take a good, sober look at our Blue Laws .
 One of the first things that hits you in studying the Blue Laws is their complexity . The Blue Laws are complex and difficult to understand .
 We're not going to settle this issue in one editorial, no matter how sore we were last Saturday that we couldn’t buy hot dogs to go with our beans . And we’ve not settled this issue with one editorial . We’ll not settle it in one
 The Sabbath was made for man and not vice versa, according to the Bible . After all, if the* Bible tells us that we are to keep the Sabbath holy, it also says that the Sabbath was not for man .
 State laws forbid hunting on Thanksgiving, but we know that the Pilgrims did .
 We don’t like schoolboys to play ball on Sunday, because it’s not ‘holy,’ yet many of us think nothing of sitting hack with a can of beer in our living rooms and watching <>1,000 hooting fans see the Giants
 We forbid folks to buy raw clams at the shore, hut they eat fried ones there by the ton . People eat fried clams by the end of the year at the beach .
 We say no mowing lawns on Sunday, while shooting galleries and Ferris wheels are a scant half-hour away . Ferris wheels and shooting galleries are a short distance from the city .
 Big ads insist that families that play together stay together . While at our seashores gift shops are closed to the family on the one day they can go out for a drive .
 We close five and ten cent stores while drug stores sell everything from cosmetics to clocks, not to mention paper back hooks and, in some places tee shirts . We close 5 and 10 cent stores, while we close 5-10 cent stores .
 Horse-racing was perfectly fine on V eterans Day, but officially, at least, buying Pablum for baby was not . Horse racing was fine on the day, but official, it was not.
 Our readers gripe with some of the things they gripe about the government . CNN iReport: What do you think? Share it with us .
 The Blue Laws are irrational and encourage disobedience and evasion . They discriminate against some and favor a few businesses, The Blue Law says .
 If you close supermarkets in Massachusetts, folks can drive up to New Hampshire to get hamburg . New Hampshire can also get a hamburg in New Hampshire .
 There’s always a way to do what folks have to do, with or without official approval . There was no official approval for the move, but there was a way of doing it .
 Ban a hook and you increase its sales; forbid liquor consumption and you create bootlegging . Ban the hook and increase sales; ban liquor consumption creates bootlegging . Ban a . hook and . increase its . sales . ban a hook .
 It’s the old human story of angering folks into doing something, even if they don't want to, because you tell them they can’t, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: It's the old story of people angering into doing
 We stress, once again, that we are not advocating one policy regarding the Blue Laws as opposed to another . We stress that the Star is not advocating a policy regarding Blue Laws .
 Our point is that whatever the Sunday laws should he should he, they should he be fair and consistent . We are happy to clarify that the laws should be fair .
 "They should represent the interests and wishes not just of a self-appointed elect but of the entire community," she says . And they should represent not just the interests of the self-elected elect, she adds .
 If a Legislature votes to close grocery and clothing stores, it should also close liquor stores and race tracks . Liquor stores, race tracks should also be closed, lawmakers say .
 State retail business to lose $20 million in one ‘holiday,’ it might give some thought to closing vegetable stands on the highways . The state retail business is expected to lose more than $1 billion in one holiday .
 Every so often in these columns we stress the importance of zoning and urge those who feel its an unwarrantable intrusion in the rights of property owners to take a look at communities where there is no zoning .
 So many communities have had irreparable damage done them hv lack of authority to prevent improper development . It's hard to understand why those without the protection of zoning do not institute it as soon as possible .
 Marblehead Harbor is a popular tourist spot in Marblehead, Massachusetts . Developers have been looking at the area for 1 i or 11 stories apartment buildings .
 Not at present a single zoning ordinance in effect along tin 1 harbor that would prevent a developer from erecting such buildings, or indeed anything he wants to build .
 All that is to be done is to commence construction within ‘JO days’ alter a building permit is issued . All that lias to do is to begin construction within 'JO days'
 Phis fact and repeated rumors that property along the waterfront can he had is giving some Marhleheads food for serious thought . Phis is fact and rumors that he had a waterfront can .
 Marblehead Harbor setting would feel much more secure if the land there was protected by zoning . Undoubtedly those who do not want to see any change in the picturesque setting would be more secure .
 Winchester has such protection, but from time to time efforts of the i Manning Board to change or modify zoning, tightening restrictions in the public interest, are strenously opposed . Winchester has no such protection . Winchester is a city that has the right to have its own zoning authority, but the
 This is not to say that changes in the zoning By-laws should be voted without investigation or that the 1 Manning Board can do no wrong . It is not that changes to the zoning by-law should be made without an investigation .
 Winchester is one of the better communities of the Greater Boston area in which to live . By and large, however, there can he no doubt that zoning has helped Winchester .
 We would wager Marblehead, or those who would keep intact the attractiveness of this picturesque town, would he glad of the protection that zoning give& to u b here in Winchester . Winchester residents would be glad of zoning protection .
 The RBESIDENI S MOIHER visited Winchester Infant Saviour Guild at the McCall Junior High School last Sunday . The Queen's visit was part of a celebration of her visit to Winchester .
 A serious error has crept into the discussion for or against shelters — that it is a moral issue . It's a serious error to say shelter is moral issue, but it's not moral, it's an issue .
 I doubt that anyone would seriously question the desire for peace of the vast majority of ppoplo in all lands . However, what peace means to each individual varies greatly .
 In the Western world at least, freedom is a necessary ingredient of anything that can truly be called peace . Freedom is necessary in order to make peace, but freedom is also necessary in peace, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 'How to attain it is a matter of individual belief and choice, with due regard to the rights of others' How to attain the right to freedom of expression is individual belief .
 To imply that the man who builds a shelter for his family is resigned to war and will automatically give up working for peace is as mistaken as the implication of many on the other side of the argument . The man who does not build one cares nothing about his family ands refusing to face
 Each individual must take facts and opinions available to him, and choose the actions he feels are most conducive to the continuation of civilization in the world .
 In this context, I do regret the tendency of many to give as proven facts much that is, at best, a matter of educated guessing . The “facts” varying according to which expert is chosen for quotation .
 The probability of attack, the total megatons delivered, the hypothetical enemy’s ability to deliver the bombs accurately for the greatest devastation, and the actual damage that would be caused under war conditions are all guesses work . Let us pray they remain that way.
 Those who choose to follow President’s request to build shelters have been severely ridiculed, and called everything from ostriches to warmongers . Taking precautions to increase the chances of survival, and recover from disaster is not a new idea .
 Most of us buy fire insurance (and support a fire department) not because fires are inevitable, but because they are possible . Most people buy insurance not because of the possibility of a fire, it's because it's possible .
 Many pay etxra to have seat belts in their cars, not because they care nothing for the slaughter on our roads, but because they do . Many pay for seat belts because they don't want to be part of the slaughter of our roads .
 He also does not cease to work for safer and saner driving . "Death or mutilation can happen to him and his, and is not just something that happens to other people"
 Let us not have our eyes so firmly fixed on peace at the international level, that we forget that Christian love and forbearance, that makes peace possible, is learned here at home . Christian love is the key to peace in the Middle East .
 "To impugn the character and motives of the person with whose ideas or arguments we disagree breeds anger and hate," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In conclusion may 1 suggest that civilization is not a matter of industrial capacity which gives us fine homes, cars, and a high standard of living, nor is it in churches, schools, or works of art, dear as they are to us .
 civilization rests in the heart and mind of man and cannot be destroyed until man, with his capacity to love beauty and to worship God, is himself destroyed . No, civilization rests on the heart of man .
 The Star suspects that a better word than “guesswork” might be found to describe scientific estimates of the effects of nuclear bombing and fallout . It is not the first estimate of how much damage has been caused by fallout .
 One of the more hopeful aspects of the cold war is, in fact, the remarkable consensus of American and Soviet scientists on the genocidal effects of both . The Cold War was one of the most brutal periods of the Cold War .
 For informed discussions of this issue, see Professor John M Fowler’s “Fallout,’ and Norman Cousins’ “In Place of Folly,” and the November 18, 1961 issue of The Saturday Review .
 In the last is published is published a candid appraisal of the nuclear test hazard prepared by Soviet scientists before the recent tests made by their government .
 We seem to forget that the Russians fear us and our nuclear power, as much as we fear them . Put we seem to have forgotten that the Russian fear us, as well as the Russians .
 Many people still visualize war as a nice, neat, little war in a little meadow with a band of soldiers fighting . And I do not think that many people realize that if a war were to erupt, it would not be a nice and neat war . Many people don't realize
 It will be a terrifying, destructive, nuclear war, and not many will live to tell of its horrors . Not many will survive the war, but many will be shocked by the horrors it will inflict .
 Those who retire to your shelters as the ‘inevitable’ war approaches are folding up centuries of the progress of man and adopting the primitive life of a cave man .
 Some stolid Americans have withstood all the bombs and radioactivity, etc. But let us now assume that some stolid American has withstood the bombs .
 "Above them circle poisonous clouds, gathered from the nuclear bombs, that will grow, encircle the earth, and eventually fall and either kill or sterilize all living matter" "The clouds are gathered from nuclear bombs," says author .
 If a war comes, it will not be one bomb dropped, or two, but many, and there is no end to the resulting destruction . "There will be many more bombs dropped, and many, but there will be no end," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The thing for us* to do is not go around building our hopes of survival in a bomb shelter, but build our hopes, in the idea that there will not be a war . We* should not build ourselves in bomb shelters, but in the hope that there won't be a
 "Exert your energy in prevention of this war, not in your shelters," she says . Exert energy in preventing the war, she says, "not in shelters, because* they are going to be of very little use"
 Zen says we must transcend crippling word-fictions of the intellect and gain direct awareness of reality unimpeded by concepts . Zen says to achieve this freedom, according to Zen, it must transcend the crippling word fictions . Zen: We must transcend word-fiction and gain a direct
 There is nothing more typically Eastern than Zen, Zen, nothing more obviously alien to the rationalist tradition and word systems of the West . Zen is a form of Zen that is typically Eastern, not Western .
 I do not refer to the commercial exploitation of Buddhism in which Boho beauties recline in the lap of the Kamakura Buddha to sell book ads . Pre-Ivy League boys stand on the shoulder of bronze Gautamas to sell Madras jackets .
 For the Beats, Zen is not the climax of a life of study and self-discipline as it was for the scholars and poets of the East . The Beats, however, are not the same thing as the scholars, poets and poets in the East.
 It is a mask for ignorance and indolence, it is a rationale for amorality and incontinence, it says . It is also a justification for amoralism and infidelity .
 Fromm’s view, Zen and psychoanalysis share a common insight and objective . Fromm: Zen and psychoanalyanalysis share an objective: Zen . Zen is a formative form of self-expression .
 Human sorrow is caused by a man’s false sense of separateness from the world, says the authors . Their insight is that human sorrow is due to a man's false sense .
 Their objective is to free men from the prison of egotism and childish dependence, enabling him to accept the world as it is with maturity, creativity, compassion, compassion and a capacity to love .
 "Free association" is the method of “free association,” a spontaneous play of thought and emotion . The method of "free association" has been a key part of psychoanalysis .
 Fromm says we “bypass logical, conscious, and conventional” thought patterns, allowing insight into the unconscious sources and correction of maladjustment . Fromm: We bypass logical and conscious thought patterns .
 Fromm says he has found in treating patients that the prime source of suffering is their sense of alienation from the world, other men, and themselves . Like the Zen masters, he says, he finds in treating his patients that their alienation from world, others and themselves is their prime source
 The patient feels cut-off, frustrated, half-alive, denied opportunity for self-fulfillment . The patient is cut off, frustrated and half-Alive .
 Through regression to a state of infantile dependence, or insanity, or death; and . Through a condition of being “fully born,” e. developing awareness, reason, and the capacity to love to that point at which, no longer frustrated by our lack of omnipot
 Society is a censor. a filter between us and the world, inducing our minds to accept as “normal” or “acceptable” only those ideas and conventions that seem to ensure its survival . Society is not only a filter but a filter that ensures the survival of society
 Fromm says he's concerned with something more than ensuring social conformity . Fromm: "I'm concerned with what I want to do more than ensure social conformity"
 They are concerned with “universal man, the whole man rooted in the cosmos,” whose seat is in the unconscious . They say they are concerned about ‘universal man’s seat in unconscious.”
 Their aim, therefore, is to penetrate the social fictions of the conscious mind, to bring the unconscious into a state of free expression, and to permit the once alienated individual a sense of solidarity with his fellow men . The aim of the work is to provoke the social
 The end of Zen is the end of psychoanalysis, a condition of “enlightenment” or “health” in which subject and object, man and his world are once again united . Zen is an ideal condition of "enlight enlightenment" or "health"
 Psychoanalyst stresses that he cannot ‘save’ the patient . Like the Zgn masters, however, he cannot "save” the patient, however .
 "He can at best guide him, as a participating observer, into that complete attunement with reality both inside and outside of him which is wisdom"
 As in Zen, as in the teaching of the historic Buddha himself, there is no external refuge, no finished set of answers to which one may turn . Zen is no place to turn to, but as in Zen there are no external answers .
 Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 • 1954 The Wincheater Star .
 I have read the editorial and the letters in the Star concerning fallout shelters, i believe that great harm can be done by letting n<i«expprts present what they believe are the facts . I believe great harm is not done by allowing n <i«Exppr
 I urge you to publish the latest release from the Atomic Energy Commission regarding the effect of nuclear blasts . I therefore urge you . publish the . latest release .
 You will find it, for instance, in the Christian Science Monitor of November 13 . The story will be published in November 13.
 As a nuclear scientist, although not a bomb expert, I feel qualified to help clarify some questions concerning the nuclear radiation released during and after a blast . I'm not an expert on nuclear radiation, but I'm qualified to answer questions .
 Most of the errors and inaccuracies, in the part of the editorial covering this topic, were expertly pointed out by Messrs. Messrsrs. O'Neill and his colleagues .
 Brooks and Boecker need to clarify some things, but I believe some further clarification is needed .
 The following points represent mostly observed indisputable facts but also a few educated estimates . The following is an attempt to make a point for the world's first time .
 When 1 speak about nuclear radiation, it may help the uninitiated reader to think of X-rays, although the nuclear radiation from a bomb is somewhat more complex . The nuclear radiation in a nuclear bomb is more complex than the X-ray .
 A nuclear bomb will for a split second during the explosion release a tremendous amount of primary nuclear radiation . Primary nuclear radiation will be released during the blast . Primary radiation is released during a nuclear explosion .
 The hulk of this primary radiation will be stopped by a few miles of air or 10 feet of concrete or dirt . The radiation is the main source of the U.S. nuclear bomb .
 Primary radiation is not generally regarded as a danger to anybody far enough from the explosion to survive the heut and blast effects . The primary radiation is therefore not generally considered a danger .
 The explosion leaves a residue of radioactive material in the air and, what is more important, if lion also takes time to build up i its harmful effect .
 If it were only for l’all| out, Dad would either be able to I get home in time, or he would stay | in another shelter and get home afI ter a few days . Dad would stay in the shelter, or stay in a shelter for a few
 Fallout radiation has about the mme penetrating power as the X rays currently used in deep-seated cancer therapy . Fallout radiation is similar to the radiation currently used to treat cancer patients .
 Any material, preferably heavy substances be tween you and the sources, will cut down on the intensity . Any material you want to use will need to be tweened up .
 Bombs exploded high above the ground produce very little local fallout . The discussion above has been concerned with the fallout of the bombs exploding high above ground .
 The radioactive residue from the bomb material will be present, however, and most of it will be carried up to very high altitudes . Most of the radioactive residue will be found in the area, but most will he carried it .
 Some of the confusion that was evident in the Star’s editorial and also in the answer to Mr Boecker can be traced back to this word usage by the sources of information .
 What 1 have given above are cold data, presented for the purpose of removing misconceptions about the effects of nuclear radiation from an explosion and from fallout .
 The matter-of-fact way in which people with the knowledge talk about these things does not reflect disconcern, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The matter of fact in which . people with . the knowledge of these things is not a matter of
 It may reflect the fact that we have lived with the truth for several years already, and that w»» are striving to make the best out of a very unpleasant situation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I believe they deserve evthe explosion is at or near ground erybody’s support and respect . tons of dirt will be made radioactive by the primary radiation and sucked up .
 It is very important to note that it is only the primary radiation, because of its natural anti enormous j intensity that will induce radioactivity in other materials . The radiation will also emit radioactivity into other materials, such as hydrogen and helium .
 The radioactive materials are carried by the wind over a wide area and settle on the ground in the form of dust . The radioactive material is carried by wind and settles in the air in a large area .
 Harald A Enge 26 Prince Avenue in reply to Mr Enge Ed. The dust particles are dust particles . Sincerely .
 The Star claims no more expertese on the nuclear act as tiny X-ray machines emitbomb and on fallout than does Mr ting .
 We have studied which is harmful in the same way the abundant literature on this as an overdose of X-rays but is in matter published in books, pamphlets and newspapers .
 Neither people nor food become radioactive by being exposed to the radiation from fallout . It should be clear from the above that neither food nor people nor people become radioactive .
 There is no reason for not helping your neighbor who has few yeurs. There is therefore no reason to not help your neighbor . Helping your neighbor is no easy thing to do .
 We consider it our moral duty to report this material and encourage the local debate the subject of human survival deserves. And we consider it a moral duty .
 Our correspondent's point of view represents that of one scientist . Moreover, our correspondent’s point of mind represents that .
 The fallout takes time to settle I ported on page one of the New to the ground. As everybody certainly realizfare, issued a joint statement rees .
 In the eventful search for treasure, players move ships to various islands and ports of call . Players move ships into various islands, ports and ports to find out what treasure is there .
 The present writer might add that if he thought he thought a shelter would save his wife and himself he would build one . He might also add that he would also build a shelter for himself .
 He has the alternative of reporting expert data which can help build a world in which men will see that there is no sure shelter but peace .
 It is regrettable that so few scientists concern themselves with the contamination of vegetables and milk, for example, that has resulted from radioactive fallout even from nuclear tests suspended in 1958 .
 Even in 1957, a midwest rainfall contained so much radioactivity as to induce one million Geiger counts per minute per gallon of rain water . The radioactivity was so high that it induced a Geiger count of 1 million per minute .
 From the tests suspended in 1958 alone some 3,600 cases of leukemia are estimated, not to mention bone cancer, genetic mutations, stillbirths, and diseases of the muscles and thyroid, to indicate just a few .
 The present fallout levels will double when the 1962 spring rains bring a large portion of the radioactive material to earth . It is estimated, moreover, that as a result of the Soviet Union’s recent terroristic bomb tests, the present fallout will double .
 We refer to the incredible horror of nuclear fire storms and blast damage . We call it the 'incredible horror' of nuclear blast damage and nuclear fire storm .
 The Star has reported the scientific consensus that 92 to 94 Vr of the American and Soviet people would perish in a 30,000 megaton mutual attack . Yet our reader fails to deal with this fact .
 In this connection, we refer our readers to the continued pronouncements of objective scientists like Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 Dr. Ralph Lapp, who are not committed to the defense of military policies of the Administration, have tried to alert the world to the savage truths of nuclear war . Lapp: "With some 6,000 of the world’s scientists, have . tried to . alert
 The tables show that the 20 megaton bomb which is 1,000 times bigger than the 20 kiloton bomb, (the one dropped on Hiroshima) has a blast radius of between 5 to 6 miles and an incendiary radius of 30 miles . The 20 megat bomb, the one dropped
 First Clans, of tin* Order of the Federal Republic of Germany, from Dr. Dr. J. Paul von Stauffner, of Germany .
 Philipp Schmidt-Sglegel was chairman for Massachusetts of the Natonal German Contest for High School Students . He was awarded the title in recognition of his services as chairman of the contest .
 Schinidt-Sglegel, Germany s consul ut Boston, (luring special ceremonies held at J lilts. Boston) Germany's consul generalate in Boston, Massachusetts .
 One of the most harmful effects of the fallout propaganda is that 300,000 people in a single night; j it promotes the idea of the inevitat Hamburg, some 70,000; at Tokj ubility of nuclear war. yo, some 200,000. yo .
 Civil Defense Director: Writeshelters afforded no protection in ten storms . Civil Defense director: "Their occupants were in the last issue of the Star"
 Within the incendiary radius of a big bomb. . . . The basement shelter becomes a fire trap. Within the . incendiary radius . of a . big bomb, the basement shelter become a . fire trap .
 The idea that fallout constitutes the principal hazard to the civilian population is a derivation from military theory . The idea of fallout constitutes a hazard to civilians is a result of military theory.
 Military installations have been constructed so close to civilian population centers as to assure the destruction of the latter in the event of war . But again, as Mr Piel goes on to show, as the Star pointed out in its repiy to Mr Boecker last week .
 Let us debate the increasing brutality and moral decline in human reflations already in evidence throughout the world as a result of the nuclear threat . And, perhaps most important, let us debate . The increasing brutality in human . reflations is already in . evidence throughout . the world . as a
 The time has come to replace unwarranted optimism and half truths with a realistic confrontation of the nuclear facts of life, such as war .
 "The growth of such a belief weakens our will to find peaceful solutions for international difficulties," says Putin . Putin: "We need to find a peaceful solution to international difficulties"
 It may not be fair to call the fallout shelter propaganda “a cruel hoax,” but its effect is the same . Since undoubtedly there was no deliberate intention to deceive the public, it may not call it “cruel hoax .”
 Let us at least have frank discussion of all the implications of the program. Let's not be afraid of the implications, we need to be open to the idea of a government program .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "I'm glad you're giving people the opportunity to express opinions on one of the vital issues of our time" Sutter says he hopes the public will hear the wisdom of promoting a program of fallout shelters .
 I am one of those who believe that the Star is performing a public service in presenting the arguments against the shelter program . I believe that . The Star will continue to present the arguments in its opinion on shelter .
 For Mr Brooke to call your editorial “harmful,” “near treasonable” is ridiculous, he says . Mr Brooke calls it ‘harmful’ and ‘treasonable’ He says it’s ridiculous.
 Winchester Unitarian Choir under the direction of Mary Rantom Witham will sing several selections from Handel’s Messiah in the pre-service concert on Sunday November 26 .
 The soloists are Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney Blanchard, Jr., baritone . Estelle . McNeely is the soloist .
 Saville Davis lecture was postponed because of the hurricane in October . The lecture will be held November 30 in Hadley Hall, Church of the Epiphany .
 Three models, plus duplicate bridge boards and un advanced bridge boards . Un advanced course in contract bridge . Three models of bridge boards, duplicate bridge board boards .
 James Donovan of Arlington, has been assigned as one of the pioneer Sisters to open a mission Hospital in the African nation of Ethiopia . Donovan will complete advanced nursing studies and midwifery training at the International MissiopuKp Training Hospital in Ireland .
 She will proceed with two companions to Ethiopia, where they will *be joined by a fourth, and together they will open this first hospital . The hospital will be largely devoted to maternity work .
 Page Five Home Building Rate Higher . Here urday, December 2, from 9m. to 9m., will offer many opportunities for Christmas purchases, for games .
 She completed her religious training in the Novitiate of the Sisters at 1 Arlington Street . She graduated from St. John’s High School in Cambridge .
 Sister M Denise proceeded to the Motherhouse in Ireland for advanced studies . Upon successful completion of teh course, and receiving her R.N., Sister M. Denise proceeded .
 Sister M Denise will remain in Ethiopia fulsome years to assist in the solid foundation 6f the medical mission work in that country . It is expected that Sister M. Denise will stay in Ethiopia .
 The Medical Missionaries of Mary in the Novitiate House at One Arlington Street are planning a large Christmas Bazaar to take place on December 2 .
 It is hoped this year that a large portion of the proceeds may be devoted to assisting in the mission foundation of the Hospital to which Sister M Denise will devote her energies, as well as the obtaining and shipping of many necessary supplies .
 Thanksgiving Day Service of the First Church of Christ, Scientist, Winchester, Winchester . The Bazaar will be held on Saturday .
 The service opened with the singing of “Glory, honor, praise and pure oblations unto God the Lord belong,” Hymn 73 . The service was held at the Christian Science Center in Washington, D.C.
 Dalziel then read the Thanksgiving Day Proclamation of the President of the United States . The Thanksgiving Proclamation was read by President Obama on Thanksgiving Day .
 The sale will start at 9m. and continue throughout the day until all baked goods have been sold . All baked goods will be sold at the end of the day . The sale is expected to take place at 9.30m.
 Mothers are going to offer cakes and pies made according to their most treusured recipes . This being not too early for Christmas specialties, they have also been promised .
 Rolland Robison, the Ways and Means Committee Chairman, is in charge of all arrangements . Rolland . Robison is the committee chairman .
 Census Bureau issues annual report on number of private dwelling units authorized for conUruetion in 10,000 localities . Department of Labor, industry sources and the Census Bureau provide answers .
 Newconstruction, it is pointed out, is a mutter of great importance to every community since it affects the economy in many different ways . New construction is an important part of the economy .
 Besides work, it creates a demand for lumber, hardware, stoves, refrigerators and other durable goods .
 In Winchester, for its size, there was more home building in the year than in most parts of the United States . Winchester is a city of about 500,000 people . Winchester was the largest city in the U.S.
 The rate compares favorably with the national figure, 6 units per 1,000 population . The rate is higher than the average rate of units per person in the UK .
 Throughout the nation generally, residential construction was in the doldrums in i960 . Residential construction in the U.S. was in an industry slump .
 There was a drop of $2.2 billion, representing an 18 per cent cut in new dwellings . There was also a drop in $2 billion in new homes .
 Some authorities place the blame for the national setback on the high interest rates and the tight mortgage market that prevailed . Some blame the low mortgage market for the collapse .
 First Research Corp. says housing market will be affected “like a wild bull in a narrow' tunnel’s tunnel” Housing experts say it will affect the market like a ‘wild bull’ in a tunnel . First Research: It will affect housing market “
 We -Al & onverSe Wuk IJau Dh OJ-uppieAl Of OhcinL vAcuvincjA Page Six . Call PA 9-4190 .
 Vf*iting Day for public nt new Lynch Junior High School, Brantwood and Horn Pond B’rook Roads . Lynch Junior high School is located near the town's new Lynch High School .
 The Fortnightly Woman’s Club at the Crnwford Memorial Methodist Methodist Hall, American Home Day. November 27, Monday, Monday . American Home day.
 IAVV presents ‘Planning for Greater Boston’ at the new Lynch Junior High School, at 8:00m. Tuesday . Tuesday, IAVv presents “Planning’ for Greater . Boston .
 Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic . The clinic is a place where men can escape for a few minutes of peace, relaxation and grooming .
 Winchester High School students are making plans for college . Nasson College director James Colville Jr. spoke to Winchester students about college plans .
 Miss Meredith Reeves, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Reeves, was born in Winchester, Hampshire . Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company .
 Applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company for the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are available .
 Mrs. D Helen McAweeney of Woburn was the sister of Mrs. Hugh McAweeney who died November 13 at the Choate Memorial Hospital . Mrs. Helen McA Sweeney was the wife of Hugh McA Sweeney who died Nov. 13 .
 Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic . The clinic is a place where men can escape for a few minutes of peace and relaxation .
 Popular Tommy Drapeau, supervisor of Winchester School Buildings and Grounds, returned to work last week after a month’s illness .
 Miss Bonny Low, freshman at Vermont College, Montpelier, and Midshipman Richard Low, senior at Maine Maritime Academy, Castine, will be home for Thanksgiving holidays .
 Miss Carol Larson is a sophomore at Jackson College, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Larson . She is the daughter of Larson and Larson, from Larson's hometown .
 Joseph Richard Donovan of 7 Fells Road, are members of the freshman class at Connecticut College . The Donovan family is proud of their son's success at the college .
 His project was chosen as the most outstanding at the Driver Education Class . The project was named most outstanding in the class .
 Directors of Winchester Community Youth Club (PALi present two checks to Michael Baldino, New England representative of the Muscular Dystrophy campaign, for flic muscular dystrophy fund .
 Michael Baldino, Muscular Dystrophy representative; Mr Thomas J Dcrro. director; Miss Mary jane Lainbiasc, assistant director . Mr Baldino is Muscular Dstrophy. representative .
 Angelo Addonizio, was the lucky winner of the 17-day tour through Italy, recently awarded at Marycliff Academy’c Bazaar . The tour was recently awarded by the Marycliffs Academy'c Academy Bazaar.
 Winchester Kivanis Club offers the use of these items to Winchester residents . Winchester residents are encouraged to use the items in their homes .
 Chain link fence damaged behind Theatre Mobil Station and Reardon’s Texaco station . Police found four sections of fence damaged by police last Tuesday .
 Firefighters responded to a false alarm just outside the Mystic School last Wednesday at 9*28m.
 Engine 3, Engine 1, the ladder truck, the rescue truck and the chief’s car responded to this false alarm . Engine 3 and Engine 1 responded to the call .
 Kodak color prints and Christmas cards should be ordered now at the Winchester Camera Shop . Winchester Firemen extinguished a fire in the Town truck at the Water Department building last Thursday .
 The fire occurred at about 8:10m. and was apparently caused by a short circuit . The fire was reported to have been caused by an apparent electrical fault .
 The Winchester Hospital called to the fire station reporting a car on fire on Highland Avenue near the hospital . Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available .
 1961 Lincoln owned and operated by Jeffrey West of 30 Sargent Road . It was a 1961 Lincoln .
 The fire was under the hood and was soon brought under control by firefighters . Firefighters brought the fire under control under the control .
 Hours for the clinic, Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday 4:30 to 8:30. can Win Salomon , Sirman ^Jaclt Si gaged Mr and Mrs. Salomon .
 Barbara Ann Solomon is engaged to Airman 2nd class Lawrence L Nadeau, son of Mr and Mrs. Robert A Solomon of Wellingboro, England .
 He joined the Air Force in October of that year and is currently stationed at RAFB Alconbury in Huntingdon, England, where he is completing a four year tour .
 The Fortnightly American Home Day of the Fort nightly will be Monday, November 27 at Crawford Memorial Methodist Methodist Hall . Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist Hall is located in Crawford .
 Members are asked to bring donations before 10m. or to contact the committee before Monday for collection .
 Even if a member has no article to bring, she is asked to come and hid, or for the fun .
 For the afternoon program Mr J W\ Howard of the 85-year florist firm of Somerville will show' slides of “A Gift of a Rose”, followed by “Flower Arrangements for the Home,” using fresh flowers .
 Donald Wilson of Fontana, California, announce the birth of their third son, William Scott . William Scott was born November 13th at Kaiser Foundation Hospital in Fontana .
 Louis A Percoco of Holland Street announce the birth of their fourth child, second son, Michael . Michael was born November 1 at the Winchester Hospital in Winchester .
 Richard Butler, of Pearl Street Woburn are receiving congratulations on the birth of a daughter at the Winchester Hospital on Sunday November 19 . Richard Butler is receiving congratulations from his wife and family .
 A Reade Goodwin, of Rockport, Mass., announces the birth of their first child . Ann Margaret Goodwin was born on November 3, at the Addison Gilbert Hospital in Gloucester .
 Winchester Community Youth Club directors presented Mr Michael Baldino with two checks to be added to the Muscular Dystrophy Fund . Mr Baldino is a New England representative of Muscular Dstrophy .
 WCYC sponsored a dance from which proceeds were donated to Muscular Dystrophy . Proceeds from the dance will be used to raise money for muscular dystrophy sufferers .
 Only by their efforts and with their hard work were we able to help in the fight against Muscular Dystrophy . Only by . their increasing efforts, with their . hard work, we were able to . help with their efforts, we are able to raise awareness of the disease .
 We would also like to thank A1 Lamhiase for his untiring efforts to help make this dance, and many of our other dances, a success .
 A I always works in the background and seldom receives any notice for his efforts . I always work in a background and rarely receive any notice from his efforts. A I. I always always works behind the scenes, I said. I said I would be happy to be able to do so
 Their efforts in disk jockeying have also made our dances a success at all times . Their efforts have also been also made to make sure our dances are a success .
 Both men rarely receive any notice of their work especially when both men donate their time and efforts . They, too, often receive no notice from their work .
 Only with the help of these people have we been able to have more recreational functions for the youngsters in Winchester, Winchester . Only with this help we can have more activities in Winchester .
 Norma E Porras of 11 Hutchinson Road completed the 1961 Postgraduate Seminar in Pharmaceutical Chemistry offered by the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy, Boston .
 The program included a series of eight lectures given on Tuesday evenings from September 26 through November 14 . The lectures were intended to assist the practicing pharmacist in his modern role as therapeutic consultant to the physician .
 At the conclusion of the course on November 14, the fifty-eight registrants received certificates in recognition of satisfactory completion . The course was completed in November .
 Bruce Garvey of 17 Winchester Place is reported as doing fine at the Winchester Hospital with the fractured knee he sustained in an accident Monday night . Garvey Boy Is Injured In Accident .
 Young Garvey was hit by the left rear fender of a Ford station wagon driven by Harris Richardson, Jr., of 17 Cabot Street . Mr Richardson was driving the car when the accident occurred .
 Mr Richardson told police that he was backing up to gain traction to go east on Svvanton Street when the accident occurred . Mr Richardson said he was trying to get traction when he was hit by the accident .
 Miss Anne Kittredge, all of Boston, and Miss Emily Hood of Winchester check order lists for the Old \ ie Company s presentation of ““Romeo and Juliet” Saturday evening, January 20. at the Donnelly Memorial Theatre in Boston, benefiting the Regional
 Franco Zeffirelli's production of Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet” at the Donnelly Memorial Theatre . The Company's Boston attraction will be Franco Zefirelli’�s production .
 Order blanks are currently in the mail to Wheaton alumnae, parents, . parents, undergraduates on campus, and friends for the Saturday evening performance on January 20, 1962 .
 Mrs. Roger Blunt of Cambridge and Miss Sally Mohrfeld of Boston, Boston, attended the ceremony . Mrs. Blunt, Mrs. Mohrfield and Miss Blunt attended the event .
 James Fenske of Lexinton, Lexinton is the Club President and is an ex-officio member of the committee . James is the club president .
 Proceeds from this Wheaton benefit will he contributed to the Wheaton College Regional Scholarship Fund . Proceeds will be used to raise money for a scholarship at Wheaton .
 Richard C. 0’Brien, 93 Beacon Street, Boston 8, Massachusetts, and Miss Emily Hood, 6 Everett Avenue, Winchester, PA 91323. Richard C 0'Brien and Emily Hood will send their pictures to their respective homes .
 CROWN ROOM provides quiet elegance for your dining . Serves delicious meals and finest wines and beverages .
 A perfect rendezvous for relaxation with friends or business associates . A perfect place to relax and relax with friends .
 UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM is located in the Lion Room . Beautifully appointed for banquets, wedding receptions, business listings or luncheons . For special purposes, use the lion room for special events .
 Harvey of Lloyd Street recently underwent heart surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital . Harvey returned to his home last Saturday, and is getting along nicely, his mobility .
 Hubert O’Donnell was believed to he critically injured in an automobile accident recently . O'Donnell has been discharged from the Winchester Hospital and has returned to limited duty .
 In addition to a severe shaking up he sustained a broken heel which cuts down sharply on his mboility . The injury was also a severe shake-up .
 MEAT R & R PLUM PUDDING OCEAN SPRAY CRANBERRY CHASE FARM Cider VEGETABLES . Honeydew loupes also Fresh Pineapple also include Honey doupes . Specials run on Wednesday, Friday and
 Thanksgiving Dinn Specialty Department for your Hostess Gifts . Just Melons, Cranshaw Melons and Canta for your hosts .
 I Boxes, Charlotte Charles Fruit Cakes, Petits Fours Pastel Pastel late and many others . Charlotte Charles fruit Cakes and Petits Pastel pastel late . Charlotte's Fours Fours pastel pastels late and others .
 Wc take a great deal of interest and cure in outfitting the young gentleman . Specialists take great interest in clothing and clothing .
 Your desire to have him properly groomed heroine* is a special responsibility . Your desire for him to be groomed is a responsibility .
 You ean select an entire wardrobe for your hoy or young man with the assistance of our fine staff and tailor . We are happy to let you choose your own wardrobe .
 Miss Gayle Porter was recently elected vice president of the Christian College Riding Club . She attended the Bridlespur Hunter Trials on Saturday, November 18, at the Huntleigh Hunt Club, Huntleigh Village, St. George .
 Mail servicemen's names and addresses to WINCHESTER HOMEFRONTERS Public Library NOW Name of Serviceman Rank Serial Number Military Address Aberjona PHARMACY PREScripts .
 Members of the Riding Club who I made the one-day trip were accomitiated by Mrs. Porter .
 Claud Drew is one of the nation’s leading horsewomen and director of horsemanship at Christian. Christian. Drew . Claud Drew: "I'm a horsewoman. I love horses"
 The Riding Club members recently attended the American Royal in Kansas City, Mo. The riding club members recently rode in the city .
 No Charge for our Alteration Service Men's, Boys’ and Ladies’ Shops . 6 Mt. Mt. Mount Sinai Hospital is located in Mt. Sinai .
 TB Christmas Seal campaign chairman of Middlesex County thought of a method recently that some residents are using now as they send their checks to the Christmas Seal Campaign . Residents are using this method to send checks for the campaign .
 The original idea Anne suggested a short time ago not only helps to build better community health but also helps residents in balancing their checkbooks . Anne suggested the original idea a few weeks ago .
 Anne suggests that when checks are written for the current Tuberculosis Seal Campaign the writer includes the amount shown in the cents column of their checkbook . Anne suggests using the cents to make sure the amount is included in the column .
 Anne points out that many people can't increase their contributions by dollars . Anne: "If only 10 people sent in 10 cents more than their usual gift. . . well there’s another dollar... and think how it would be if a lot of people did the same thing."
 “Nickles and dimes can add very quickly to make dollars that fight tuberculosis in Middlesex County,” she said . Nickles and Dimes can be used to raise money to fight tuberculosis .
 Anne entered the TB Hospital in Waltham shortly after the first of last year . She hopes to get back to work after the Christmas holidays this year .
 Judge William F Henchey of the Woburn District Court had intended to read it during his recent address to the Winchester Rotary and was prevented by lack of time . He was prevented from reading it during a recent address by the Winchester .
 His name becomes food for the jackals; For us who have never been caught. Nor allow for the battles he’s fought; His name become food for . The name of the man who killed him is that of a man who has never been found .
 I'm willing to trust in Thy mercy; To keep the commandments Thou’st taught. I’m willing to . trust in . Thy mercy . To keep . the commandments thou'st taught .
 The proceeds will be given to Simmons College as part of this club’s annual gift .
 Mr DeSuze has become familiar to many in the New England area by presenting his experiences as well as pictures of his travels in various parts of the world .
 South and Latin America may hold the key to the defense as well as the economic health of this country . With other observers of foreign affairs, Mr DeSuze feels South . America may well hold the . key to . the defense of the country as well .
 Winchester club members working on arrangements and ticket sales include Mrs. Mrs. Winchester . Winchester members of the Winchester club are also hoping to raise money for the event .
 Autobridge is a bridge game you play by yourself anywhere with champions as partners . Autobridge lets you play the game by yourself against any other team or against anyone else .
 Winchester Well Represented At Assembly of State Church Council J I lie Rev. Rev. William Winchester . Winchester well represented at assembly of state Church Council . Winchester was well represented in 1960s . Winchester served as a state church leader .
 Knapp of W inchester, general >ocretarx of thesoo-i litirch Massachusetts C ouncil of C hurches, speak ini; to Protestant leaders from all parts of the state, stressed that “we be possessed by a sense of urgency
 Knapp was’ one of the speakers on November to at the annual meeting of the Assembly of tin* Massachusetts C ouncil of Churches, composed of twelve major denominations working together .
 The dav-long program began with an ecumenical service in historic Trinity Church in Copley Square . It was followed by a luncheon, afternoon business meeting, and a dinner program in the Hancock building .
 Knapp stressed that “each denomination in our fellowship has contributed some emphasis of importance to the total Christian Com munity.” Knapp said .
 The Rt. Sees Improved CatholicProtestant Relations with the Catholic Church . The retiring president of the Massachusetts Council, the retiring president, will speak at the end of his retirement .
 R. Anson Phelps Stokes, Jr., R. Bishop of the Massachusetts Episcopal Diocese, told the Assembly, "The great area of Protestant Catholic relationships can be faced in Massachusetts perhaps better than anywhere else in the country"
 Roy Pearson, dean of the Andover Newton Theological School of Newton Centre, points out that an attempt to establish the church’s self-image almost inevitably ends in the conclusion that the church is a schizophrenic personality .
 Ecumenical Service Bishop Stokes presided throughout the day . At the dinner program the benediction was given by a Winchester cleric .
 Knapp paricipated in the Ecumenical Service which included a vested procession of ecclesiastical leaders representing the 12 denominations in the Council . Knapp was the first member of the Council to attend .
 Dr. Dil gir gir, India; Nehemia Chukuzwbe Adimora, Nigeria; and Robert Yau fa, Tonga Islands . Dr. Dr. Yeau fa is Tonga's first Tongan Tonga Island resident .
 Councillor Knapp presented citations to six clergy and lay leaders in recog nition of their service to the Coun cil. Knapp also presented citations .
 Bishop Stokes retired alter two terms as president of the Massachusetts Council of Churches Election of Officers . Fleeted to succeed Bishop Janies K Mathews of the Methodist Church in New Eng land, and one of the four vice presidents elected was Dr. Dr. Gerald Stokes .
 Two of the others elected are former Winchester boys, Richard R Higgins of Dedham and Albert O Wilson, Jr., Jr., of Lexington . The other two boys elected are Richard Higgins and Albert Wilson of Lexington.
 Higgins and Wilson were among those receiving citations, for service as Council treasurer for five years and vice as chairman of the Council’s Department of Finance for the same length of time .
 Alexander Henderson of 0 Standish Lane and elected chai man of the Department of Finance was Mr Wilson . Mr Wilson was Mr. Henderson of No. Standish Street . Alexander Henderson was Mr . Wilson of Standish London . Mr. Wilson was the first person elected to be elected ch
 Among represen tatives elected to the Board of Directors elected from the Council’s Departments United Church Women was Mrs. Mrs. Wilson, who was elected to board . Wilson was the first woman to be elected to a board of directors .
 A new state-wide survey is underway for the purpose of obtaining information about church-going practices . The Council’s Department of Public Relations is conducting a state . opinion study among clergymen .
 The | the needs they think it should meet ‘THE GIFT BOX FAIR’ CRAWFORD MEMORIAL METHODIST CHURCH .
 Eileen Wolf of Fellsdale Close will hold a joint exhibition of oil paintings for two weeks in the lobby gallery of Shopper’s World in Framingham .
 Established in 1930 SKI OUTFITTERS to the ENTIRE FAMILY . We have been advisers to the leading skiers of the East for a generation .
 Latest models of HEAD KASTLE DYNAMIC KOSSKOPF NORTHLAND and other leading brands of SKIS • Release Bindings, Marker, Ski-free, Dovre, Star, Cubco, O-U Micronmtic .
 Trousers in wool gabardine including extra-long for both men and women . Trouser in wool tights available for men or women .
 Our policy is to sell only the latest quality equipment at reasonable prices . We are happy to let you know we have the latest equipment we need to buy .
 Harry Gilson, Superintendent of Schools, congratulated the Officials upon their selection of him as “coach of the year” Coach Knowlton . Gilson said they could have made no* better choice .
 Coach Knowlton believed the Officials had not chosen him because of his fine won and lost record as a coach, but for his character building and what he has done for the boys who have played under him .
 At this point the toastmaster called attention to two coming football players at Winchester High School attending the dinner with their fathers .
 Jack Daley, former Williams player, was next introduced and kept his audience in one long laugh . He recounted stories of Mattawamkeag, Maine .
 His remarks were strictly entertainment and it would be hard to name the more popular of his anecdotes . His remarks are strictly entertainment, and it's hard to think of more popular ones .
 Mattawamkeag's sick canines were chosen for the selection of officials for the big game . The selection of the officials for Mattawag’s big game was made in the same far-north town as the other .
 John D West was one of Winchester's greatest fullbacks in the old line-bucking tradition of fullbacks . Every one who played for Coach Knovton had the greatest respect for him .
 Henry Knowlton said he could think of nothing nicer than having his own three boys play football under Henry Knowllton . He said he hopes to see his own children play under Knowllon .
 Howard Niblock says he knew some Maine stories acquired during 14 years in Maine . Niblock said that he “knew when he was licked” and would not venture to tell his own .
 Mr Niblock said that the “coach of the year” award was a great, and well deserved tribute to Henry Knowlton .
 In closing he paid tribute to Henry Knowlton, saying he had never known a man of finer character nor one who did more for boys .
 Friends of football need have no fear of those who want to make nothing but intellectuals out of our boys, says Kozlowski . Knowlton is teaching the game, while footballers like him are teaching it, he says .
 Many, he said, look down on football, but properly taught, there is nothing like it to discipline the body, mind and spirit . Football is a discipline discipline that discipline the mind, body, spirit and spirit of football .
 Too much emphasis can be placed on studies as opposed to all around men like Barry Wood of Harvard and Albie Booth of Yale, he continued .
 Coach Knowlton told the meeting he had been the official in the recent Melrose game who called two fumbles against Winchester . As an example of the coach's relations with officials he said he was the official at the Melrose- Winchester game .
 Henry knew the official had called them as he saw them and in the way he thought it was right . Henry knew he had done what he thought was the right .
 Mr Kozlowski recalled working a game in which Joe Bellino seemed to be roughed up by an opposing player . He said Bellino was "taken down" by a player in the game .
 The official had not seen the play develop and asked Bellino if the opposing player had deliberately tried to rough him . Bellino said he did not see the play and asked if the player was deliberately roughing him .
 This is typical of the Knowlton teaching and influence of his boys, according to the speaker . This the speaker believed . This was typical . This is the typical . of the Teachlton . influence .
 Coach Knowlton, in his acceptance, said that the receipt of the trophy gave him the thrill of his life . Coach knowlton: "Receiving of the . trophy gave me a thrill of my life"
 He felt humble, he said, because there seemed so many coaches equally, or more deserving of the honor than he . He said he felt humble because of the lack of respect for coaches .
 Football had been good to him in many ways, including friendships he had made through the game, he said . Football had given him the chance to play in the Premier League for the first time .
 He listed many officials among his friends and expressed his admiration for all officials . He beieves that officials are a very necessary part of any game .
 He is not among those, he continued, who believe there is too much whistle blowing . He said he does not believe there are too many whistles blowing .
 Rules are made to be enforced and one of the lessons boys who play football must learn is that the game must he played within the framework of these rules . Rules must be enforced in order to ensure the game is played in the right way, says Mark Hughes .
 A respecter of officials himself, he told his audience he has always taught his boys to respect them . Even though he had encountered officials who “carried the ball” equally as well as his best backs, he always believed them to be fair .
 He closed his remarks with a sincere expression to the Association of New England Officials for the great honor shown him .
 Arvid Gustavson of 74 Salisbury Street, has been named Miss Capezio of 1962 . Arvig Gustavson has been awarded the title .
 Recently Miss Gustavson accompanied Miss Nashe on a special tour to Canada as a Goodwill Ambassadress for the New England Council . Miss Gustavsson accompanied Nashe for a tour of Canada in Canada .
 Sylvia is majoring in elementary education and plans to teach the third or fourth grade at Jackson . Sylvia plans to be in elementary school in the fall .
 While at Winchester High she was active in “Curtain and Cue,” the “Aberjona” and intramural sports, including budminton .
 “Miss Capezio’s” is also a member of the National Honor Society . She is a senior in high school .
 Sylvia Collins has modeled for Boston’s Field Day at Fenway Park before 35,000 people .
 She will have a chance to see the ballet, visit many fine restaurants and tour the historical and interesting sights of Manhattan .
 Mr J Edward Downes opened her lovely home at 84 Cambridge Street, on Thursday, November 16, for the regular meeting of the Winchester Garden Club . Mr Downes is a member of the Garden Club, Winchester .
 After a pleasant social hour, when dessert and coffee were served, Mrs. Sy mines, president, called the meeting .
 The club voted to send Christmas plants to patients at the Veterans Hospital in Bedford and to also ask each member to bring a gift for a child to the next meeting in December to he sent to the House of the Good Samaritan, a part of the Children’s Hospital, for
 Sears, Roebuck was again staging a contest in 1962 for community projects . A Flower Symposium would be held in Horticultural Hall from Thursday, November 30th through Sunday, December 3rd .
 Ross thanked those m embers who brought terrariums and it was voted to send them as a gift to the Fruit and Flower Mission . Ross thanked them for their support .
 Robert G Richards of Groveland, Mass., as the speaker of the afternoon . Richards was elected to speak at the end of the session .
 The members had a delightful afternoon listening to and seeing the lovely work of Mrs. Richards* subject was “Christmas at Home”
 Richards is not only an artist in creating, but an entertaining speaker as well . Richards is known for his work on art and music . Richards says he is proud to be able to share his talents with others .
 She made two separately lovely arrangements with angels and candles . Then with soft music of “Silent Night, Holy Night” in the background, she recited .
 As part of its years theme “Building A Better World” the Senior Forum of the First Congregational Church will have as its guests for the November supper meeting this Sunday . Students from other countries who are studying in Cambridge .
 Richard Roelofs, protestant chaplain to international students at M.I.T., will secure Christian students to speak . Christian students will also be able to speak at the event .
 This program will augment Forum’s winter time International Weekend when a larger number of students are invited irrespective of race or religion . This program is augmenting Forum's winter time Winter Winter Weekend .
 At the 11 o’clock Forum at Church service the chaplain will be Ned Niblock . Rich Cooper, Tom Dolben, Scott Erskine, Robert Cowles, Richard Halverson and Peter Hichborn serve as deacons . Frank Curtis, Robert Williams Larry Wh
 Have them laundered where pride in work well done is a tradition known to thousands . Have them washed in a place where pride is well done .
 Samuel Taylor’s ""The Pleasure of His Company” to be presented by the Unitarian Players on Fri| day and Saturday evenings, DeeemI her t and 2 nights .
 The cast works on stage with director Jacqueline Langdon Sibley ami her moral supporter Rev. Rev. Reverend Rev. Siblei . The play is set in New York .
 The set is being constructed by chairman Bernard Eyden, Robert Low, Frank Thayer, William Miller, James Wooley, and Edward Barker, with set decor by Mrs. Sibley .
 Edward Knowlton handles sound effects while Carleton Maley controls the lighting . Carleton M Maley handles the lighting for the show's special effects .
 Properties are being secured by Miss Gladys West and Miss Marjorie Bradford, and costumes by Mrs. Marjory Bradford .
 The corps of ushers is headed by John Harrison, John Lyman, and Charles Merenda . John Harrison is the son-in-law of John Harrison .
 Jayeees were president William Bird and John Patterson of the Winchester Jaycee Chapter . The Winchester chapter of Jaycees was located in Winchester .
 Mr Bird and Mr Patterson attended the quarterly meeting of the Massachusetts Junior Chamber of Commerce held at the Hawthorne Hotel .
 Winchester Jaycee chapter was represented at a quarterly meeting . The Winchester chapter cast its two votes to vote on the many bids on the agenda . This marked the first time the Winchester chapter has been represented in a meeting . This is the first meeting for Winchester Jayccee Jayce
 Guest speaker at the dinner before the board meeting was Frank S Giles, Commissioner of Public Safety of Massachusetts . Giles spoke on responsibilities and goals of the commission .
 Jaycee president Robert B Dillon, Jr., Jr., of Pittsfield, presided at the business meeting . The Peabody chapter served as host to the state organization .
 Winchester Jaycee members will meet on November 30th, the Jayeees next general business meeting . President Bird will report the details of this board meeting to Winchester members .
 Mellon’s third visit | to Winchester, and she is a memher of Winchester Grange, 343, which she joined during her visit j of 1955 . Mellon joined the Grange during her third visit to Winchester .
 Winchester Telephone Answering Service DEPENDABLE 24-IIOUR . Service TO BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL MEN FOR ELEVEN YEARS . Winchester telephone answering service has been in existence for 11 years .
 The first half of the schedule is nearing completion, and California is still in the driver's seat . Notre Danie, Alabama and Harvard trail in that order .
 California downs Bates, with the strong arms of Frank DiMambro and Angie Amico playing a big part .
 Of the 98 bowlers eligible for the attendance prizes, three won turkeys, Johnny Mangano, Bob Tatiro and Woozy Giacalone . Three bowlers were eligible for prizes, including turkeys .
 Walter Houston Clark, author of The Psychology of Religion, will address the parents and teachers of the First Baptist Church on Monday, November 27 at 8:00m. to speak on the psychology of religion . Clark is one of the outstanding resources on the description of religious growth in childhood and
 Clark is dean and chairman of the Hartford School of Religious Education . Clark is a past president of the American Association of Schools of Religious . Education .
 He will describe the origin of the concept of the divine, what the child's religion is like, the growth of religious maturity emerging from the tensions of youth, and the factors which lead to a variety of religious experience .
 This will be the beginning of bimonthly addresses at First Baptist, directed at describing to parents and teaching staff the broad scope and deep sources of re ligious education .
 WALT DISNEY'S 1 Pit riOlLULUU tmm ^teBOBBY IN TECHNICOLOR . Also features GOLIATH THANKSGIVING DAY BOBBY . Also featured on Broadway .
 Susan Hayward Dean Martin ADA also features on the ADA ADA . Susan Hayward, Dean Martin, Susan Hayward and Dean Martin .
 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Churl’ll Street, WincheHter, Mass., sells skis for $5.95 to $30 . NORTHLAND TOBOGGANS with Cushions are $28.50 .
 PArkview 9-1931 Qua fi lif ~3s Our l Host precious ^4 A Set . The Sad Story of Fisherman Koch is set to be shown .
 Margaret Atanasoff is teaching third grade at the Wyman School . She is a native of Lake Placid, New York, and taught in Webster, N.Y., for three years .
 Left to right, kneeling, John McGann, manager, Charles Tarbell, William Hood, Davis Blanchard, Scott Wallace, Thomas Sullivan, David Swanson, Robert Falzano, Stephen Poole, Gerry Cullen .
 Frank Provinzano, Kevin Collins, Bill Mahoney, Ron Vigliotti, Boh Little, Austin Broadhurst, Ron MacDonald, Gerry Kean, Gerry Kan, John Mongiello, Gerry MacKean, Larry Dalton, Alan Eugley, John Brenner
 Colin Gray, George Moran, Ralph Sexton, Austin Garvey, Paul Soucek, Warren Wilson, David Pywell, Willard Cannon, Paul Puzzo, Tony Silvestri and Willard Canner .
 In t lie inter-school* football match with Lynch Junior High School McCall won 22-8 . McCall also won a football match against Lynch Jr. High School Lynch .
 Barry Weeks, Gene Carey, John Bees, Steve Havelli, Garth Nelson among those kneeling for the band . Barry Weeks: "Weeks, Weeks, Carey, Bees, Nelson, Havelli" Garth: "I'm not going to be sitting down, I'm kneeling
 Hugh Fisher, John Cussen, Steve Harwood, Rick Cassaro, Paul Gentile, Pete Harvey, Bob Gilberti, Charles Dutoit, Jim Kirk . Jim Kirk. Hugh Fisher.
 John Stavros, Jim Crow, Marty Hill, Art Stafford, Bern Tuttle, Joe Franfaglia, Robert Crotty, Boh Kuhn. John Crotty . Marty Hill and Art Stafford. Art Stafford .
 You need a ■M0T0-0-M0WER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLED SNOW THROWER . Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3>/4 HP. snow thrower .
 Moil, Wed., Fri. evenings 5:30 to 8:30 Saturdays Saturdays All Du> nov9-t/ Exeter and both scored for their schools . Moil and Exeter scored for both schools. Moil: "Moil, Exeter"
 Exeter quarterback and former Winchester High School play caller, Neville Neville, is the son of Mr and Mrs. Neville . Neville is Exeter High School quarterback and ex-Winchester quarterback .
 Farrar scored two touchdowns in Andover’s 18-8 victory over the Red and Gray . The first in the second period on a one-foot buck, and the second in the third period on another buck, again from inside the one yard line .
 In both instances effective plunging by the big Winchester boy made the scores possible . In both cases, the scores were made possible .
 Neville, a fine passer, had little chance to show his wares in this department as the Blue Line was rushing him badly . Neville was a good passer, but was rushed too much in the first half .
 Exeter had converted a bad Andover pass into a touchdown with only a little more than a minute left in the game . He did however score the only conversion points of the game for Exeter . Andover scored a touchdown after a bad pass from Andover had been converted into a
 Neville circled right end to get into pay dirt and add two points to a losing cause . Neville circled the right end of the match to get in touch with pay dirt .
 James Parker, former National Congress of Teachers president; Richard Batcheldcr, house master at Newton villc, Mass. House master at New England villc .
 The American Chemical Society presents ""Quality — For the Consumer"" including a fallout filter for water . The society presents a range of products for consumers .
 As a high school girl she played flute in the band, which was good, she said, because it got her to all the games . Mrs. y i i i Mrs. Yi. yi
 Nancy Jane Foss is another Winchester girl who has returned to her home town to teach . She returns to her hometown to teach at the University of Winchester .
 Cartoon Show A Cartoon Show for Children will lie sponsored by the Sodality ot St. St. Louis County .
 Admission includes the chance to win one of the attractive door prizes . Admission, includes the opportunity to win a prize .
 Foss was born in New Rochelle, N.Y., but came to Winchester as a child and grew up in town . She graduated from Winchester High School in 1956 and from Conecticut College for Women with a B.A. in economics .
 Foss went to the Wyman School for five years and it is in that school that she is teaching the fourth grade this year . Foss is a fourth-grade teacher at Wyman . Foss says she is looking forward to teaching her fourth grade students .
 She and Glenn A Foss were married last August and are living in Waltham, Massachusetts .
 As ac-» tive sports she likes swimming and diving . In the field of music she plays the piano and enjoys the study of music appreciation .
 The second annual New England High School Hockey Jamboree will be held on Saturday, November 25, at the North Shore ring in Lynn . There will be over three and one half hours of hockey .
 Malden Catholic grabbed the North Shore Hockey League title and Archbishop Williams won the honors down on the South Shore . Archbishop Williams took the honors on the south Shore . Malden Catholics beat Archbishop Williams .
 The two are expected to have a lot to say about the championship in 1962 . And once again, these two have had a lot of say in 1962.
 Winchester paired with Hingham for the Jamboree . Winchester will play Hingham at 6:30 a.m. ET . Winchester and Hingham will play each other for the first time in a row .
 The old Latin “quid pro quo"" are the words that spring most quickly to mind as we contemplate the reason for his recently found devotion to the art of terpsichore .
 Charlie and Harry Damon have been fishing out of Harry’s place at Chatham on Cape Cod . For lo these many years Charlie and . Harry Damon has been fishing .
 From time to time they have been joined in their fishing by Marty Rubin, the barber, and Dr. Dr. Martin Rubin . Dr. Marty Rubin is also a fisherman .
 Dr. Dick Blanche is a pediatrician out of the Medical Building across the street from the Sport Shop . He is located in the medical building across from the Sports Shop . Dr. Blanche says he is proud of his work in the community .
 ""Grampa"" Koch’s absence from the Sport Shop has left his wife, ""Maggie"" riding herd on the shop alone . This fishing activity has taken place in the summer and leaves his wife alone .
 She did, however, venture a mild protest when ""Grampa"" casually mentioned he might take a fishing flyer with old Isaac Walton Damon during the early fall .
 The protest was not vigorous and neither ""Charlie"" nor ""Maggie” discussed the proposition further . As we said, "Charlie" and "Maggi" were not vigorous .
 The blue fish were so thick in Pleasant Bay that you could hardly force a boat between them, says Damon Damon . The fish were practically jumping out of the water to attach themselves to worthy fishermen's hooks .
 "Grampa” Koch thought about a little fishing flyer come that week-end . The boys, said Mr Damon, ought not to miss an opportunity like that .
 His bad luck of the summer faded into roseate hopes of better fortune to the extent that he had the temerity to broach the subject of the proposed safari to the Mrs.
 Maggie was surprisingly cooperative, acquiescing to "Grampa" joining Mr Damon and Dr. Dr. Damon . Maggie eventually agreed to join Dr Damon and Mr Damon .
 She did feel that if she did this small favor for ""Charlie", he should do a small one for her upon his return . She felt he should return to her after she did the favor .
 He knows better now that it is too late, for all Maggie asked in return for permitting him to partake of the fishing trip was ""Grampa's" attendance with her at Mr Curry’s dancing school this fall .
 Koch: Damon timepiece picked the morning of the big fishing day to go ""on the fritz,"" and as a consequence the intrepid fishermen got up at 3 .*30 instead of 4:30, which in Koch book is grounds for justifiable homicide . Koch:
 Mr Koch and Mr Damon got nothing for their fishing activity t>ut seaweed .
 The Doctor who did not fish, but just relaxed was the only member of the party who realized anything constructive out of the whole business . The Doctor did not catch the fish but just relax, he said .
 "Grampa’s"" total return from his entire fishing season, while unusual, would have little appeal for fishermen . As a matter of fact ""Grampa's" total return would have . little appeal to fishermen, as well .
 Included have been a whole tree, several logs, a sea anchor and two 35-pound sea skates .
 Koch has compromised his status as a free man by taking dancing lessons . Koch has taken dancing lessons for the first time in his free life .
 Open House At Noonan Sehool held at Noonan School on Tuesday, November 14, from 7:30 to 9:00 m. Parents had the opportunity to visit their children’s classrooms, to inspect their work, and to have an informal talk with their teacher .
 Room mothers were in charge of name tags for the parents as they entered the classrooms . The Room mothers in charge were also responsible for the name tags .
 A social hour followed in the auditorium where refreshments were served by Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The social hour was followed by a social hour in the audience .
 The splash party consists of one and a half hours swimming and fun in a heated indoor pool . The party will take place in one-and-a-half hours in the pool .
 The Winchester splash party is open to both boys and girls of all ages in Winchester, Winchester . The splash party will be held at the end of the month on October 31 .
 Buses will leave Winchester at 7:30m. from in front of McCall Junior High School on Main Street . They will return at 11:15m. and will return to Winchester at 11 a.m.
 Registration will take place at the police station from November 26 to December 1 . Registration will be open at the station in November 26 .
 Winchester Scholarship Foundation will hold its annual meeting in the Speech-Arts room of Winchester High School on Monday evening, December 1 at 8 o’clock .
 Officers will be elected and reports for the past year’s operations will be made . Officers will also be elected .
 Neil Borden, chairman of the Foundation’s general committee, will preside . Any one interested in the Foundation is cordially invited to attend .
 Technical training with supple mentary business subjects . One-Year Secretarial Course Technical training .
 Liberal Arts-Secretarial Course combined program of selected college-level studies and technical training . Liberal Arts and Secretarial Course is a combined program for students .
 M71 Alta Niu Tart, PravMaaao, ■THE WINCHESTER STAR ■ SAY WHEN TRADEMARK i tat av promo sEftvicES. imc.
 Excitement in this game runs high as players try to come neo but not to go over the given goal . The game is based on an NBC-TV program based on the NBC Sports Network .
 Today’s challenges point up the need for active thinkers, indi viduals with deep spiritual convictions . J Subi ect of Christian Science Lecture: "The Way of Active Peace"
 A member of The < ""’hri istian Scienee B oard of Led Lure ship, she spoke in St oneham Town Hall, under the j i u s p i c e s of The Mother Chun ■h .
 So these are the things we rnust conquer with love, spirituality, and righteousness . So these things are things that we conquer with our love and spirituality .
 Healings through wholly spiritual means of epilepsy, broken bones, and other serious conditions described by the lecturer .
 Miss Aultman held that enlightened prayer provides the answer to conflict of every kind . She said: "Enlightning prayer provides an answer to every kind of conflict"
 First, an embattled sense of being in conflict with everything in one’s environment . First, a sense of feeling in conflict against everything in your environment .
 This sometimes is just irritation with salespeople, members of one’s family or neighbors . This is sometimes just irritation .
 We often talk about our mistakes with anyone from near relatives to our Congressman, telling them what we think of their mistakes . Or perhaps it takes the form of carrying on silent, heated conversations with anyone .
 "This is the holy war which is an hourly striving to obey God and grow in Christian character," says Christian leader .
 It conquers the conflicts and frictions which pose as one’s human nature, replacing them with the realization of the divine nature, serene and satisfied .
 The doors will open on Wednesday at seven o’clock in the evening on a gala holiday event .
 Christmas Decorations and other interior decorating items will be featured along with booths of Needlecraft, Jams, Jellies, Foods, Candies . The event will be held on December 11, 2015 .
 There will be a Doll and Toy Department and a Children’s Shopping Center . The mall will also have a doll and toy department .
 The unique and highly successful Hat JBar of last year will he repeated and there will be many other features, including the ever-popular Apron Bazaar . Hat Jbar will be the first time it has been in existence since 2008 .
 The Center Group of the Woman’s Society will serve a Luncheon at noon on Thursday . The men of the church will also serve a dinner that evening .
 Mr Walter Fish is again heading this event and promises some unusual and enjoyable features as well as a fine meal . The event will be held in London at the end of October 31 .
 All day Thursday children will be cared for in a Nursery so that mothers may shop and talk knowing that their children are well taken care of . The event will be held in the Nursery .
 The entire event is open to the public and there is no admission charge . Glenic Kelley, a registered nurse and a member of the W.S.C. will have charge of the event . The event will be held at the home of a local hospital .
 Almost every day several people visit Winchester's shop who have never before done so . Winchester plays are on view at the Winchester plays on view .
 There are many more new residents in Winchester and nearby than we realize . The answer, of course, is that there are many new residents . Winchester is home to more than 1,000 people .
 We begin to feel as though we were a new shop just open instead of approaching our fourteenth vear on Winchester Place . We're looking forward to our fourth vear in the area .
 A number of changes are taking place resulting in a different shop, more like the pleasant arrangement of our Nantucket quarters . The new shop will be located in the same place as the former . The owner of the shop says he is looking forward to a more pleasant arrangement .
 Our aim is to feature only a few handmade items to complement small jewelry with color and size in ceramics, stained glass, prints from wood-blocks and occasionally paintings and sculpture .
 Macefield invention becoming widely recognized as The flower holder, which at each summer’s end is sold out . Macefield invented the flower holder .
 During our island summer season we have held to this plan for six years now . We enjoy it much more for limiting to stock to be found only in our shop .
 Wires and sheets of gold and silver are skillfully and beautifully formed to the exact drawings . They are made either for showcase stock or for special requirements like resetting diamonds and other gems .
 The Reading Pageant is a preliminary to the Miss Massachusetts and Miss America Pageants . It is a Preliminary Preliminary to Miss America and Miss Massachusetts .
 In the typical self-contained organization, some twenty to thirty pupils are assigned tq each teacher, and each group is placed in a classroom where most of the instructions takes place at the hands of that one teacher .
 He must provide as best he can for the range of individual needs and abilities in his group . The coach must provide best for the group's needs and needs .
 In addition, he must perform a variety of clerical duties and supervisory tasks on a non-instructional nature .
 Under the team teaching pattern, groups of teachers take joint responsibility for the instruction of a segment of the school population . In contrast, under . team teaching patterns, under the team .
 The clerical and secretarial needs of these teachers are cared for by a clerical aide . The aide is a member of the school's staff .
 Parents of the children in the team teaching program raise questions about the school's curriculum .
 Each year an achievement test is taken by every child in Winchester schools . Each year every child takes the test at every school in the city .
 The results of these tests were just one criteria by which all the pupils in the present fourth, fifth and sixth grades were grouped . Tire results were based on the results of the pupils' tests .
 There are one hundred and fifty four pupils in the team teaching project at Parkhurst . Parkhurst pupils are part of a team of 100 pupils in a teaching project . The project is based on the idea of teaching children at the school .
 Achievement results were recorded from high achievement to low achievement . The achievement results of a given subject were recorded as high achievement .
 During the first few days of school in September, inventories were given to each group to re-check results of the achievement lists .
 Re-grouping once again took place to ascertain correct placement of each child . Children were placed in various locations across the country .
 This pattern followed in each subject to be taught in the team teaching project . This pattern was followed by the pattern of teaching each subject .
 The teacher is selected for a given subject area for her specialization and existing talent . One teacher is for reading, one in mathematics, another for science, etc. One teacher for reading is for mathematics .
 Pupils are assigned to each teacher, for each subject, according to their placement of achievement . The pupils are then assigned to teachers according to the placement of their achievement .
 Children can now work together with others facing the same problems . This is not confusing to the children, for now they can work together . The children will be able to learn how to cope with their problems .
 This grouping makes it possible to place pupils into different ability groups for each subject, with sufficient flexibility . Pupils can be placed in groups of ability groups in different subjects .
 All the teachers involved in the team teaching project work together to meet the instructional needs of the children by a cooperative organization of planning . Different teachers assume responsibilities within the group .
 They plan together; they observe the plans carried out and onferences for evaluative discus sions of original plans and its operations . They observe each other's plans and their operations .
 The success of team teaching depends a great deal upon the acceptance, understanding, adaptability, confidence and faith in the program by each teacher . Each teacher must accept, understand, adapt and adaptability of the program .
 The enthusiasm of the children, and The cooperation of the parents in understanding the efforts of the school and staff in providing for the children educational facilities to the best of our abilities .
 From time to time you will he will he kept abreast with the progress of the project .
 Annual meeting of the mem bers of Winchester Hospital will be held in the dining room at the hospital, Highland Avenue, Winchester, Massachusetts, on Tuesday, December 5, 1961, at 8:00 o’clock, Eastern Standard Time, for the following purposes . Winchester Hospital Meeting
 To determine the number of directors to be elected and the term of y^ars for which they will serve . To determine how many directors will be elected, the directors must be named . The directors will then decide the terms of their terms .
 To ratify the acts of the directors, the executive committee and the officers since the annual meeting in 1960, as shown in the records of the board of directors .
 To transact such other business as may properly come before the meeting . The meeting will be held in New Year's Day .
 1962 Directors for Three years Alfred D Elliott, Gerald Y Hills, Mrs. Hills and Mrs. Allen O Eaton were nominated for three years . Mr. Hills was the first woman to be nominated for a three-year term .
 Robert G Ingraham Jr., James L Jenks, Jr., Robert B Kittredge, Carl B Pitman and Carl Pitman, Mrs. Mrs. Pitman were among the first responders .
 Trustee for Three Years William F Morton nominated Harold W Bates, Mrs. Bates for 1962 . Trustee of Three years William F. Morton nominated for 1962 Trusteeship of 1962 .
 Winchester girls will have an opportunity to compete for the title of “Miss Reading,” at the Reading Pageant . Pageant will be held in March under the auspices of the Reading Junior (’ham her of Commerce)
 Winner of the pageant will participate in the Miss Massachusetts contest in June . The winner will be crowned Miss Massachusetts .
 Applications for the Reading Pageant can he accepted from any community in which a local contest is not being held . Nils Nordberg, chairman of the entries committee, said applications for the pageant will be accepted from all communities .
 To be eligible for the pageant a contestant must be between the ages of 18 and 28 on September 1, 1962 . Contestants must be 18 to 28 on that date .
 She must be a high school graduate by September 1, and must never have been married . She must also have never been married.
 She must possess talent, either trained or potential, which may nclude playing a musical instrument, dramatics, dress designing, singing, or any of the fine arts . The winner will be announced at the end of the year .
 If she wishes to pursue a professional career, such as nursing, she may present a three-minute talk on her training to date and her aims in that profession .
 Candidates should write to the College before December 15, for the Mount Holyoke Scholarship application form and for the Confidential Financial Statement of the College Scholarship Service .
 These forms are sent only to candidates who have applied for admission to the College . The forms were sent to those who applied to be admitted to college .
 Scholarships must be filled in and filed before January 15 with the Executive Secretary of the Committee on Scholarships at the College .
 Howard A Morrison, 12 Glen Road, indicated their plans, interests, size of family, etc. Howard A. Morrison, wrote in his letter to the public .
 Social tea for Mrs. P. Chinarazza . Parkhurst School tradition of social tea .
 Mrs. Kenneth R Wiggett, third grade teacher, will be given by the room mother, Mrs. Mrs. . Mrs. Wiggetst .
 Dudley was on the Dean’s list the second semester of his freshman year at Norwich . John C Willis and John A Willis, were 1960 graduates of New Preparatory School in Cambridge, and both are majoring in liberal arts .
 The regular meeting of the Guild of the Infant Saviour will he held on Tuesday, November 28, at 2 m. in K of C Home .
 Albert T McDougall, will preside at a short business meeting which will be followed by “cups and saucers” with Ann Bliss, arranged by the program committee .
 This is a novel program and will he greatly enjoyed by the members and their guests . This is the first time a program has been hosted by a member of the American Athe Atheists .
 John Hoffman, assisted by an enthusiastic group, have graciously offered to serve as usual during the social hour . John Hoffman assisted by a group of enthusiastic group of volunteers .
 The Guild is sponsoring its annual rummage sale earlier in the morning, from 11m. to 1:30m. Please remember that the Guild is . The Guild will also be offering its rummage sales earlier this morning .
 The “Toys for Tots’ campaign for the 1961 Christmas season will he held in this area from November 24 to December 15 inclusive . The ‘Toys For Tots' campaign will be held in the area between November 24 and December 15 .
 This “Toys For Tots’ drive is an annual collection of new or almost new toys, given by the general public, and distributed to otherwise forgotten hoys and girls .
 For the first time, visit the flower shop's 9-1077 Eves. For the rest of the week, visit http://www.wedding.com/111111 .
 Rev. John M Manion, Pastor PA 9-2990 TV Service Phono Radio Winchester Appliance Co. Rev. Manion is a pastor in Pennsylvania . He is also a radio evangelist .
 Religious Classes for Hi-School Pupils each Monday at 7 for boys . Each Tuesday at 7 a.m. for girls . Religious classes for boys and girls .
 Gifts of money, food and clothing are earnestly solicited to help Winchester friends during the holiday season . Winchester Community Relief Gifts may Committee .
 Winchester Winchester PArkview 9-3000 Sunday, November 26. Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArview 9/3000 . ‘3:20m. ‘‘3.20m ‘
 The Red CCohh Bloodmobile will be at the Chturch of the Epiphany . 7:00 a.m. on January 7 .
 Morning Worship, floly Communion at the Worship Services, Fir>t Sunday of the Month .
 Message ""Only One Way to the Father"" (Series on What Does Jesus Mean?!: extended session for Nursery through 5th Grade. 3:30m. Message: "Only one Way to The Father"
 Senior High Fellowship at home of Brenda Mosher, 5 Standish Lane, will meet at 8:00 a.m. Sunday . Liturgical Mass will be held at Brenda's home in honor of her .
 Walter Houston Clark, Dean of the Hartford School of Religious Educaion, speaks . Clark is a former teacher at Hartford University . Clark talks about the importance of religious education in the United States .
 Dinner will be served by the men of the church on Thursday at 6:30 and 7:00 a.m. The men will serve at the men's dinner at the church .
 Carlton Helgerson, Pastor Baptist Baptist Baptist Evangelistic Evangelistic Denominational Non 9:30 a.m. ET. ET .
 ARTHUR K SMITH Guild Optician 49A Pleasant Street, Woburn WElIs 3-1704 au 5 -tf 2)rr.r. W.
 Candy, Food, Christmas Decorations, Dolls und Toys, Interior Decoration, Bags, Bagnets und Toys .
 Checks totalling $145,898 were mailed to all Christmas Club depositors as of the close of business on November 15 .
 The popular appeal of this type of regular savings is clearly demonstrated by the number of individual depositors, as well as the total dollar volume of Christmas Club deposits .
 The yearly distribution of this money, saved over a 50-week period, gives added impetus to the pre-holiday purchasing power of a large number of prospective retail shoppers .
 The 1962 Christmas Club applications are now available at Winchester Trust Company, 35 Church Street and 16 Mt. Mt. Mount . Applications are available at both offices of the Winchester Trust Co. and 35 Church St. Winchester . The Winchester Christmas Club will be held on December 11 .
 The voting players dance and sing to the gray music . They will, at times, ask the audience to sing with them .
 The first performance of the plays will be given on Friday, December .1, at .1:45m., at the High School Auditorium, Winchester . The Community . School Association which each year makes it possible for the children of Winchester to . see good l live theater .
 Some of the enthusiasm and cooperation of some of the teachers in our community is most gratefully appreciated .
 The Children's Theater School is establishing a reputation for an experience which is theatrical yet both cmative and spontaneous . The Children’s Theater School .
 The group has drawn children from neighboring towns to the group . Their success in their “Noah’s Ark” at the Boston Arts Festival last June has drawn them to the area .
 The cast includes children from Winchester, Reading, Stoneham, Medford, Lexington, Lexington and Wellesley .
 Veronica Sanderson, singing and accompanist, accompanied by Mrs. Edna Hatch, painting for the older children . Mrs. Hatch painted for the younger children; Mrs. Sanderson painted for her older children; Miss Hatch, painted for older children, Mrs.
 Richard F Brackett, painting and dancing for the younger children; and Mr Tom Morse, high school stage crew. Richard F. Bracket, painting, dancing for younger children, and Mr. Morse, stage crew .
 Eighth Notes from McCall Junior High School . During one intermission the boys and girls of McCall junior high School, the Eighth Notes .
 Children in the audience will also participate in singing songs from the play under the direction of Miss Nancy Bellows . Miss Bellows will be directing the children to sing songs in the show .
 Your children can make a contribution to the rebuilding fund for WGBH Channel 2 . The educational television station brings 21inch classroom programs to them .
 Tickets are also available at Hevey's Pharmacy and McCormack’s Apothecary . Tickets will be sold at the door . Mayor of Newton will speak from the suburban point of view .
 Regional Planning is not a new one, but it has become more familiar to the public in recent years . The concept of regional planning is not an entirely new one . Regional planning is a key part of the planning process .
 The speed of change and generally accelerated tempo of modern society has ere ated serious pressures on outmoded urban structures — physical, political, and economic . Modern society has also put pressure on urban structures .
 The mechanics of planning for change in major U.S. cities have developed in varying degrees, and with varying success depending upon the communities involved .
 Most Metropolitan Regions grew from the central city in a kind of overflow pattern . In the Boston area the outlying communities were established as autonomous political units separated geographically from the core .
 On the other hand, local autonomy is granted by the Legislature — it is merely permissive . Local autonomy granted by state legislators is granted only by state law .
 Less than 409c of the inhabitants of Greater Boston live within the ‘core’ city in contrast to the overall national average of 609c . The national average is 609C .
 Panel of speakers will analyze problems, explaining terminology, current impetus, and existing agencies for long-range comprehensive planning . Panel will also discuss terminology and current impetus for planning in the U.S. The panel will analyze these problems .
 They will estimate current trends and future needs in the physical environment of the community . They will attempt to estimate current . trends and . future needs .
 The Winchester LWV suggests that those who attend this panel discussion will be better equipped to understand and to weigh the needs and responsibilities of Winchester in its relation to neighboring communities . Winchester is the center of rural services in Boston and Boston .
 "Midsummer Night's Dream" and "Robinson Crusoe" will be presented at the Winchester High School on Friday, December I, at 3:45m. Children's Theatre School .
 Fairies Marla Johnis, Rebecca Brackett; Queen Titania Kathy Dale; Elves Stephen and Stewart Johnis; Puck Geoffrey Bracketett; Snug Stephen Edgell .
 Veronica Sanderson of 10 Harrison Street has been appointed accompanist at the forth| coming productions of three plays by the Winchester Children's . The Winchester Children’s The| atre under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. Sanderson .
 Anderson j has been a music specialist in English schools . Anderson j taught choral singI ing, verse speaking, elocution, mu| sical plays, and free expression of dance .
 The East Middlesex Association for Retarded Children will hold their monthly meeting at 52 Sanborn Street, Reading, November 29, at 8:00m.
 This film was made at the Dental Clinic for Retarded in Road Island, Mass. It was shot at the clinic for the disabled .
 Dinner will be served from 6 to 9 and tickets may be secured from committee member Danny Gatti neri at Fashion Cleansers on Washington Street .
 Manager THOMAS C MURRAY WALTCR H PALMER Registered Representatives 47 CHURCHESTER PArkvIow. 9-4650 Plooio *ond mo free booklet ""Socuritiat Transactions"" AddressCity -Zone.
 Another Allyn Service for Inveetpre Beatrice Jasper, Rhoda Feuer Mrs. Mrs. Beveetree Jasper . Mrs. Feuer will be the first woman to be married in Boston .
 Emyln Williams, England’s foremost dramatist, wrote “A Murder Has Been Arranged,” and it had a long run in London . A Woman, Nancy Dorsey Orchestra, Marie Wingate, piano; Doris Thomas, violin; Mary Sinclair
 Parish Players must have known they faced a real challenge in choosing this for their fall play . Parish Players chose this for the first time in their history .
 Nine people on that stage made an audience actually believe that an old theatre legend had come alive . Nine people were on the stage making the audience believe it was a real life .
 The story ninges on a supper party given on the stage of an empty theatre by Sir Charles Jasper on his fiftieth birthday . The party was on the eve of his inheriting two million pounds .
 He hopes to prove a legend will came true this same evening — that the ghost of a man murdered in this same theatre will rise again and walk across the stage . Another ghost 90 years before .
 Sir Charles is murdered before eleven o’clock . His young wife manages to prove that it was murder and not suicide . Sir Charles’ ghost actually does walk across the stage, sit at the head of his dinner table .
 Phyllis Hollinshead stepped out before the curtain and asked the orchestra to stop the music . She was terrified when she stepped out of the theatre and asked for the music to be stopped .
 She and Elizabeth Shepard had a long scene in which to establish the story of the party and its significance, and both held it well .
 George Hebb as the good-looking young man intent on helping Lady Jasper, whom he knows is in trouble, did a truly superb acting job . Lenore Gamage as Lady Jasper’s rather worldly mother did a superb performance as well as the play .
 Four actors were given the task of setting the story and mood of the play . These four actors were tasked with setting the play's mood .
 Rhoda Feuer is one of the most capable young actresses the Players have had in some time . Beatrice Jasper comes in, and Rhoda feels the tension builds in the tension .
 It is always good to see new people on the stage, but it is equally exciting for audiences to see actors such as Gene, Lenore, George Hebb, George Connor . George Connor: It is great to see a new cast on stage but it's equally exciting to see the
 His dramatic entrance sparked the action of the play . He continued to build suspense as he worked out his evil plan, his carefully devised murder .
 'When he comes on stage at the end of the play, sees his victim at the head of the dinner table, and cracks under the whole apparent failure of his plan, he pulls out every theatrical trick he knows so well. When he comes . He pulls . out of every theatrical
 The curtain closes on him, elegant in his scarlet Cesar Borgia costume, as he completely goes to pieces . The curtain closed on him as he went to pieces in his costume .
 Nancy Dorsey as the woman who has been struck dumb, according to the revived legend, held the audience in the palm of her hand, making them believe in her story in her death . The revived legend has been revived by the director of the film .
 Shepard was a delightful comedy touch, with her cockney accent . Otis Jason, with his voice coming from the audience each time, added his bit to the mystery . Shepard was delightful .
 The three ladies in the orchestra should have taken a curtain call for their music . Their music did much for the performance. The orchestra did well .
 The excellent lighting and the excellent setting of the deserted stage helped create credibility . Along with the marvelous lighting effects, the superb set of the stage was the setting .
 He probably knew the play itself had many holes and many facets that American audiences would not accept . But he had his fine cast do the job well, and by their own acting, they make the story real .
 It was an unusual play for the Players to have chosen, and not a very pleasant one, actually . It was a very unusual play, and it was not a pleasant one to play .
 Woburn Realtors’ Convention hosted by National Association of Real Estate Boards in Miami Beach .
 The Trefrey agents listened to the most progressive and informed Brokers from all over the country in a mass exchange of ideas . Trefrey Agents listened to most progressive Brokers in the country .
 The schedule was quite rigorous with classes starting at 8m. and going through to 4:30m. each day .
 This is the fifth straight year of increased business for the Trefrey office . Much of this is due to the superior service of the agents available because of their attendance to conventions .
 Expert Appraiser MAKER and DESIGNER of EXQUISITE JEWELRY Repairing . “ONE of a KIND’s”
 Newly completed Wedgewood Apartments on the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center . The newly completed apartments offer simplified, luxurious living .
 Make an appointment today to see these apartments about which the whole town is talking . Make a visit to these apartments to check out the prices .
 Young CAPE in immaculate condition . Young Cape in immatulate condition. Call PA 9-5860 Monday through Friday .
 First floor features fircplaced living room, full dining room, modern kitchen, panel-den, paneled den, large bedroom and ceramic-tile-tile .
 Ruth C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers . Gertrude H Murphy, PA, PA 9-6213 Richard H Murphy . Marlon R Fcrriman, PA
 Distinctive custom-built Garrison Colonial in quiet, desirable, executive location . Uiljanksgiuing Hag .
 Features of this beautiful 10-year-old home include large living room, den, modern kitchen, screened porch, patio, master bedroom with dressing room, two twin bedrooms, 2*6 baths . Features of the beautiful 10,000-plus-bedroom home include .
 Large modern modern Split Level with five bedrooms, two baths . Five bedrooms and two bathrooms . Five-bedroom home .
 There are four bedrooms on the second floor, one bedroom on the third, and two baths . Four bedrooms on second floor and one on third floor .
 This is a fine home, fairly priced at $31,900, and we invite your inspection by appointment . We invite you to inspect by appointment.
 Expanding National Paint Manufacturer has Dealer Franchise Available in Area . 12 to 36 months Financing Merchandising Demonstrising Demonstration Demonstrations Promotions National and Local Advertising Arranged.
 Winchester P A 9-5.169 novifi-tf James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 nu* 12tt LOST AND FOUND COST A ti| >f ”Mutrh.’�
 Upstairs. large mast bedroom, *2 twin-siznl bedrooms, nursery and tiled hath . Upstairs . Large mast bedroom. Upstairs bedroom, . 2 twin-folded bedrooms, . nursery and . nursery . Nursery and . 3 bedrooms .
 New Floors Laid Old Ones Resurfaced Floors Waxed and Polished . Call PA PIANOS FLOors FLOORS FLOORORS .
 Shelvador refrigerator, good running condition, needi minor repairs, so we bought a new one . We bought a refrigerator that needs minor repairs .
 Trains for Christmas for Christmas, American Flyer layout, including 7 engines, perfect condition . For sale, trains for Christmas are for sale, including seven engines . For SALE, trains are for Christmas and for sale .
 Attractive room and kitchenette one minute from center of center . For rent for $1,800-square-foot apartment located in central park .
 Two rooms, private bath, kitchen privileges, separate entrance . Call PA 9-0898. nov28-2t .
 Professional office space with parking with parking on grounds, central location . For rent, professional office space can be rented out of central location.
 Fiveroom apartment in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments . $190 up. Call WElls 3-2334 .
 MASON W0RI DAVID J SPERO & SON BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE MASONS Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls . Call PA 9-5860.
 Antiques — Buou-Bruc China, Clus8, Furniture, etc. Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester, PA .
 Boy's bike in good condition, 24 inch. 24 inch . Call Stoneham. 8-1939 John J FOLEY .
 Woman for general cleaning and ironing on Wednesday and Thursday, 9:30 5:00. 00. 00 . Woman for regular cleaning, ironing and general cleaning .
 A local lirm girl with two or three years secretarial experience is wanted . She needs to be a librarian with two to three years experience . She should be a junior lister girl with three years of secretarial work experience .
 The Post Office De 7 part me nt plans to expand its facilities and to provide extra help during the Christmas rush .
 Be sure they are addressed dearly and correctly, and mail all your gifts and cards early . Mail them early .
 Postmaster: "I hate to see folks take chances on mailing poorly wrapped packages" The Postmaster said he doesn't want people to take chances sending poorly wrapped gifts .
 The limits on size and weight of packages varies, depending on where you mail your package from . The limit on size, weight and size of packages can vary depending on the location .
 Postmaster Gilgun advised placing both your return address and the recipients address inside the carton or package before it was wrapped . As an extra precaution against loss, Gilgun also advised placing the recipient's address inside a carton .
 If you use Christmas stickers or seals, put them on the back of your Christmas cards and packages so that they will not conflict with the address on the front of the cards .
 Make sure that correct postage is firmly affixed to each card and package .
 When mailing gifts, it's a good idea to place a piece of transparent cellophane tape over the address portion of the label to prevent defacing it in transit . The tape is needed to protect the label from being defaced .
 CNN.com will feature iReporters' top 10 most recent stories on CNN iReport . Submit your top 10 stories on Facebook and Twitter . Send them to iReport@cnn.com/top 10 .
 Christmas mailing period is primarily a battle against time, “Do it now” is the slogan from here on in. “The entire Christmas mailing . period is a battle . against time .
 Don't put off your Christmas mailings while you still have ample time because this means that dreaded pileups will occur at the Post Office . This means that unavoidable slowdowns in deliveries will occur as the holiday approaches .
 Postmaster asks for cooperation of all business firms to delay mailing circulars and catalogs until after December 25 . Postmaster: Keep the mails clear for the Christmas push .
 The Postmaster said he is most appreciative of the interest and cooperation shown by the mailing public . All mail going long distances should be sent by December 10 .
 Christ mas packages for local delivery should be mailed not later than December 15, and be sure to mail your Christmas cards for nearby destinations at least a week before Christmas .
 Family Service Association of (Boston) exemplifies the role of the Good Samaritan every day of the year . Jane Day of the Family Services Association of . (Boston, an agency which exemplifies . the . role of Good Samaritans every day, year .
 Family Service Associations throughout the Greater Boston area share in the current United Fund drive .
 Day is Director of Central Intake Counselling . Day is a wise and warm person whose title is Director . Day's job is to help people with mental health issues in the UK .
 Those who can well afford it pay a maximum of $15 a week for counselling . Those who are well able to afford counselling can pay $15 per week for it .
 Some pay part of this, and many pay nothing at all but get unstinting help in many areas . Jielp in some cases, including financial help, is a form of assistance .
 Home maker Service provides for “mother substitutes” capable and understanding women who take over the care of children and the normal household routine . One of the valuable services of this organization is the Home Maker Service .
 Social workers inter view the family and visit the home and assign a suitable . homemaker for the particular family . These women are trained under qualified social workers . Social workers visit the homes and find a suitable home for the family .
 The association charges clients only what they can afford to pay . They work an eight-hour day and their sal aries are paid by the association which charges the clients .
 Anyone may telephone for an appointment or walk in off the street . Anyone may simply walk in to the building .
 Old coins, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, also top price for other coins . Private collector pays $12 a hundred for old coins .
 TeL WElls 81947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There a way out. TeLWElls .
 Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use . Tel. b^Ormundy 5-4520.
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates . Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them out whb you .
 Direct-by-mail mutual fund launched just a year ago . Net assets have risen 14% since early January . Net Asset Value per share has risen over 14% .
 The Fund made its first investments at that time with proceeds from the nitial offering . The Fund has since invested in more than 1,000 investments .
 Total net assets on November 14 were $5,005,743, up from $3,486,588 on December 31, 1960, the end of the initial offering period . Total assets now stand at $6,000,000 .
 The inrease was accounted for by strength in the Canadian market and by new sales of over $1. million thus far in 1961, H Nelson, Conant, the Fund’s president, dis closed today .
 Net Asset Value per share on, November 14 was $10.88, up 14.5% from $9.51 at the year-end . The company's net asset value per share is now $11.99 per share .
 The Fund’s shares were first offered in, mid-November 1960 at a price of $10, including a sales charge of 4.9% of the Offering Price . The Fund was first offered at $10 at the time .
 UBS Fund of Canada shares were sold by means of double-page prospectus ads in major U.S. newspapers and by a substantial direct mail campaign . UBS fund of Canada sold shares through a number of newspapers and direct mail .
 This is believed to be the first distribution of its kind in the history of the mutual fund industry . The distribution of this type of fund distribution is the first in the industry .
 Thus far UBS Fund has more than 2,500 shareholders from 45 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Canal Zone, the Virgin Islands und 15 foreign countries . The fund is based in New York City .
 Gordon ami David Stuck wood for prompt efficient servlcu around Kudid Avenue vicinity . Don’t breuk your ba<k shoveling snow shoveling your snow .
 Public Health Service, gives the latest official figures for every section of the country .
 lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death among American men . Lung cancer is the most common cause of lung cancer death in the United States .
 The num ber of m^Ie deaths has increased six-fold in the past 20 years . The number of deaths has also increased in the last two decades .
 Medical authorities torn between statistical and clinical proof, unable to agree as to where the responsibility lies .
 There is no disputing the figures. However, as to the mortality from lung cancer, there is no doubt the figures are correct .
 The official report shows that there were 32 deaths among residents of Winchester from all types of cancer in the year ending January, 1960 . Winchester residents of the 1960s died from all kinds of cancer .
 Lung cancer, however, was responsible for only one, or 3, percent of lung cancer deaths . Lung cancer is responsible for one of the highest rates in the United States .
 Nationally, it accounted for 14. percent of the total and, in the State of Massachusetts, for 13. percent . The state of Massachusetts is home to the largest population in the country .
 The lung cancer toll in the U.S. is small when viewed in the light of the 260,047 lives taken in the year by cancer as a whole . The fact that it is growing is causing concern .
 Not everyone in the scientific field is impressed with the evidence that indicates cigarette smoking is the chief cause of lung cancer . Cigarette smoking has been linked to lung cancer for decades .
 Lung cancer mortality in Winchester was found to be below average . In proportion to population, lung cancer mortality was below average in Winchester .
 In the U.S. as a whole, the rate was 20.9 per 100,000 . In the State of Massachusetts, it was 23.9.9 .
 Dress children in moderately warm, but no very heavy, clothing, with hands and feet well covered . Children should be wearing moderately warm but no heavy clothing .
 Don't use this as an excuse for eating too much fattening food . Eat a good diet, hut don't use it as a reason for overindulging .
 Should you become badly chilled, don’t rub snow or ice on frostbitten fingers or toes . Don't rub snow, ice or snow or snow on frosty toes or fingers or fingers .
 Get inside as quickly as possible and get into a warm, not hot, tub of water . Get inside quickly and get in a warm tub of not hot water .
 The symptoms are numbness, tingling, a sensation of cold and ashen color in the affected part . The symptoms of these symptoms include numbness and tingles .
 If you have an illness causing poor circulation of the blood, be doubly careful to avoid exposure to cold . And if you have a cold, be extra careful .
 Undue exposure to cold, places severe burdens on the circulatory system, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com . The cold is a sign that the health of a person exposed to the cold will be affected .
 It can cost you a finger or toe, or in the case of prolonged, unprotected chilling, it can cause death . It can also cause damage to your body or limb, or even your brain .
 Humans are warm-blooded animals and ordinarily conserve their body heat by cutting down the surface exposed to the air . Humans conserve body heat using surface-covering techniques such as cutting it off to avoid heat .
 When your body is chilled, you start shivering; this gives your muscles involuntary exercise and helps warm them . In addition, shivering gives you an involuntary exercise to warm your muscles .
 If you’re still cold, small blood vessels close down all over your body surface, with their blood-flow rate cut to as little as one fifth of normal . If you're cold, your blood flow rate is cut to one fifth .
 Your body is using your skin literally as a blanket, to conserve heat internally . Your skin is being used to protect your body from the heat .
 At the same time, your heart beats faster and your blood pressure rises, all in the effort to mobilize your internal sources of warmth against the external danger . At the time, you are trying to get warm and warm .
 This is another case where the ounce of prevention is worth the pound of cure . This is a case of 'prevention' and 'preventive medicine'
 Autobridge, the gume that lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners, is now available to you .
 All work guaranteed C OMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex . Middlesex, as well as Massachusetts, is guaranteed . Call 9-4179 .
 If you desire to object, you or your attorney should Hie a written appearance in Haiti Court at Cambridge within twenty-one (lays from the eighth day of January 1962, the return day of thin itation) If you want to object to the decision, you should HI
 To nil persona intorrated in the estate of FRANCIS MEREDITH COOPER also known known h . Also known as F. F. C. Cooper also known h« F . F. M. Cooper .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARGARET LOUISE COOPER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that .she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a aure
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of the .said Court, this seventh day of November 1961 . Witness: The First Judge .
 John V Harvey, Register. novl6-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex. Middlesex, as well as . Middlesex Middlesex . as well .
 To all person* interested in the estate of MABELLE H LORD late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . The estate is being held in trust of the deceased .
 The executors of the will of said MABELLE H LORD have presented to said Court for allowance their first account . They presented to the court for allowance .
 Esquire was Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this thirtieth day of October 1961 .
 A petition has been presented to aaid Court for probate a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by PERCY BUGBEE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed administrator .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of November 1961 . Witness: "John C Leggerat" Witness: “John Leggats”
 John V Harvey, Register. novl6-3t . COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . Middlesex was the capital of the state .
 To all persons interested in the estate of DANIEL C DENNETT lute of Winchester In said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceaaed by Doston Safe Deposit and Trust Company of Boston in the County of Suffolk praying that it be appointed executor thereof .
 If you desire to txbject thereto you or your attorney should tile a written up pearunce in said Court at Cambridge beiore to o’clock in the foreneon on the fifth day of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 MARY AGNES McCORMACK lute of Winh ester in suid County, deceased . To ull persons interested in the estate of M. McGormack, deceased. lute .
 A petition has been presented to suid Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the lust will of said leceused by ROBERT MICHAEL McCOItM ACK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed xecutor thereof without
 Johu V llui s ey. Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this sixteenth duy of November 1961, was Johu .
 To ull persons interested in the trust of MABELLE H LORD lute of Winchester in said County, deceased, for the benefit of LOUISE FRANCES EBKRLK nnd others .
 The tUSteea of suid estate have presented to suid Court for nllowuuco their first to third accounts, inclusive . The tTUStee have presented their first-to-third accounts to the court .
 IX you desire to object to this citation should tile a written uppearnce in suid Court & Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twenty fourth day of November 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this thirteenth day of October 1961 . Witness: The First Judge, First Justice of the Court of Appeal .
 Low-cost personal checking account service helps make budgets behave . Make ends meet more easily with low-cost checking accounts .
 The primary thrust of the current campaign for fallout shelters is to convince the American people that the war which we are told is unthinkable can actually be prepared for and survived by a plan which is as normal and prudent as life insurance .
 If tension is a contributing factor to heart disease, then no wonder it's so prevalent, says doctor . Stress is a factor in heart disease .
 A successful ban on nuclear testing would leave the world burdened with nuclear stockpiles . Even a successful ban would leave nuclear testing left the world with a nuclear stockpile .
 Moral goodness may be its own reward, but it’s no protection from the actions of immoral people . Moral goodness is not a reward for moral virtue, but for immoral behavior .
 There are rights of others to self-government and the free exchange of ideas . There are, for example, the right to self government and self-governability .
 Finast Ticket Offer provides a discount price on tickets for 50 events during the current season . First National Stores and Boston Garden have announced renewal of the ticket offer . Boston Garden and Finast will continue to offer discounts on tickets .
 Vouchers may be presented in person or mailed to the Boston Garden ticket office . The Boston Garden will host the Boston Marathon Marathon on Sunday night .
 List of events in the offer will be displayed in the stores, as well as on envelopes issued by First National for saving the green tapes . First National will offer the offer in stores and envelopes .
 Areas served by these divisions include Eastern Massachusetts; and all of Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont . Areas served are Eastern Massachusetts .
 The word "American" is known and understood in nearly every country, in the world . It's a word that is well understood in many countries, including the U.S.
 Some of us wouldn’t know how to carry on a conversation without it . It has become so thoroughly imbedded in our daily speaking vocabulary that some of us would not be able to talk about it .
 Of course, it’s strictly slang, or at best a colloquialism, and not a word of any degree of literary repute . It's strictly slang .
 Club that supported Martin Van Buren in his candidacy for President of the United States. Club . Club . supported Martin van Buren's candidacy .
 ‘K. K.” was their motto to go ahead and raid the headquarters of the opposition, it is said . ‘” we are told, was the motto for their raid on the opposition headquarters .
 Special Agent Thomas F McLaughlin recalled an incident from his boyi hood in Maine . Special Agent McLaughlin said the incident occurred in a Maine home .
 When he was twelve he was selected by the town fathers to deliver Lincoln’s Gettys* burg address at the annual Memorial Day exercises . He was selected to deliver the Gettys-burg address at Memorial Day .
 You only have two things to worry about one, that things will never get back to normal; two, that they already have . You have to worry that things already have. You only know that things are going to get worse than normal .
 The trouble with life is that by the time you know your way around, you usually don’t feel like going anywhere . The trouble is that you need to learn how to navigate the world .
 Above sleeping grandchild’s crib I linger, Finding her year-old-beauty irresistible . Third Generation .
 It's there and it's extraordinarily active, but the dog is not aware of it and never gives it a thought . It’s there and there is not an active dog, but it's there, and the dog doesn’t even notice it .
 If the dog knew it had a tail, it might be able to do something useful with it . The dog's tail was found in the garden of the garden .
 PArkview 9-1400 W Allan Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGENCY 1 THOMPSON STREET Rea Rea. 9-0694 P. Rea . 9-0400 P. O. PA. P.A. 9.0694
 Brian S. LIquor MART 2153 Mystic Valley Parkway Medford, Mass., is located in Medford . The store is located at the bottom of the line of the highway .
 "When you bury your head in the sand, you have left sticking out something that is very vulnerable," says David Cameron . When you bury a head in sand, it's left sticking something that's very vulnerable .
 Two cockroaches lunched in a dirty old sewer and excitedly discussed the spotless, glistening new restaurant in the neighborhood from which they had been ejected . The cockroach was ejected from the neighborhood restaurant .
 "Please,” said the other in disgust, nibbling on a moldy roll . “It’s so clean-” asked the other . ‘Please, please,’ said one .
 Leo L Beranek of 7 Ledgewood Road has been appointed a membership chairman for the gigantic subscription membership campaign for the Opera Group of Boston . The goal it is to enroll more that 13,000 opera lovers in the Greater Boston area for the winter opera season .
 The intensive subscription' campaign will officially be launched on December 1, preceded by a huge pre-campaign supper r^lly on November 30 . Known as ‘Operation Opera,’ the intensive subscription’ campaign will be launched .
 Beranek is part of an army of dedicated volunteers who are tirelessly working to make the opera season a success . The opera season is set to run until the end of September .
 Opera Group, led by its founder and present artistic director, Miss Sarah Caldwell, has undertaken an ambitious program . The Opera Group is led by Miss Caldwell .
 Massanet’s “Manon,” “Die Meistersinger,’ and “Rigoletto’ are among the highlights of this year's opera season . Wagner's "Die Meisteringer" is set for March 14 and 16
 The Opera Group’s performances will be held at the Donnelly Memorial Theater . All the Opera Group's performances have been held at this theater . All performances will take place at Donnelly's Memorial Theater.
 Artec Insurance Agency of Chelsea opened a new office in Woburn on November 15th . The new office will serve car owners in the surrounding communities .
 The office is staffed with officers and personnel from Artec’s home office at 22 Everett Avenue, Chelsea, Chelsea . The office brings many years of experience in the car insurance field to the new location .
 The new Woburn office will be open evenings and Saturdays . For the extra convenience of its customers, the new office is open evenings, Saturdays .
 School on Police Administration held at John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company . School on police Administration last week in the Main Conference Room of the John Hancock mutual life insurance company .
 The school was conducted by Special Agent Thomas F McLaughlin of the Boston F.B.I. office in cooperation with the Committee on Law Enforcement Education .
 Tufts has launched a $370,000 fund-raising drive to provide a group of new buildings to be located on the Tufts campus . The school has recently launched a fundraising drive for the new buildings .
 New Dwelling: 31 Robinhood Road Alterations : 3 Orient Street . William B MacDonald Building Commissioner William B. MacDonald building Commissioner .
 Footwear for men, women and children since 1866 Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m. daily . Coward has been at the centre of the world's most famous shoe shops .
 Every one of these fine used used cars has been reconditioned by factory-trained mechanics . The cars will be driven by the owner of the car .
 I was up the pole and let the hot lead fall on Spikeright down his neck . I was in the lead on the podium, but let it fall on his neck.
 No costly service policies, no annual furnace cleaning bills, no expensive storage equipment . No motor operating cost necessary . No annual furnace service bills or annual furnace clean bills .
 The sooner you obtain your medicine, the sooner you will enjoy its health restoring benefits. Prove to yourself, Gas Heat doesn’t cost Jr. j . Prove yourself, gas Heat doesn't cost Jr j
 Our pharmacists, stocks and laboratory are always ready to give you instant service . We are happy to let you know that our pharmacists are ready to help you in the process .
 Hit the “red or dead” slogan as a defeatist form of “psycho-surrender,” and said these were not the only alternatives open to adult Americans . Hit the slogan: “Red or dead is red or dead.” Hit the
 “This is not just the slick slogan it sounds like,” the Congressman added. “It's not just a slick slogan that sounds like. It's just a promise to make America a better place to live,’ he said .
 Onc-lfonr Session Sign Warrants On Vinson-Owen School Bills . Town selectmen signed warrants totalling $11,046.75 Monday night .
 The sum of $2,937.84 in still contested bills is under investigation by the town accountant . The town accountant is looking into the matter . The bill is still under investigation .
 The still-contested items concern stone under the water main and swamp work . Still-contest items are still to be resolved .
 Of the $11,046.75 in signed vouchers, $10,220.33 was authorized for payment to the Keystone Co., the remainder to the archij tect, at 8 per cent . A new laboratory in the hospital will run such special tests as radioactive iodine intake .
 While in Seattle he attended the annual convention of the College of American Pathologists and the American Society of Clinical Pathologists .
 Donald Nickerson, former pathologist of the New England Sanitarium and Hospital, installed as president of the College of American Pathologists . Nickerson is a former pathist who has been in charge of the hospital for more than 30 years .
 Tyler, a former resident of Taunton, graduated from Atlantic Union College and received his M.D. degree from the College of Medical Evangelists in Loma Linda, California . Tyler is the father of two children, one of whom he is married to .
 He interned at the Porter Sanitarium and Hospital in Denver, Colorado, and completed his residency in pathology in Salem, Mass.
 Tyler set up private practice in the field of pathology at the New England Sanitarium and Hospital . Tyler is also director of the clinical laboratory at the hospital and set up a private practice .
 Tyler is working in cooperation with Atlantic Union College to establish a laboratory school at the sanitarium . Tyler is also working with the college to establish the laboratory school .
 The school will be completely accredited and classes will begin as soon as the necessary details can be worked out . Classes will begin once necessary details are worked out, according to the school .
 Annual eandv sale of Camp Fire Girls opens tomorrow, December 1 . Annual e-v sale will take place on December 1, 2015 .
 The meeting, which began shortly after 7:15m., was over shortly after 8:45 a.m. The meeting was adjourned shortly after 9:30 p.m .
 Moderator Harrison Chadwick was unable to preside over the session because of illness . Philip Wadsworth of 66 Oxford Street was replaced for the occasion by Mr Wadsworth, who once served as Moderator .
 Winchester School Committee has decided to dismiss pupils and close the schools . Winchester school committee has decided that the best interim policy in the event of nuclear attack is to close schools .
 Committee voted to authorize Superintendent to close schools in the event of imminent attack . Committee also voted to instruct Superintendent to notify parents as to procedures to he followed .
 The Massachusetts Medical Society, the American Society of Clinical Pathologists, the College of American Pathologists and the American Association of Blood Banks are among the organizations involved in the study . The study was published by the American Journal of Human Origins .
 The School Committee has voted to suggest to the Board of Selectmen that all school buildings be included in any survey of Town buildings which the Town Civil Defense agency might make to determine their possible use as shelters for the public .
 The Committee announces that parents of school children will receive direct mail notice of the foregoing decisions . Parents will be notified by mail .
 Last month, the committee heard discussion on the subject by members of the parents’ Community School Association .
 One of its members presented a special report on material obtained from the offices of the Corps of Engineers, the United States Army and the Office of Civil Defense in the Department of Defense .
 There are no real need for you to leave W inchester to get them . Instead, there are tea cups, toys, or topcoats to put in Cristmas gift packages .
 Winchester has become a shopping center in its own right with none of the seasonal traffic hazards and crushing rush hours . Winchester is a suburban shopping center with no seasonal traffic issues and no crushing rush hour rush hour .
 Winchester Community School Association | presents its annual childrens play on Friday, December 1 at 3:45 m. at the W inchester High School Auditorium . Winchester High School will host the Three Plays Tomorrow at 3.45 p.m.
 Carlene Samoiloff's Children’s Theatre School has been working enthusiastically and diligently to bring these classic stories to life . The children's Theatre School created and painted the scenery to be used in this production .
 Winchester Community School Association present ‘live’ theatre for children annually . This versatility in combining the arts fulfills one of the aims of the Winchester community school Association .
 The largest portion of the funds received from the sale of tickets for this performance will go to the Winchester Scholarship Fund . The Winchester scholarship fund will be used to raise money for the Winchester scholarship Fund .
 Heidi Mary Wadsworth plays Heidi, Brigette and Brigette . Grandfather Almuncle Michael Fiore Goat Peter Brian MacDonald is the Grandmother .
 The appropriation secured by the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee was $4,658 less than the maximum of $31,992 the Building Committee thought it would ask for . Seseman Donal Murphy THEATRE, continued on page 3 .
 The maximum cost of the fence is $8,500, the committee estimated last week . In last week’s summary of its appropriation, committee estimated the maximum cost at $8.500 .
 The Building Committee’s position was set forth at the town meeting by Mr Louis Wadsworth . Mr Wadsworth set forth the position at the meeting .
 The committee’s appropriation summary fell into three categories, $3,649 in construction items committed, leaving a balance on hand of $9,499 .
 $18,445 for uncommitted additional expenditures to complete the project, including the Well Field fence, deferred school equipment and furniture, and furniture for administrative offices, left a balance needed of $8,946 . This balance on hand, in turn, was applied to the $8
 Committee asks for $16,888 for additional expenditures found desirable . Committee also asked for $9,000 for construction items and $7,222 for school furniture and equipment .
 This left a balance needed of $25,834. In addition, Mr Wadsworth told town meeting, the committee was seeking a $5,000 contingency .
 This item, reduced by a credit of $3,500 transferred from an earlier ippropriation of the same amount I voted to conduct a study of the I Wadleigh School in terms of pos• sible use for administrative school Ribicoff of j offi ( .
 I le asked the indulgence of the meeting in case anything wonky came before the meeting, but he need not have worried . The meeting was adjourned to allow the meeting to take place, but there was no need to worry .
 No meeting could have gone much smoother, and wouldn't it be lx* nice if we could transact all town business with equal dispatch . The meeting went very smoothly .
 It was a fairly expensive meeting for the short time it took, but then, schools do cost money . It was an expensive meeting .
 Mr Saltmarsh called for nominations to fill the post of Moderator in the absence of Mr Chadwick, who was ill . Mr Cullen was the first upon his feet when he was nominated for the post .
 Mr Saltmarsh should have spotted first his colleague Mr Ives, says colleague . It was only natural, however, that he should have been spotted first .
 We would have liked to know whom Mr Cullen had in mind, says Mr Ives .
 The Bureau of the Budget appropriated $300,000 for the further equipping and staffing of this laboratory . Congress passed enabling legislation by Congress to set up the lab .
 It is estimated that the preparation of the plant’s new equipment will take several months . The new equipment is being prepared by the Public Health Service and not as before .
 You shouldn’t shop in Winchester just out of charity for local merchants, although charity, is one of the major teachings of the Christmas message .
 You should shop in Winchester, above all, to get the finest possible products with a minimum of fuss, and because the shops now in Winchester through wise supplies; a toy shop; a children’s clothing shop; two jewelry stores; and a camera shop .
 We have two distinguished super-markets with an amazing stock of holiday delicacies; two Oriental rug showrooms; a thrift shop run for community purposes; an antique store; an applibuying practices are at their peak ance store . Take a stroll through the Centre and see what
 We have a top quality sport shop, two first-rate men’s clothing stores, and several women’ s lingerie shops, clothing stores and dress shops . We have at least two excellent gift stores selling ceramics, silverware, even lamps . We
 We have two fine bakeries, two or three hardware stores, five drug stores and a candy and ice cream store . We have a special shop devoted to Christmas card gift wrapping, and gifts . A number of restaurants in which to have a bite while shopping .
 There is no reason to leave Town to shop for any Christmas gift you may have in mind even if this is an automobile, a phonograph, a barrel of roses, or a kiddie cart . What we’re getting at, of course, is that there is no
 You do have the satisfaction of doing business with people you know and trust . And after all, after all you do have to do business with them, you have to trust .
 i 1 i School Committeeman Austin Broadhurst supported the Building Committee’s request . Federal aid amounting to approximately 30 cents on the dollar for expenditures incurred during time of construction .
 Mr Cullen asked whether the athletic field at the school would be as large as originally estimated . Mr Wadsworth explained that it would be. The athletic field is expected to be larger than originally thought .
 School Committee, under terms of a previous town meeting vote, was responsible for paying for the fence, not the School Building Committee, he said .
 Mr Hewis said that on all items but the furnishing' and equipment of the school the Building Committee had actually exceeded its appropriation . He said that they were now coming to town meeting to get more money for these things .
 The Star has seldom heard a more masterly choice of words than that used by Mr Broadhurst to describe the need for new ceilings in the boys' toilets .
 Mr Wadsworth's presentation of the reason for the school building [ committee’s need for more money was temperate and commendably brief, surprisingly so in view of the supporting material he carried with him to the “mike” Mr Cullen wanted to know about the size
 It might well be well to have some one check the surface of the field for suitability .
 Mr Hewis didn't think the school building committee deserved any particular credit for coming to the town for more money . The Star has been told it leaves much to be desired .
 Mr Carruthers did not see eye to eye with Mr Hewis on the job the school building committee has done, feeling that when a committee has come up with a more-thanmillion dollar school needing only two per cent additional funds they have done well .
 The appointment also makes him a Vice Consul and a Secretary in the Diplomatic Service .
 Mr Becker graduated from Winchester High School in 1954 . Born in Weymouth in 1936, Mr Becker was born in 1936 . Mr Becker is a father of four .
 Becker served in the U.S. Army from 1958 to 1961 as a translator .
 Becker is currently attending the Foreign Service Institute in Arlington, Virginia . Becker is preparing for his overseas assignment .
 The hook, which cover Joe's life, was written by Winchester** Dr. and Mrs. Dr. Joe . The hook is a life from childhood days in Winchester to a spectacular performance on the Navy team .
 Banmc and is being distributed nationally after receiving very favorable reviews . Banmc is now being distributed nationwide after receiving favorable reviews.
 Ritirim A Sorokiit of S.I. Street, founder of the Harvard Sociology Department, has been named to the Institute of European Studies .
 The Institute is a non-profit organization that conducts foreign study programs for American college students . The Institute conducts foreign studies programs for U.S. college students.
 Sorokin’s principal task on the council will be to advise the institute on matters pertaining to courses, standards and the over-all objectives of existing and projected overseas programs . Sorokin will be the first member of the council to be appointed .
 ‘Crisis of Our Age’ has been translated into German, Dutch, Spanish, Norse, Japunese, Portuguese, and Czech, among others .
 Sorokin is also author of “Contemporary Sociological Theories” and “Reconstruction of Humanity” among many others . Sorokin: “Russia and the United States.”
 Most of these works have been translated into two or more foreign languages . Most of them have been published in a number of languages .
 Dr. John Sutter is the founder, first, professor and first chairman of Harvard’s Department of Sociology . Dr. Sutter was the first chairman and founder of Harvard's Sociology Department .
 Sorokin is the director of the Harvard Research Center in Creative Altruism . Sorokin: We need to find a way to improve our relationship with each other .
 An honorary member of several European and American academies of arts and sciences, Dr. John Defterios is also a member of the U.S. Academy of Sciences .
 Sorokin's works are among the most frequently translated sociological treatises in the world . Sorokin’s works exert a continuing and growing influence throughout the world. Sorokin is one of the world's most prolific sociological writers .
 Winchester Police Athletic League will announce registration for basketball this week ami next week . Winchester police Athletic League is looking forward to a new season of basketball .
 Registration for both the junior and senior leagues will take place at the police station from 3:00m. to 4 >30m. ami . ami from 6:30m to 9:00am. every afternoon and evening . Junior and senior teams will be held at the
 Every youngster that wishes to piny basketball in the league must tile an application to join the league .
 John Elliott, and his co-workers have arranged a wonderful program for the basketball season . John Elliott and his colleagues have arranged this wonderful program . The program will be broadcast on PBS stations throughout the summer .
 Those between the ages of 13 and 14 will join the junior league, and those between 14 and 15 wij) join the senior league . Those between 14 to 15 years old will also play in senior league.
 Every youngster who joins the leauge will be provided with a uniform and a team . Every youngster will be given a uniform, a team and a uniform by the club .
 Tuesday evenings will be for juniors and Wednesday evenings for seniors . Wednesday evenings will also be for seniors and Tuesday evenings for junior nights .
 The league this year has approached by many volunteers for coaching and refereeing . The league has been approached by players from all over the world .
 These people spend part of their leisure hours one evening a week with these youngsters . The children are part of a group of people who live in the UK .
 Without these volunteers the league could not provide the appropriate basketball recreation it has had for many years . Without volunteers, the league would not be able to provide the proper basketball recreation . The league has been in need of volunteers for years .
 Those youngsters that join the Howling League will be charged a much smaller amount to bowl than if he or she howled privately . Those youngsters will also be charged less to bowl if they howling privately .
 This could only he done with the tremendous volunteer help of Strike Lanes . This could not be done without the help of strike Lanes. This is not the first time this has been done by the volunteers .
 Registration will he taken at the Police Station or at Strike Lanes at 10:00m. on Saturday . Registration will be taken at 10 a.m. or at strike Lanes on Saturday morning .
 Registration at the Police Station will be the same hours us basketball registration . Basketball registration will be at the same time as the Police station .
 National Safety Council reports Massachusetts is in a favorable position in relation to traffic fatalities compared with the other states . Massachusetts has the lowest number of traffic fatalities in the country compared to other states in the holiday season .
 "In spite of our favorable position, enforcement officials are fearful as they look at our record of last December when we killed sixty one and injured thousands in highway traffic accidents," says D.C. enforcement .
 More than one half of drivers involved in traffic accidents had been drinking, police say . More than half of those involved in accidents were drinking during holiday season .
 Mystic Avenue may have extended down to the bridge before the Parkway was built .
 After the construction of the Parkway there was a short driveway from it to the bridge . The Parkway was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 A standpipe to fill the old watering-carts on the Parkway stood at the entrance of the drive .
 Painted red, the old wooden wooden bridge stood just south of an island that split the river . The remains of granite masonry at its northern end were visible at the northern end of the bridge .
 Story had it that this masonry was the foundation of a bridge that crossed the river, giving access to a summer house on the island that was a part of a big estate in Rangeley .
 The wooden bridge was used by commuters from the side hill to reach the old Mystic Station which preceded Wedgemere, though it was not located just where it was built . It was used to connect commuters to the station which preceded it .
 The bridge was torn down and replaced with a longer structure located just north of the red bridge, that gave access to old Manchester Field . The new bridge was built in the 1930s .
 This bridge also spanned an island, just north of the one near Mystic Avenue, was removed when the river was moved in connection wtih the building of the present Manchester Field .
 Ollie Jean’s Scalp Clinic for Men specializes in IIair and SCALP TREATMENTS . Monday Tuesday, Thursday Friday 4:30 to 8:30m.m.
 The New England Shopping (’enter on Route | I in Saugus, a “regional’’ or kingsize shopping center in real estate I parlance, is the product of years of creative planning, negotiating, financing, engineering and construction .
 Milton (J. and Alan T Green) conceived the plan and mobilized the economic resources and faith it took to proceed from idea to reality . Convinced that the urea was natural, Milton (Milton) and Alan (Alan) Green conceived the idea .
 Their father Isadore, and two brothers Benjamin and Frank, started one of the early 5 and 10c chains .
 By 1929 their chain consisted of 50 stores throughout New England and the East . By 1929 the chain had 50 stores in New England .
 Green Stores merged with McLellan Stores this year . The Green brothers devoted their interest to the real es tate operations of chain store commercial properties .
 Milton ami Alan Green entered the business in 1937 and 1950 respectively and now are the two active members of the firm . Milton and Alan Green enter the business together in 1950 respectively .
 Alan and Milton graduated from Harvard College and Harvard Graduate School of Business administration where they were outstanding athletes . Milton and Alan were outstanding students at Harvard College .
 Milton Milton cap tained Harvard Track Team and held the intercollegiate and world record in the high hurdles . Milton was a member of the Harvard track team . Milton held the world record for high hurdles and high hurdles at Harvard .
 During World War II, Alan served in the Submarine Service . Milton was an Air Combat Intelligence officer in Naval Aviation . Alan served as a Navy Submarine .
 They also have diversified and active interests in middle income apartment homes as well as urban and suburban commercial properties .
 The year 1954 brought the germ of the New England Shopping Center concept . The New England shopping center concept was born in 1954 .
 The Green brothers negotiated with the Town of Saugus for land that then comprised the Town Farm . Having decided that the time and place were right, the brothers negotiated for land .
 Experts in the field from Harvard Business School, were making comprehensive studies of traffic, population, economic growth, ease of access, access, labor pool, travel time and travel time . Meanwhile, experts from the field of the field were making detailed studies .
 The area was determined to be the most densely populated site of its kind in the entire country . The area is determined to he the most populated site in the country .
 Ease of access from as far away as ten miles and more was quick and simple . Ease-access was easy and easy to access from ten miles away from the site .
 The entire area I was thriving* Conditions were per] feet for the establishment of a vast regional shopping center with much more than simple local or neighborhood appeal .
 The land was purchased in 1955 and the Greens started working immediately . The Greens have been working on the land since then .
 Architectural plans were discussed with many of the leading architects of the nation . Greens conveying their own ideas and concepts as to design features they wished to incorporate .
 In this center they are located at the very center of the shopping area around a courtyard containing a children’s play area and space for fashion shows, art shows and seasonal promotions .
 16 foot wide walkways around the crescent accentuated by landscaped garden areas, planters, and patterns of brick and concrete patterns .
 These walkways provide a continuous weather-protected arcade leading to all stores entrances . All stores entrances and thence from the courtyard to the parking facilities in the rear .
 Sears Roebuck’s largest store in New England, Baker Shoes . Baker Shoes, Dorothy Muriel's and Brigham's, Endicott-Johnson Shoes . Endicot-Johnson shoes, W T Grant, Household Finance Corp., Kennedy Butter and Egg Stores, National Shoes
 Woolworth, Elm Farm, Emric’s Luncheonette, Fanny Farmer Candy Shops, Field's Hosiery Shops . The town also includes a medical center, a bank, a barber shop, a jewelry store and a bank .
 Six Days New England Shopping Center is open Monday through and including Saturday from 9:30 in the morning to 9:00 in the evening . The shopping center is located in New England, Massachusetts .
 Center merchants will follow trend to more evening hours as a convenience to customers . With service the watchword, center merchants will continue to serve customers in the evenings .
 New England Shopping Center is located in New England, Massachusetts . Immense expanses of parking area are an outstanding feature at New England .
 Parking for over 3500 cars in parking areas to the front, both sides, anil to the rear of the center make it easy for the shopper to park close to the store he intends to visit first . Anil parking area to the back, sides and anil parking areas
 Drivers parking cars in the wide lot directly at the center’s rear will find easy access to the canopied j walks in front of the center j . The diamond-shaped eourtI yard area in the middle of the I center is located in the center .
 Bus stops right in New England f Shopping Center are an additional convenience for the shopper . Bus service Direct to Center is available direct to New England .
 The Saugus Transit Company’s modern buses leave every half hour on the half-hour and hour . The buses depart from the center and proceed to Cliftondale and then Main and Central Streets to New England Shopping Center .
 The same company runs buses from Malden Square along Route I directly to the* center of Malden .
 Direct bus transportation to the center will be available from Malden and Saugus starting at 0:30m. through 9:30 a.m. six days a week . Direct bus service will be offered from Maldens and Suggus starting from 0:00m. to
 Seven years of faith and perseverance on the part of Alan and Milton Green have finally culminated in the full realizatioh of what was once only a glimmer of imagination . The shopping center will contribute materially to the economic growth of the entire Greater Boston and north-of-Boston
 Paul F Stoneman started auctioning the many and varied articles donated by member for the benefit of the Winchester Hospital Building Fund . The Winchester Hospital Fund was set up to help the hospital build-up .
 Kingman P Cass, asSccne II The Almuncle tain Hut Scene II T The Mountain Goat, is a musical set of scenes .
 Peter’s Grandmotht ing Scene IV tain Hut Scene V where Heidi is living in Frankfurt in the city Scene VI Back to Almuncle's House in the Mountains Scene VII Scene V Scene VI Scene V is Heidi's daughter, Heidi's sister, Heidi .
 Finale Procession, All sing the lonely goatherd’s song from ‘Sound of Music’ Curtain, please. Audience join in this song, please . Audience joins in .
 Annual meeting of Winchester Scholarship Foundation will be held Monday night, December 4th, at 8:00m. in the Speech Arts Room at the Winchester High School . Cast for Midsummer Night’s Dream is Geoffrey Brackett .
 Committee called a meeting of those interested in forming a group to study these subjects . Committee called to meet to discuss the subjects .
 John B Wills were appointed to plan a first meeting on February 6, 1962 at 10m. at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Wills . The first meeting was held at 10:30am at 10.30pm at Mrs Wills' home in her home .
 Children's Theatre School will present three plays at Winchester High School Auditorium . Ralph R Meigs Puck, Titania, Cara McCarthy Peaseblossom and Marla Johnis Moth are the main characters .
 Captain Warbeck and his wife, Cornelia, from tin* mutineers. Crusoe and Friday . Crusoe . Friday .
 Benefit performance will be given for WGBH-Channel 2 to right. I he he Friday, December forinanee, at 3:4*m..
 Will Atkins, Richard Grandficld; Sandy McNutt, Billie Chase; Sandy . McNutt; Robinson Crusoe, 1 Marcy; Cornelia, Karen Kimball; Captain Tom Warbeck, Michael Fiore; Friday, Henry ich .
 Miss Slagle was given in marriage by her father, and bad as her only attendant her sister, Miss Bonnie Slagle of Arlington, was her sister . She was the only attendant .
 The bride wore a gown of white silk peau de soie fashioned with a scoop neck, three quarter length tight sleeves and a full skirt extending into a chapel train .
 Ano. ano. read her excellent secretary’s report, various announcements were made. Audience join in this song, please . Audience joined in this . song, Please join in .
 Everett Littlefield said that the Literature Group would meet at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Littlefield . Littlefield was a member of the Literary Group .
 Mrs. Blanche Barnard will give a paper on “American Poetry of the Civil War . Mrs. Barnard is also giving a paper about American Poetry . The Civil War Poetics of the War will be on Saturday .
 The next meeting will be “PresiChristmas Greefns Radio-Heater Automatic Transmission’ The Baptist Church Hall will open at 10m. next Wednesday, December 6 .
 Winchester Home and Garden Club is holding it’s annual Christmas Greens Sale . Winchester home and garden club holds annual Christmas greens sale . Winchester Home & Garden Club will be selling their Christmas Greens .
 This has become a traditional event and is regarded as one of the finest of its kind in our area . The event has become an annual tradition in the area and is now regarded as a 'traditional event'
 Everything imaginable in the way of Christmas decorations will be displayed . Here everything imaginable will he displayed .
 It is the ideal place to get started on holiday decorating, for with the wealth of ideas suggested by tlie lovely things exhibited, there will surely be something appealing that seems ‘just the thing” to make our hmnes gay and beautiful for the holidays .
 The natural place to begin home decorating is, of course, the front entrance . Home decorating begins at the entrance of your home .
 A musical program, featuring Phylis Howes (soprano) and Bob Phillips will be presented . The program will also feature a musical program by Bob Phillips .
 John G Hayward, 8th District Director, wore an attractive corsage made by Mrs. Mrs. Hayward .
 She also urged the attendance at the Christmas Institute in Boston on Thursday, December ally on the sale know that the Yuletide Spirit is very contagious and extend an invitation to everyone to come .
 Celia Hubbard, director of Boston’s Botolph Group, will lecture at Winchester Art Association next Tuesday, December 5 . Hubbard is a dynamic young artist and former magazine art director .
 Mrs. Ives, both of Winchester aiiges Mrs. Mrs. Morgan, Jr. an. an< Ives . While this lecture was held in Arlington, brother of John S Morgan Jr. Mr. Morgan was a member of the Morgan family .
 Joseph Howard, third generation of the well-known Florists, Inc., of Somerville, made arrangements . Mr Howard quickly and expertly made arrangements with fresh flowers .
 He divided a dozen red roses, showing that they could be enjoyed instead of vase . He then divided them up to 12 red roses .
 Purtle’s Pharmacy was established in the early twenties as Pratt's Pharmacy . The new owner will take over the pharmacy as of December 2 . The pharmacy will be taken over by the new owner .
 Celia Hubbard's work in the field of liturgical and religious art is unique . Her work is unique in her work on liturgical, religious art .
 She has drawn together artists and craftsmen who are available for work on religious subjects . She has brought to them a market, whether clergy or general public .
 Her services are not limited to Catholics, although by the very nature of the Catholic Church, art plays a greater part in its religious services than in some others .
 The gallery on Newbury Street caters to a wide variety of tastes . Wood carvings of religious figures, silver medals, plaques, ceramics, enamels, seriographs, creches, some traditional, some more abstract .
 A showing of religious prints by Sister Mary Corita and others from the Botolph group will he opened in the North Reading Room of the Library . At the same time, a showing of . religious prints will he show .
 George A Marks is in charge of arrangements for various ions. ing arrangements for meetings .
 Club members have made small corsages of small pine cones, berries and ribbons . Corsages are made up of pine cones and berries .
 Jeffrey Alan Gibson was born on November 23, at the Winchester Hospital . Jeffrey Alan was born to his parents W. Glenalan Gibson .
 Ghostrs 4.47 has had experience in pharmacies both in Swampscott and Marblehead, Massachusetts . Ghostrs is a member of both the A m e r r i c a n Pharmaceutical and Massachusetts Pharmaceutical Associations .
 Great-grandparents are Mr and and Mrs. Charles H. McLaughlin Jr. of Winchester, to Louis E. McLaughaughaugh . Charles H ment of th < McLaughlin  of Winchester was born to Louis Jr.
 Are you an Amateur Painter Student Artist or Hobby-Craft Painter? See the Color Match n Mix Art Set at Hillside Paint & Wallpaper Co. Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club is Winchester Duplicates Bridge Club .
 The first unit of the office park will be ready for occupancy in March . Charles Whitten of Winchester, president of the building firm, said that the first unit will be available for occupancy .
 Tenants and their employees will have complete swimming pool, restaurant, and hotel privileges, all of which are located on the same premises . Tenants will be able to use their own swimming pool and restaurant .
 Lakeside Office Park is the only location north of Boston that encompasses these features, Mr Whitten stated . Lakeside office park is only location in Boston that has these features .
 The Lord Wakefield Hotel and Restaurant opens on December 15 . The hotel is situated on the shores of Lake Quannapowitt .
 Warren F Barnes of Winchester, former Boston and Philadelphia hotel manager and owner of the Ocean Point Hotel in Booth Bay Harbour, Maine, is president and general manager of the hotel .
 All buildings are electrically heated, air conditioned, and have janitorial services . All buildings will be air conditioned .
 Extensive renovation of the Hevey Block is now under consideration . The Star learned this week from the owner of the block, Robert Davis of Arlington .
 Mr Davis told the Star that he hoped full details of the plan would be available for publication in the next edition .
 Circle Friday, December 8 for a one-stop shopping spree guaranteed to satisfy even the fussiest gift-giver .
 Santa's Bazaar will be held in the school auditorium from 3:15 to 5:30 . Santa’s Bazaar features truly unusual gift opportunities .
 There will be no presale buying and doors will not open to adults until 4:15 . Doors will open to children at 4:30pm and doors to adults open at 4.15pm .
 Remember to alert the children and watch for fuller details in next week’s paper .
 Dick Herlihy and Fid | Sullivan broke the mythical barrier on November 22nd with a partnerj ship percentage of .752. For more than two years, the I magic “769$ game” had successfully eluded the concentrated ef1 forts of
 Martha Walker and Ellen Schofield, 132% Richard Smith and Blair Hawley, 124% Mr and Mrs. Smith . North -South Martha Walker was 132% of the vote in the North .
 There are probably lots of people who play cozy rubbers of friendly bridge regularly at home . They just as regularly beat their spouse or favorite neighbors, and feel that they have achieved bridge Valhalla .
 But let them try duplicate and they will soon be in for a rude awakening . Let them try duplicating and they'll soon be awakening .
 There has been no defen sive bidding and the JD is opened UTOPIA . Of the eight tables which played this board in a spade contract, none were able to take ten tricks . Nine tricks were taken by NS at nine .
 Come in now — choose your Gorham design, and set the table of your dreams anytime . The Gorham restaurant is now open to the public for the first time ever .
 S«a $218.00 Rondo $196.00 Blithe Spirit $204.00 Chantilly $204 .00 Mew Clasiique $238.00 Price* ore for 32 piece service for eight and include Federal Tax*
 Mass. four tables, three declarers were held to eight tricks, and one unfortunate North took only seven tricks .
 North still has to find seven more tricks . With the AD and two top hearts in his pocket, North has to come up with seven .
 He will have to count on the trump suit to produce six tricks . Assuming he can set up a long diamond, he has to rely on his trump suit .
 Declarer might take the first trick with his AD and lead back a low diamond right away, since his task will be easier if he can find them split 3-3 .
 West can now win and return another diamond, giving East a chance to discard the 3H and make declarer’s small trumps useless . East can now return a diamond and discard a 3H .
 If he leads the KD, that's set up for North while he still has an entry . North still has a place in the NBA, but that's not enough for him .
 There is a subtle fallacy in' herent in even the line of play suggested above, suggested above . Far from I it, for there is a . subtle fallacy . in . even the lines of play . suggested above.
 Hilda Libby Ives Sunday morning* at 0:15 at 0.15 at the Senior Forum of tho First Congregational Church . Ives is a member of the congregation at the First Congregation Church .
 Ives has been coming to Forum for many years and each year tho young people are interested to hear her brief mention of new great grandchi’ii . n in the family . Ives says she has a new great-grandchild in her family .
 This is her way of keeping in touch with the interests and needs of young peofrom active work as a professor at A n dove r Newton Theological School and from regular pastorates “ — ■ in several Maine churches .
 Congressman Bradford Morse -pent much of the day talking with his Winchester constituents . Morse visited the Mystic Glee Club on Tuesday, November 28 .
 During the noon hour and early afternoon, lu* was at the Town Hall to greet and discuss areas of interest with local voters .
 Republican Committee members from Winchester, Woburn, and Arlington, were on hand to renew acquaintances with Mr and Mrs. Bob and Mrs .
 Mr Morse outlined what he defined as tho three major issues f the past session of Congress . After an introduction by Ralph Bonnell,
 On Aid to Education bill, j Mr Morse said, the Rules Com| mittee held the Bill in Committee when the religious issue was interjected .
 The Administration forced the bill to the House floor and was i defeated . The bill was forced to be defeated .
 The Administration was also defeated on the Foreign Aid hill for a five year appropriation . The Administration also defeated a five-year extension of Foreign Aid .
 He predicted the next Congreasion1 al session will he greatly concerned with Medical Aid to the Aged and the extension of Reciprocal Trade Agreements . He predicted he will be concerned with medical aid to the aged .
 Lillian Whitman, chairman of the Winchester Republican Town Cotnmit| tee, as well as several other committee members of the fairer sex ter making the arrangements for < ongressman Morse’s successful i visit to Winchester . Morse's successful i.E.Winchester
 Moulton completed a three-year enlistment in the Army in September . He was recalled to active duty with the 324th Battalion of the United States ASA at Fort Devens .
 Get a headstart on your Christmas shopping with Green Stamps . Ml this week ANO NEXT... thousands of extra stamps top you/ Get an extra stamp top you .
 Enjoy the full, heart-warming taste of this rich, full-bodied coffee . Enjoy the taste of a rich and full-beneated coffee .
 Paul Whitney is engaged in a new development off Main Street in Lynnfield . Whitney is a local contractor and builder who developed Briarwood Estates off Johnson Road and Willowdale Road area .
 Known as Ridgefield, this development includes some 38 homes of early American design with roads and other necessary adjuncts . Ridgefield is the largest development of its kind in the country .
 Mystic Glee Club gives a special concert at the* Walpole State Prison .
 The invitation to sing came from a committee composed of church loaders in the state and prison officials . The committee attempts to bring specially selected entertainment to convicts .
 The program was composed of lighter and more popular music . It is proving to be so well received by the club's audiences .
 The inmates at the prison, composed entirely of convicts, guards and officials, enjoyed the musicals “Gigi” and “My Fair Lady’s” musicals . The listeners were made up entirely of prisoners and guards .
 The remainder of the program was made up of spirituals, barbershop numbers, sea chanties and a few religious selections which showed the versatility of the club .
 Wendell Withington directed the Club and Frances Randall Cabot was the accompanist . The Club was set up at the end of the year .
 Mystic Glee Club will present its annual winter concert December 16 at the Junior High School auditorium . After giving several concerts in surrounding towns and cities during the next two weeks, the group will give a good turn-out .
 This is a fine chance to win a prize, to develop a youngster’s ability and power of self-expression . The winner of the prize will be announced at the end of the month .
 W. Appleton Lawrence, former bishop of Western Massachusetts, will conduct a quiet day for the Women of Epiphany on Tuesday, December 12 . Lawrence will conduct the quiet day .
 Holy Communion will be celebrated at 10m. followed by devotions and luncheon at 12:30m. Holy communion will be held at the end of the service .
 Winchester Camp Fire Girls launch their Annual Candy Sale on Friday, December 1, along with the (amp Fire Girls in tin* many cities and towns in the Council for Greater Boston Camp Fire Girl . Camp Eire Girls Launch Candy Drive Today .
 Camp Fire Girls and Horizon Club members will knock on doors to bring home chocolates . Russell Stover Gandy Company of Lincoln, Nebraska, will make the chocolate .
 You will recognize the girls dressed in their red. white and blue costumes and their warm happy smiles . The girls will be dressed up in their costumes .
 Winchester Fire Girls Candy Sale Committee will help make this year’s (‘amp Fire Girls) Candy Sale a real success . Mothers, fathers and leaders, too, will be helping the Winchester Candy Sale .
 The major purpose of the candy sale is to balance the Council’s operating budget for 1962 . More girls may be served in the Camp Fire Girls year round program for girls from seven to 17 years of age .
 The Blue Birds are seven and eight years old . They learn new things and have fun in a program of outdoors and nature, music, games, homemaking, trips to interesting places, and hand arts .
 Camp Fire Girls earn the Group Torch Bearer Rank and then Individual Torch bearer Rank . High Camp Fire girls earn the . Group Torch bearers Rank and Individual Torch Bearers Rank .
 Horizon Club members, 9th graders and above have a grown up program of vocational exploration, personality development, outdoor activities, developing social relationships, and giving community service . Horizon Club is a program for 9th grade students .
 Fantasia opens a new cocktail lounge featuring for its decor a festive green eanopy over the bar .
 An organ-bar, in the corner, is surmounted hy a colorful canopy in a rose surmounted by a rose motif . An organ bar is also surmounted with a rose .
 Graceful drapes, luxurious chairs and subdued lighting provide a restful air to thi> justly famous restaurant .
 This is State Item III on the 1961-1962 Program . It deals with a region instead of a core-city area . This is state Item III of the program .
 Police Chief Dcrro notified parents of teenagers when their hoys and girls seemed headed in the direction of trouble with his department .
 Chief believes in most instances parents of children about to get into trouble do not know anything about their youngsters activities . The Chief, from his experience with parents and young people, instituted his notification procedure .
 W hether they should or should not know about them didn't enter into it all into it . "I'm not sure what I think about them," she said .
 He thought they didn’t know and subsequent events have proven that he was right . He thought that they didn't know and subsequently events have proved that, he said .
 Delaware State Police have been conducting a similar campaign similar to the one instituted by Chief Derro . Police in W.mington, Del., say they're doing a similar thing .
 The program is designed as a warning to parents that their teen agers, hows or girls, are in had company, arc acquiring l>a(l habits and heading for trouble . The program was designed to warn parents of the dangers of their children .
 The Winchester program is going to be no better than the parents permit it to be . Naturally their program, like the one in Winchester, will be no different from the parents .
 "Their interest and cooperation is absolutely necessary if the plan is to be helpful," says President Obama . "The plan is very important to be successful," says Obama .
 In Wilmington the jxdicc arc greatly encouraged with the reception their letters have received from the parents . In Wilmington, Delaware, the jxcicc has received the support of parents .
 In more than TO per cent of the cases parents notified have replied to the police . Most parents expressed appreciation of the interest shown by the police in their youngsters .
 Chief Derro tells the Star that his department has also had a good percentage of repsonse to their letters . i> to ^0 per cent of the parents having either written in reply or called the station to talk things over . i >% of parents have responded to the letters .
 The Chief signs the letters himself, but much of the actual work with young people at the local Station is done by the Juvenile Officer, Jim Cogan .
 Parents should understand what the police arc trying to do in this campaign . Parents should be aware of what they are trying to protect their children .
 They are not, as a few parents seem to feel, trying to interfere with the town’s voting poeple, nor are they attempting to tell parents how they should rear their children . The parents are not trying to tell the town how to vote, nor how to rear
 What they are trying to do is simply to prevent trouble, to stop it before it gets started, rather than punish wrong doing after it is done . What they arc trying to . try to . stop trouble, not to punish . after it's done. What they . arc trying is
 The Delaware program lias received national attention, so much so that Maryland is considering a like program . Maryland is also considering a similar program .
 Winchester Police Chief Derro is encouraged at the reception his department has received from parents . Winchester police chief says he is looking forward to parents' support .
 A number of them have come to Headquarters to talk things over with him and Officer Cogan . They have also come to headquarters to talk about their relationship with him .
 Some parents have brought their youngsters to the police station to hear what the police have to say about their actions . The police are eager to supply advice in their effort to keep hoys and girls out of trouble .
 Chief Derro told the Star that since he instituted the letter writing several weeks ago there has been an apparent improvement in teen age actions . He pointed to absence of any real trouble on Hallowe’en and more recently on the night before the big Winchester-W’oburn
 In the past there has been considerable deviltry before the game, ranging all the way from painting bleachers and goal posts to rotten egging cars .
 Some such system as the letter writing is necessary now, for Police work like everything else has changed . Some such systems are necessary now. Some such a letter writing system is necessary .
 In the old days the route patrolmen knew all the young people on his heat . The route patrolman knew all of his heat. He now has a radio set up in the city .
 When he saw one of ‘his’s’ boys or girls in the way of getting into trouble, he stopped by the family home and dropped a hint to the parents .
 Sometimes, if he saw the son of a friend making a fool of himself, a cuffed ear or an application of his jxdiceman's special to the right spot was well within the officer’s province . If he saw a friend make a fool, it was well
 Route officers are as scarce as t lie dodo, and the law has stripped policemen of much of their informal punitive powers . Route officers have been stripped of most of their formal punitive powers.
 Parents resent any interference on the part of a stranger with their youngster’s complete freedom . For one thing parents do not know policemen as they did the old route officer .
 Police make scant contacts with young people unless they are sent to break up a fight or to assist at an accident . Police, cruising along in automobiles, make scant contact with youngsters .
 They do not know the kids personally as the old route officer did, and do not have the advantage of mutual knowledge and understanding . Instead of a route officer, the new route officer has a job with the school district .
 What few youngsters were hanging around at night years ago were pretty much known and pinpointed for possible trouble by the police . Now, the police say they are aware of the dangers of young people hanging around .
 There arc just too many youngsters on their own today to make this possible . There arc too many young people in the world to make it possible .
 The only salvation of the Police in a sincere attempt to prevent juvenile crime lays in the home and parents . Police say parents are responsible for their children's safety .
 If the Police can get the cooperation of parents, if they can bring to the attention of the parents the awful danger in which their sons and daughters stand because of their anti-social tendencies, a start can he made in rehabilitating our boys and girls .
 Ignorance on the part of parents of actual conditions as they affect their children has permitted many an essentially good boy or girl to drift into conduct that finally makes necessary punitive action by the police .
 Chief Derro and his department arc striving to prevent this from happening . It is to prevent it from happening again .
 The best, possibly the only way to enlist parental cooperation and supxirt is by informing parents of what their hoys and girls are doing . The best way of enlisting parental cooperation is to tell parents what their children are doing, and what they're doing .
 If parents do not avail themselves of the opportunity offered to prevent their youngsters from falling into the hands of the police for criminal behaviour, the fault will not be that of police .
 It would seem the least they can get from parents is cooperation and support . It's the least parents can expect from parents to support their children .
 Decorations, Yes; Coney Island, No. No. Christmas decorations in the Centre .
 In a poll conducted by the Winchester Christmas Spirit Committee, sixty out of 1 Town Meeting members favored “more but conservative decorations,” while T> opposed more decorations outright .
 The Winchester Christmas decorations at the Centre are conservative, restrained, simple, and in good taste . This is a representative cross-sampling of Winchester opinion . The Town as a whole favors Christinas decorations .
 Those favoring decorations, it has been seen, fear gaudiness, excessiveness, and vulgar display . I Wen those favoring decoration, those favoring decorating .
 We know that the Christmas Spirit Committee has considered these opinions with due care and has planned its decorations accordingly . The committee has considered the opinions of the public with due consideration .
 Winchester's Christmas decorations could be lost in its desire to increase its Christmas decorations . Winchester should not lose its quiet dignity and traditional restraint for which we have come to admire it .
 It would also be unfortunate if the essentially religious nature of Christmas were to he obscured by factors less noble .
 Pictures Tell Story Fisc* where on this page the Star is showing the wrecks of automobiles involved in accidents in Winchester on one day, Thanksgiving . This page is a collection of photographs from the Winchester Star .
 In one of the wreck> shown two of the three teen agers riding in the car wme killed .
 We are publishing the pictures with the hope that Inns and girls embarking on their driving careers will look at them and understand what happened to those riding in the wrecked cars .
 Parents of teen agers who have their own cars or ride in those of their young friends will also have to consider the wreckage .
 Automobiles, properly used, contribute greatly to twentieth century living . Automobiles are the vehicles used to drive cars in the United States . Automobile is a vehicle that can be driven by a driver .
 Foolishly nr recklessly driven, they are among the most lethal takers of life extent . Foolishly reckless nr. driven are the most dangerous drivers of the world .
 18ycar-ohl William Poor of Somerville and 20-year-old Joseph V Astureio of Medford were killed and Thomas MeCormaek, 17, seriously injured . Their ear crashed into a stone wall near Symmes Corner at 12:25 in.
 Oldsmohile coupe went out of control while travelling south on Cambridge Street and smashed into a tree on the westerly side of the road near the W inchester Conservatories .
 29-year-old Eileen M Fowler of 10 Burt Road in Wilmington was treated at the \\ inehester Hospital for lacerations and bruises . Fowler was taken to the hospital in Wilmington, Delaware .
 Dr. Bryant Conant assures us that Germany, in a great change of heart, has turned its hack on its ugly Nazi past .
 Mr Tetens is a close student of German affairs . If the evidence documented in his book is correct, his vote is for him to win .
 Chancellor Adenauer himself conceded in 1952 that 66 per cent of Bonn’s higher diplomats were former Nazis .
 Adenauer’s Secretary of State, Hans Glohke, was personally responsible in 1943 for the death of 20,000 Jews at Auschwitz . He had earlier drafted Hitler's notorious racial laws that resulted in the planned extermination of all Jews . Adenauer's secretary of state, Hans
 He supervises the German diplomatic corps, controls the appointment of government personnel, and prepares Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. for the president .
 Mr Ludwig Erhard is Bonn's minister of economics and heir apparent to Dr. Erhard . Mr Erhard has been in Bonn since the 1970s .
 88 per cent of the German people polled in November, 1957 refused even to discuss their feelings about the Jews . In a nation that insists it is now a “Republic,’s ‘Republic’ in Germany refused to discuss Jews .
 Their strategy has been to forge identification papers and infiltrate right wing parties . According to their own confiscated records, they have been trying to forge ID documents .
 If we can stomach Franco as an ally, it is not very likely that Washington will reverse its policy on neo-Nazis in Bonn, Germany .
 Mr Teten’s book might he given consideration when we debate giving nuclear weapons to Germany, or when we deal with the threat to build H-bombs .
 Richard A Hakanson, Publisher James H Penallgan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan, Assistant Editor Theodore P Wilson — Editor and Publisher 1919 . 1954 The Winchester Star, left at yonr Residence for one year .
 The essential point is that our best hope of survival is not a shelter, but in working as best we know how for peace . We hope that whatever bombs are aimed at Boston miss their target to such an extent that shelters are of value .
 We can’t count on all bombs aimed at Boston missing that city and Winchester, by a sufficient number of miles . Winchester would be worth something if a shelter there was a shelter .
 Each of us can write the President of the United States and our Senators and Representative in Congress. Each of them can write a letter to the President .
 Seek agreement that all countries disarm at the same time, by steps, and endeavor by inspection to be sure all have completed one step before the next started .
 A world-wide UN-inspected disarmament plan should be implemented, writes Andrew Hammond . He says countries should feel they can safely give up part of their arms . Hammond: Police should be able to take disputes to the World Court (which they can't do now)
 U.S. Senate and House of Representatives arrangement, but with limits on maximum representation of larger nations . Senate and Representatives arrangement with definite limits on total representation .
 "Seek a greater feeling of good will and trust on the part of all nations," says President Obama . Seek a 'great feeling of goodwill and trust'
 Some may say that Russia or Chinu will never listen to any proposal for a stronger United Nations . We may not have much time and need to act as quickly as we can, says President Obama . I am of the opinion that the only much time is to act .
 No one can say what Russia’s answer would be if faced with the unanimous and repeated proposal of all the non-satellite countries of the world . Russia's answer to the proposal is unclear .
 Russia has spent much to try to influence world opinion and might hesitate to flout a proposal supported by all . The proposal is likely to be rejected by the Russian government . Russia has had a long history of trying to influence the world's opinion .
 The chances may be one out of 50, but if this is our only chance we must consider it, we must . The chances of winning the game are one in 50, according to the mayor of London .
 If a bull is chasing you toward an eight-foothigh fence which is the only way out, you’re going to try to make it and not just quit first . If you've never been over such a fence before, try to try and make it, not just
 When Anns Control Bill was pending, the United World Federalists informed their members throughout the U.S. so they might act in time .
 This organization seeks to make more effective the work of individuals toward a more effective United Nations . This organization is based in New York City, New York .
 The undersigned or other members of the Winchester Chapter of UWF will gladly provide information about the organization to those who request it .
 2 Wolcott Terrace solution for mankind is total nuclear disarmament, policed by World Government . Sincerely, Robert B Williams wrote to Robert Williams .
 I have read the new contribution from The Star on the fallout discussion . I have also read a new contribution to The Star's new contribution .
 I have no wish to enter the pres ent controversy raging over fallout shelters . I'm not interested in entering the debate about fallout shelters, but I'm concerned about the issue .
 I would like to voice my agreement with Norma Woods’ letter in last week’s Star . However, I would not agree with her letter . I would also voice my support for the letter .
 Let us first inform ourselves, then spend our energies working for pence rather than wringing our hands and waiting for destruction . Let us spend our energy working for the pence instead of wrangling our hands . We need to be first informed ourselves, and then work for our country .
 Some of the current projects are the Tufts-Newton Summer Seminar in Public Affairs, the Nine States Youth Citizenship Project and Interchange . Interchange is a newsletter sharing information among schools in the Northeast .
 A repre sentative from the Center is available to explain the program to terested groups .
 The first editorial is one of the most striking presentations I have seen of the case against reliance on shelters; and the Letters response was exciting, moving, and informative . The Letters response is exciting and moving .
 "Here again, your reply to was temperate, informed and shatteringly effective. Here again, you replied to your question with an answer to the question: 'What do you think?'
 The powerful thrust and counter-thrust of the Letters page, and the consequent ventilation of matters too often avoided, seemed to me, to use a word that has a way of being misused American, in the best sense .
 The “Red or Dead” editorial deals most effectively with a pro blem that has vexed too many people needlessly . Its credo is strongly stated, affirmative, and forward looking .
 "This is one of the healthiest examinations of the issues before us that I have seen," says the British Prime Minister . "It is a healthiest examination of the issue before us," he says .
 Ninth-Grade Holiday Dance on Friday, December 1, from 8:00 to 11:00m. for all ninth gruders of Winchester . First Congregational Church is sponsoring the dance .
 Tickets can be purchased from Diane Changaris and Debbie Nelson at the McCall school or from Sue Jackson, Sally Worthen and Scott Wallace at the Lynch school .
 Congressman: "I believe that the true revolution of modern times remains the American Revolution" Dress will be casual .
 When we say we're conservatives, we must remember wbat we’re conserving. But when we say that, we should remember conserving, we're conserving .
 We’re not just conserving our right to clip coupons . although that is a vital aspect of our society, too . We're not just saving our right but we're preserving our society's right to use coupons .
 "We're conserving the Revolution of 1775 in which we asserted the right of every man everywhere, not just in America, to he free and well-fed," says President Obama . We are conserving our Revolution, he says .
 Congressman Morse struck out at what he called the “grey flannel” conformity of many Americans today . Morse at the same time struck out against what he calls the ‘grey . flannel . conformity” of many today .
 He called “grey flannel thinking of grey flannel minds” unworthy of the American individualist tradition . He called it “unworthy of American individualism .
 Mr Morse also urged people in business and the professions to get into politics .
 Congressman served as chief assi.st| ar| t to Senator Leverett Saltonstall from 1955 to 1958 . He served as 1 United States Deputy Administrator of Vete inns’ Affairs from 1968 to 19(50)
 He said he was “available” and would be happy to serve in the Senate if Massachusetts, once again, wanted more than a “name” in its highest legislative body .
 They especially appreciate the kindness and cooperation of the chief and members of the Fire Department, who were helpful in so many ways, they say .
 John B Mercurio Insurance Office at 1 Mount Vermin Street is observing its 15th anniversary of service to Winchester this month .
 Mr Mercurio servos as insurance agent, while his wife, Mary, serves as secretary-bookkeeper . His son, John B., Jr., helps out on Saturdays when he is not attending classes in business administration at Boston College .
 With John Mercurio, as with so many other Winchester businessmen, the old saw that “the customer’s interests come first,” is something more than a slogan . Mercurios: With so many others, ‘the customer's interest come first’
 John Mercurio has built up close connections with leading insurance houses over the year . To ensure such coverage at the lowest possible costs to the customer, he has had to build up close .
 A past president of Kiwanis, he has taken a keen interest in community affairs . He has also been a keen member of the community .
 H«» is a member of the Winchester Scholarship Committee, a fourth degree Knight of Columbus, and a former advocate of the K of C . He has also been active in the Sons of Italy Lodge, the Christopher Columbus Club and the Winchester Lodge of Elks .
 Irene Cannava of 85 Squire Road and John B Jr., a junior at Boston College in the College of Business Administration. Irene J Cannava, 85 Squires Road, is a mother-of-two . John Jr. is a junior in the college of business Administration
 This is John Mercurio’s 15th year at this Mount Vernon Street insurance stand, but it's his 28th year in the business . This year marks the 15th anniversary of the insurance stand's opening .
 His many friends wish him many more years of successful insurance business and of valuable eommuhity service .
 John Laiii*son, heads the Committee as chairman, with Ralph Hatch, treasurer; and Mrs. Mrs. Lai*son . Ralph Hatch is treasurer; Mrs. Martha Hatch is secretary .
 Janies Quine represents the Junior Chamber of Commerce on the Committee, and John J Shanahan, the Board of Park Commissioners . John Shanahan, John J. Shanahan, also represents the Park Commission .
 The Committee wishes to express its gratitude to the many merchants, individuals and groups who have contributed so generously to make its decorating problem possible .
 SEARS ROEBUCK CO. and Antoine’s Beauty Salon. Baker Shoes Barber Shop. Dorothy Muriel-Brigham’�s Elm Farm Foods Co. and . Elm Farm Food Co. Co. are also on the menu .
 Jay’s Gift Store Kennedy Butter and Egg Stores Liggetts Drug Stores and Drug Stores . Ludwig Cleaners Cleaners Lynn 5 Cents Savings Bank Maytag Launderette National Shoes
 New England Shopping Center is centrally located on Route 1 in Saugus just minutes from most North ofBoston communities . The shopping center is located in New England, Massachusetts .
 New England Shopping Center is new shopping headquarters for Lynn, Lynn . Lynn, Massachusetts, is located in Lynn, New England, Massachusetts .
 Reading, Wakefield, Lynnfield and Lynnfield, Peabody, Danvers, Salem, Swamp, scott, Marblehead, Winthrop and Winthrop . Salem, swamp, Swamp and Marblehead are among many towns .
 Parking for over 3500 cars is a new concept in shopping centers... designed for you . The concept is designed for shopping centers .
 Every imaginable convenience awaits you ... including protected walkways and the easiest parking ever . Enjoy the easy way to get to your destination .
 You’ve never seen Christmas values like these . . . You've never seen a fun-filled shopping center like this one . You have never seen an event like this .
 Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION’s FUNDS S AFEGt ARD ARD . The neat egg of your social, fraternal or church organization hy opening an Account .
 Your club’s funds will earn a nice profit, he fully insured anti readily available . He is fully insured, fully insured and readily available.
 Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 CHURCH STREET Generous Dividends Paid Regularly nov30-2t (ibituama Newsy Paragraphs Mrs. Newsy Newsy)
 Fred M Cameron of Stetson Hall is reported to be recovering from surgery at Winchester Hospital . He is said to have had surgery at the Winchester Hospital on Monday .
 Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic, a place where men can escape for a few minutes of pence, relaxation and grooming . The clinic is a place for men to relax, relax and groom .
 The entrance opens onto the driveway which runs beside the salon at 11 Thompson Street . The entrance to the salon is located on the corner of the salon .
 Fred S Mitchell of Winchester Place, was in town last week to spend Thanksgiving with his parents . Fred Mitchell was visiting his parents to spend the holiday with his family .
 David attends Thompson Academy, and he brought with him as his holiday guest another Academy boy, Edward Wood . Edward Wood is a junior at Thompson Academy . David attends the school .
 The pleasure of your company is requested at “The Pleasure of His Company,” December 1 and 2 in Metcalf Hall .
 Father Jim Hennessy Mission Club meeting in the Charter Room of the New England Life Building in Boston Wednesday December 6, at 8:15m.
 Miss Leslie Anne Pendergast of Lexington, formerly of Winchester, has been elected to the Girls’ Leader Corps of the Muzzey Jr.
 The Leaders Corps is made up of girls, who are chosen by faculty for scholastic and physical ability, personality, initiative, dependability, and interest .
 The New England Dog Training Club, Inc. of Boston (a non-profit organization) will be holding its 26th Annual Obedience Trial Show on Sunday, December 3 .
 Jack Volpe accepted to pledge Delta Kappa, a chapter of Delta Sigma Pi . Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company .
 Brink of 33 Samoset Road, former Winchester High School star football lineman, was among those receiving freshman football numerals from St. Winchester . Brink was a star lineman at Winchester High .
 Donald Butters of 10 New Meadows Road is among members of Wentworth Institute’s Band playing at school assemblies and other school functions during the year . Butters is a Winchester student .
 G Lindrov Witham, II and the late Mr Witham of 75 Bacon Street, have had one of her art works chosen for exhibition . Wellesley College freshman is a freshman at Wellesley .
 The composition is of insulating brick and may be viewed later on in the season at the Jewett Art Center, Wellesley College .
 Michael Macdonald, Jr., of Bacon Street, is chairman of the hockey game to be played during the annual Bates College Winter Carnival sponsored by the Outing Club . The game will be played at Bates College during the Winter Carnival .
 Kodak color prints and Christmas cards should be ordered now at the Winchester Camera Shop . Mrs. nov2-tf Mrs.
 Lewis M Foster of Lloyd Street has returned to her home and is convalescing nicely . He recently underwent surgery at the New England Baptist Hospital .
 Firemen responded to a call reporting a smoking TV set at the Boyle residence at 15 Russell Road Friday at 5:12m. Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company .
 The TV transformer had burned out causing a good deal of smoke throughout the house . On arrival firemen dsicovered that the TV transformer was burned out .
 John M Kirk of Jefferson Court, Woburn, struck an Edison utility pole . Join Winchester Christmas Club for which applications are now available at Winchester Trust Company .
 Kirk told police he lost control of his car when the right front tire blew out . Kirk said he was driving when he was hit by the tire blow-out . Kirk says he was trying to control his car and lost control .
 He claimed no injuries, police report, but his car was damaged on the right side of the road . Police report: The driver was not injured .
 Clarence Russell of Lovell, Maine, formerly of this town, spent the holiday weekend in Winchester visiting friends and relatives . Russell spent the weekend with friends and family .
 Benson was treated for superficial lacerations at Winchester Hospital early Saturday morning . Benson's car struck a tree in front of 43 Mystic Valley Parkway . Benson was taken to Winchester Hospital for treatment .
 Charles D Stebbins of Oxford Street was elected Monday night at the Town Meeting as a precinct member to fill the vacancy caused by the death of F Meredith Cooper . Charles D
 Albert S Crockett was elected a director of the Massachusetts Municipal Personnel Boards Association at the recent sixth annual conference of the organization .
 Mr Crockett discussed the 1961 wage trends as disclosed in the 4th edition of the Associations’s municipal employees salary survey . At the conference'
 Wa will deliver. fe2-tf Ollie Jean has now opened her Scalp Clinic . The clinic is a place where men can escape for a few minutes of peace and relaxation .
 Street Street have sold their home at Symmes Corner and are moving to Winter Park, Florida . Street Street are selling their home in Florida and moving to Florida .
 For many years, the old homestead was the headquarters of the 11building Symmes Farm . It was built in 1881 by the grandfather of Mr Marshall Symmedes of Yale Street .
 Dinah Kohner of Belfast, Ireland, is guest speaker at today’s luncheon meeting of the Winchester Rotary in Masonic Apartments . Kohner is now associated with the Children’�s Hospital in Boston, Boston .
 Toys for boys 8 to 12 years of age are to be brought and wrapped for the Christmas fellowship meeting at the church in December . The boys 8-12 years old will be wrapped and brought in for the meeting .
 Please come, but if you cannot attend, kindly phone and let your hostess know . Please come to the event, but please phone and tell her hostess about it .
 Steve Powers, Dick Tierney and Steve Powers are Winchester boys playing on the Northeastern varsity hockey team . The Winchester boys play for Northeastern at Northeastern .
 Cambridge Center for Adult Education on arrangements for the Center’s Holly Fair at Brattle House in Cambridge tomorrow from l to 9m. and all day Saturday .
 Harry Edward Brown died early Thanksgiving morning November 23, at the Winchester Hospital after four years of failing health . Brown was one of the last of his generation at the Central Fire Station in Winchester .
 Flags on the common and public buildings were displayed at half-staff in his honor . Flags were displayed on the public buildings in honor of the soldier .
 He was born January 11, 1877, in Effingham, N.H., and spent his early life there, later as a young man living there .
 He came to Winchester in 1916, and built the house in which he lived at 13 Rock Avenue . He moved there in 1916 .
 Prior to entering the Fire Department, he was foreman for George Poland, a local building contractor . He learned the carpenter’s trade and was a carpenter before entering the fire department .
 During World War I he worked at his trade at the Boston Naval Shipyard . He worked at the shipyard during World War One .
 Mr Brown was appointed a call man in the Fire Department October 1, 1916 . He was appointed by the department in 1916 .
 He received a provisional appointment on March 30 1919, and was made a permanent firefighter September 30, 1919 . He was made permanent firefighter on September 30 .
 He served under three chiefs, the late David H DeCourcy and John J German, and the present Chief James E Callahan . He served as a member of the late Chief of the Police Force .
 He was appointed to special duty on the department’s fire alarm . April 3, 1930, and retired Jan uary 23, 1943, .
 During his years in the department he made many im provements at the station through his skill as a carpenter . He made many of the best imitations of the station .
 He was a member of the Carpenter's Union and of the Winchester Fireman’s Relief Association . He was also a fireman's union member .
 On January 1, 1901, Mr Brown married Bridget Agnes Cullen of Winchester . Mr Brown died October 3, 1956 .
 Ring, all of Winchester, has 15 grandchildren and 13 great-grandchildren . Ring was married to William Ring, of Winchester . Ring also had a daughter and a son-in-law . Ring is survived by William Ring and his wife .
 The funeral was held Saturday morning from the McLaughlin Fu neral Home in Woburn, with Engine 1 of the Fire Department and the pallbearers .
 Firefighters, Walter Skerry, John J Flaherty, Charles R Moran and Bernard Stygles acting as escort . Walter Carroll, Walter Carroll and John J. Flaherty acted as escort. Walter Carroll .
 Requiem high mass was celebrat ed at the Immaculate Conception Church by Rev. Rev. John Lister . Requiem was held at the Immaculate Conception Church .
 A detachment of firefighters under Chief James E Callahan, formed a guard of honor . The ceremony was held in honor of the fallen .
 Mary Waters Kelley, widow of Erskine Hawes Kelley, died Wednesday afternoon, November 2, at Winchester Hospital . She was a member of the family at the Home for Aged People .
 She was born August 18, 1876, in Charlottetown, P.E.I., but went as a girl to Woburn, growing up in that city and attending the public schools . She was also a girl who went to the public school in that town .
 They lived for 30 years in Winchester, making their home on Wildwood Street before moving to Andover . They lived in Andover, Massachusetts, for about 30 years .
 For twelve years they lived in Andover until Mr Kelley’s death, at which time Mrs. Kelley died . For 12 years, the Kelley and Mrs Kelley lived there for 12 years .
 Kelley returned to Winchester to make her home with her son, Erskine H Kelley, on Forest Street . Kelley moved to Winchester with son on Forest St. Kelley in 2004 .
 Dorothy Kelley Woodard of Spartansburg, S.C., has four grandchildren and six great-grandchildren . She also has six great grandchildren and four great-great grandchildren . The Woodard family is also survived by six other grandchildren .
 Committal services were held Monday at noon at the family lot in Wildwood Cemetery with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister was a member of the Baptist National Guard .
 Frederick Noss of the South Congregational Church of Andover officiated the service . Noss officiated .
 Sidney Q Curtiss of Sheffield is Republican floor leader in the House of Representatives . Curtiss is a member of the newly formed Calendar Committee . He is also the Republican leader in Sheffield .
 The function of this committee is of the highest importance because it is the job of the minority party to prevent any type of legislation being acted upon which is detrimental to the Commonwealth from appearing on the calendar without notice .
 The members of this committee have been appointed because of their knowledge and alertness . The committee was appointed because they were aware of their alertness and knowledge . They were appointed to the committee because they are alert and knowledgeable .
 Chadwick has been a member of the Massachusetts House since 1947 . Chadwick is a town meeting member and moderator in Winchester, Massachusetts .
 Stephen Cutler Greene and daughter of C Fred, and Louise Eberle of Winchester, died early Friday morning, November 24, at the Putnam Memorial Hospital in Bennington after a brief illness with spinal meningitis .
 She had visited her parents in Winchester the week previous to her death . She had been in the best of health when she died .
 Greene was born June 5, 1928, in Boston though her parents were residents of Winchester at the time . Greene was also born in Winchester, Massachusetts .
 She grew up in town, attending Winchester schools and Winchester High School, from which she graduated in the class of 1946 .
 A member of the scholastic honor roll, she was a three sport athlete and winner of the Mansfield-Wheeler Sportsmanship Cup . She was also a three-sport athlete .
 Voted the girl who had done most for the school, the most popular girl and the best all around senior . She was secretary of the student council, a member of the executive board of the Athletic Association and on the staffs of both the student paper and yearbook .
 After two years at Colby Junior College, and her marriage to Mr Greene September 11, 1948, she accompanied her husband to Milford, Connecticut . Mr Greene was completing his studies at Yale Divinity School .
 Greene accompanied him to his first pastorate at the First Parish Church in Island Pond Vermont . Greene accompanied Greene to the church . Greene was a member of Greene's congregation .
 Mr Greene became minister of the Second Congregational Church in Bennington . From the post five years ago they went to Bennington where Mr Greene was minister .
 His wife assisted him with his work in many ways, as a member of numerous church committees and in the general role of a minister's wife .
 She was genuinely beloved by those, young and old, fortunate enough to know her well . Greene who did not like her, and she was genuinely loved by those who knew her well. Greene . Greene was not a fan of Greene, but she was a hero of the day . Greene
 Always friendly and considerate, with a sincere liking for people, she enjoyed an unusually wide circle of friends . News of her untimely passing brought a very deep regret .
 Greene leaves behind three children, Elisabeth Everts, 11; Frederick Eberle, 8 and Nancy Louise Greene 5 . Greene leaves three children with his wife .
 At the service at her husband’s Church last Sunday there were many clergymen in attendance . Some clergymen from as far distant as Burlington .
 A committal service was conducted at the family lot in Wildwood Cemetery Monday forenoon . A funeral service was held at the funeral home .
 Cart also conducted a largely attended memorial service at the First Congregational Church on Monday afternoon . Cart conducted the largely attended service . Cart's funeral service was held at the church .
 Franklin Pynn, 73, of 24 Clematis Street, died Tuesday morning, November 28, at the Winchester Hospital after a long period of failing health . Franklin was retired superintendent of Wrought Iron Kitchen Equipment Company .
 He was born September 15, 1888, at Harbor Grace, Newfoundland, and grew up there learning the trade of a sheet metal worker .
 In 1911 he came to this country and soon after settled in Winchester, making his home in town for half a century . He came to the UK in 1911 and settled in the town of Winchester .
 He was for many years a member and active in Waterfield Lodge of Odd Fellows . He was also a member of the First Baptist Church .
 For a time after coming to this country Mr Pynn had his own sheet metal business in Boston under the name of Trask,Pynn Co. He had a sheet metal company in Boston .
 In 1944 he became associated with the Wrought Iron Kitchen Equipment Company in Boston . He was shop superintendent at the time of his retirement four years ago .
 Florence Chase of Winchester is survived by six sons and six daughters . Franklin Pynn, Jr., Jr., of Waltham, is also survived by Franklin Chase, Jr. Florence Chase, of Winchester .
 Also surviving are 18 grandchildren and one great-granddaughter; a sister, Mrs. Mrs. Smith . Also surviving include 18 grandchildren, 18 great granddaughters and 18 grandchildren . Mrs Smith also survived by her sister, a sister-in-law .
 Andrew H Hughes of Toronto, Canada, and Willis Pynn of Saugus. Hughes of Canada, Canada and a brother, Willis. Willis Prynn of U.S. Hughes. Hughes and Pynynn.
 Funeral services will be held Friday afternoon at 2 o’clock at the Graham Funeral Home in Woburn .
 Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., pastor of the First Baptist Church, will officiate . The service will be held at the church .
 Memorial contributions may be made in his name to the Winchester Hospital Building Fund or Cancer Research Foundation .
 Joseph T Callahan died suddenly Thanksgiving night, November 23, at the Winchester Hospital, following an acute coronary attack . Joseph T * Callahan was a constable of Winchester for 10 years and well known in the local oil burner field .
 He entered the hospital on the Tuesday before his death for exploratory X-rnys in no way connected with his heart . He had entered hospital on Tuesday before he died for tests that weren't connected to heart .
 He was born June 22, 1906, in Winchester and spent virtually all of his life in this town . He attended Winchester schools and graduated from Winchester High School in the class of 1924 .
 He first worked for the Winchester firm of Kimball <fc Earle, and later formed the partnership of Kelley & Callahan . He later formed a partnership with Kelley .
 He had been for the past 10 years associated with Fitzgerald Fuel Oil Co., as credit manager . He had worked for the company for more than 10 years .
 He had served the town as constable since 1951 and had been a special police officer for 15 years . He had also been a constable for the town since 1951 . He has been a police officer in the town for 60 years .
 He was a town meeting member for Precinct 6, serving from 1928 to 1941, and from 1951 until his death . He was also a deputy tax collector and had been a town council member . He died at the age of 92 .
 He was a member and past exalted ruler of Winchester Lodge of Elks and was in the communications division of the Winchester Civil Defense . He was also a member of Winchester Elks .
 For six years he served as manager of the original Immaculate Conception Drum and Bugle Corps . He is now the president of the University of California-based Drum & Bugle corps .
 The funeral was held Monday morning from the late residence with solemn requiem high mass at 10 o’clock at the Immaculate Conception Church . The funeral will be held at 10 a.m. at the Immaculate Conception Church.
 Mary Callahan Dockham was organist and Arnold Callahan, cousin of the deceased was soloist . Arnold Callahson was a soloist for the funeral service . Arnold was a cousin of Callahan .
 Winchester National Bank has purchased food and medical survival kits . Kits contain a two-week supply of food, water and medicine . The kits will be used in the event of a nuclear attack .
 National Bank official hopes that other businesses, institutions, and private homeowners will see fit to follow suit .
 Mabelle Rosalie Nickerson of J 1 Stetson Hall, a long time and widely known resident of Winchester, died Saturday morning, November 26, suddenly at her home . Nickerson was a well-known Winchester resident .
 Born in Boston, she grew up in the old Boston Highlands district, now Roxbury, being educated at private school there .
 More than 50 years ago Miss Nickerson came with her parents to Winchester to make their home on Calumet Road . She and her parents made their home in Winchester, Winchester .
 After the death of her parents she moved into Stetson Hall, being among the first to take an apartment there after the hall was built . She moved into the hall after her parents died .
 As a young woman she taught in the church school and was a member of the Women’s Guild . She was also a teacher at the church .
 Funeral services were held Tuesday afternoon at the Church of the Epiphany with the rector, Dr. Dr. John Lister . Dr. Lister attended the funeral .
 Mr Carruthers disagreed with what he called “one or two misstatements by Mr Hewis’s’ remarks . He said Hewis was “misstatements’ by Mr. Hewis .
 Building Committee observed good business judgment, that their school had opened on time, that they had done a “fair, decent, and respectable job” in coming within 2 or 3 f /r of their budget estimates . Building Committee said he felt he felt the Building Committee had observed
 The town meeting passed the appropriation by unanimous voice vote, no one dissenting . No one dissenting from the vote .
 At this point Acting Moderator Wadsworth bade the town meeting to rise in tribute to three recently deceased town meeting members . Joseph T Callahan, F Meredith Cooper, and Denton W Randall were all members of the town council .
 The town meeting took action on article two, unanimously approving the transfer of the $3,500 from the Wadleigh study account to the Lynch Junior High School Building Committee account . After the tribute, the town meeting voted to transfer the money .
 The town meeting adjourned at 8:49 with audible relief and no evident sense of discomfort at facing the chilly drizzle outside . Town meeting adjourns at 8.49 with a sigh of relief .
 Novcmhor 24 and 25, Friday and Saturday N<> film pr«nn am at thr Public Library . Film is shown at the library .
 Library will open Friday from 10.m. to 9m. an usual . Library will be open Friday and Saturday from 10 m. to 0m. a. usual .
 Viaitinir Day for public at new Lynch Junior Hfwh Sch*>ol, Brantwood and Horn Portd Brook Ronds . Viait inir Day will be held at Lynch Junior Sch***ol and Brantwoods .
 The Fortnightly Woman’s Club at Crawford Memorial Methodist Hall, American Home Day. November 27, Monday, Monday .
 Friendship Guild of the First Congregmtional Church will meet nt 8m. in Chidley Hnll. November 28, Tuesday, Tuesday . The Friendship Guild will meet at 8 a.m.
 Troop 9 extend cordial invitations to the mothers of all the Kiris to attend . The Kiris' mothers will also be invited to attend the event .
 LWV presents ‘Planning for Greater Boston’ at the new Lynch Junior High School, at 8:00m. November 28, Tuesday, Tuesday .
 Boston College Dean Joyce Joyce, Ralph Kaminsky, Howard Whitmore, Jr.. ex-Mayor of Newton, ex-mayor of Newton . Howard . Whitmore . Jr. will speak at Boston College and Boston College .
 Unitarian Players present ""The Pleasure of His Company,"" 8:30m. Dec. 1 and 2, Friday and Saturday, in Metcalf Hnll. December 1, 2 and Saturday .
 Tuesday, at 7 :45m. in the Rich Room of the Library, Art Association Lecture hy Celia Hubbard of the Botolph Group . The Art Association lecture will be held at 7:45 p.m. Tuesday .
 UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM is located in the Lion Room . Beautifully appointed for banquets, wedding re« >-pt >ns, business meetings, meetings, dan. . s . For special purposes, visit the lion room for more information .
 C PARTY THINS EDUCATOR CHOCOLATE MINT COOKIES EDUCator CRAX SUNSHINE KRISPY CRACKERS . Fresh Pork Chops 69c lb. P. k g35c P. g37c P k g39c
 He has served as president of the Olericulture Club, has been a member of the Ski and Marketing Clubs, the Roister Doisters and the Carnival, Carnival Ball Committees .
 The regular meeting of Saint Mary’s Sodality was held on Tuesday evening November 21 . He also played freshman hockey and was in campus Varieties as a junior .
 Father Turke announced the reception for all new members would be December 5 at 8 o’clock in Saint Mary’s Church .
 You‘11 find them in our Men s, Roys or Ladies' Shops . Whether it is “The Gift’ or the little stoeking items .
 No, it’s not a government agency, nor a South African instrument, but a new game of chance . The South African government is not interested in playing politics, it's not a new government agency .
 It was organized some years ago by interested and faithful friends and parents for the purpose of supporting the members of these groups . The group was organized by interested friends and faithful .
 The Friends are those cheery, enthusiastic people who serve you hot dogs and drinks at the home football games . The Friends serve hot dogs, drinks and food at the football stadium .
 About sixty faithful workers were down there early to sell over 3000 cups of hot drinks and 1100 hot dogs, etc., to the thousands of hungry fans . It has grown steadily through the years .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he is gratified to work with pleasant, cooperative people . Sutter: FOBO's is a great deal of fun .
 Those Friends who helped dining the past football season were Mr Byron Graves and Mrs. Byron Graves . Mr and Mrs Graves are also known for their kindness .
 George Needham's fine liquors • vintage wines • choice beer and ale -At the -JJou.^e fif fjootl .
 Last call for supper at 8:30 sharp sharp. Last call to supper is 8:45pm sharp .
 Please make every effort to mail ticket receipts and unsold tickets before the dance, to Lindy Lane at 11 Robinhood Road . Also, please send ticket receipts for unsold ticket receipts or tickets .
 A few tickets will be available at the door but advanced receipts will be badly needed to operate with . The event will be held in a bid to raise funds for the next year .
 Your immediate action now means a personal share in the future success of our Charter Night Project . We are committed to Charter Night .
 To anyone interested in attending our Charter night Buffet Dance please call either of the above numbers . Please call either the above number or the number of those interested .
 A reminder to all members that there will be a business meeting on Thursday November 30 at 8:00 m.m. at the Red Cross House .
 Most parents of teen-age children would be unable to state just how much their particular costs are in this direction . Most parents would not be able to say how much they would like to have a child in the care of a parent .
 It takes twice as much, for example, to support a 15-year-old as it does an infant . The cost of a child is more than twice as high as a baby .
 The consumption of food, milk, soft drinks, chewing gum and candy increases until it reaches a peak in the late teens . The Chamber of Commerce reports that the consumption of foods, milk and soft drinks is highest in teens .
 The pattern is similar except that the change is most marked when the child enters into his teens . As to clothing, the pattern is . similar but the . changes are most marked .
 A breakdown shows that $790 a year is required to maintain the average 13-year-old youngster . The cost is $855 for a 15-year old, $910 at age 17 and $940 at age 19 .
 At the midway point, which is at age 16^, the average annual expenditure is $890 . The average annual expense is $900 per person .
 On the basis of this average, the overall amount spent in Winchester per year in behalf of the teenage population, which the 1900 census set at 2,165, is estimated at $1,927,000 . The average amount spent per year on Winchester's teenage population is $1
 The nation’s teen-age population will be growing rapidly in the next Star Of The Future few years, ft. ft is pointed out .
 Between now and 1967 there will he an additional 1,100,000 of them each year . The first time they will be able to be born will be in 1967 .
 If Winchester follows this national rate of increase, the number of teen-agers locally in 1967 will be 3,180 . Winchester will be at least 3,000 teens in 1967, according to the statistics .
 "They will make an even greater impact on the local economy than they are making today," says the mayor . They will make a 'greater impact' than they did today, he says .
 Already, retailers are finding it worth while to cultivate this booming market . The market is booming, and retailers are looking to tap into it .
 Several Winchester residents named to the Interim Committee of the Massachusetts Council for Public Schools . Committee will recommend to the legislature what it believes should be the scope and depth of a master survey of public education in Massachusetts .
 The members of this Committee will act as individuals and their recommendations will be free from any outside dictation . The committee will be independent of any outside influence, it has been stated .
 It will include 16 distinguished citizens, 11 top educators and four members of the State Legislature . It will also include members of state Legislature . The event will be held in New Hampshire .
 Among the luy citizens named is William E Spaulding, president of Houghton Mifflin Company, publishers, publishers . Among the citizens named are William E
 Fern Horne, Pittsburgh guidance counselor; Earl Moore, high school guidance counselor from Iowa . Earl Moore is a former Iowa guidance counselor . Horne and Moore are from Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh .
 Kven with his background as a terrific halfback for Winchester High, Tilton School, and the UN 11 freshman Serieka could not crack UNH’s starting lineup this year . Serieka played for UNH and Winchester High .
 Co-Captain Dick Mezquita led the Wildcats and the Yankee Conference in rushing last year and topped UNH in ground gained and scoring this year . The reason for the success is that he is a co-captain .
 The hall was decorated in the colors of both schools by Alan Macdonald, Sue Wallace Joanne Hess, Jane Hess and Charlene Bertolucci .
 Fred McCormack, proprietor of McCormack’s Apothecary, introduced Peter Sullivan who acted as master of ceremonies . Peter Sullivan acted as Master of Ceremony Peter Sullivan . The event was held in New York City .
 At intermission the Em Cee presented the outstanding player awards . The Fo ley Memorial Awards for Woburn players and the Hevey and McCormack Trophies for Winchester players . Winchester players also received awards for their performances .
 Foley Award for best Woburn lineman went to Co-Captain Tommy Quinn and that for best Tanner back, to Eddie Foley . Foley Award also went to Tommy Quinn for best offensive lineman .
 The Hevey Award for best Winchester lineman went to Tom Mooney . McCormack Award went to Captain Mike Bellino for best back going to Captain Bellino .
 Head KASTLE DYNAMIC ROSSKOPF NORTHLAND and other leading brands of SKIS • Release Bindings, Marker, Ski-free, Dovre, Star, Cubco, O-U Micromatic, Nevada, Tyrolia .
 Last year Dan led UNH freshmen in scoring and twice ran over 75 yards for touchdowns . Dan led the UNH freshman class in scoring last year .
 Serieka again was the leading scorer for the Wildcats this fall . Mezquita was sidelined with a touch of the flu . Serieka is the team's leading scorer .
 Dan dropped down to the second string after Mezquita recovered from a knee injury . The move has tened Dan down to a sore knee . Dan has been playing in the second half of the side's first team .
 An official ruled interference on the play and gave the ball back to Connecticut . However, an official ruled the play was interference and gave it back to the team .
 Three plays later the same official again ruled interference on a play to give Connecticut the ball on the 4 yard line . The official ruled interference and gave the game the ball back on UNH’s 4-yard line .
 Quarterback Bo Dickson fired a pass over the middle to Serieka for 19 yards and a first down at midfield . Serieka completed a 19-yard pass to set up a first-down at midfield for the first down .
 On the next play, Dickson tossed to fullback Charlie Beach who lateraled to Serieka . Serieka completed the catch for a touchdown .
 Dan hugged the sidelines all the way down to the UConn 12 before two men pushed him out of bounds . Dan hugs the sidelines until he was pushed off the field by two men .
 He might have gambled on a cutback but such a maneuver would have used up all the time remaining on the clock . Such a move would have left the clock running out of the clock.
 Connecticut defenders eliminated Serieka by pushing him in the end zone while tackling UNH’s end . On Jhehe next play, Connecticut defenders pushed Serieka out of an end zone . Serieka was pushed out of end zone by Connecticut defenders .
 Officials ignored both cases of interference and UNH lost the game . The officials chose to ignore the interference and the game went to a loss .
 Serieka returned a punt 50 yards in the first period and scored his first and only touchdown of 1961 in the third to ice the game for New Hampshire . The following week against Springfield, Serieka gave UNH fans a hint of things to come .
 Dan also hopes to make a name for himself as a baseball player with the Wildcat diamond team . Dan is a hard-throwing, hard hitting catcher .
 Danny or “Chief,” as he was known at Winchester High, is carrying on the gridiron tradition of the Serieka family . He is the younger brother of Ed “Jocko” Serieka, all time Winchester back, who later starred at Xavier .
 Library Film Program features color color film Letter from Alaska . A reporter writes to a boy in Letter from Alaskan film .
 Alaska’s history from its discovery in 1741 to the present is included with information on the people, cities, industries, climate, agriculture, and geography . The review of Alaska's history includes information about the people and industries that have shaped its history .
 The history and romance of silk are described in Naturally Silk, another color picture which covers sericulture, dyeing, weaving and end uses of the fabric today . Naturally Silk is published by Naturally Silk .
 Animules is a film to encourage children's creativity and imagination . Animules encourages children to use their imaginations to create their own .
 Methods for constructing entirely imaginary animals out of wet paper, paste, and temperu are shown . Methods are shown as are the final results of one group of young artists who constructed the animals .
 This week's program is designed to interest young people as well as elementary school children and their parents . This week’s program is aimed at young people and elementary school students .
 Group of the New England Modern language Association, to be held Saturday, December 9 .
 Machine translations and Inter lingua, a relatively new auxiliar language for international us age, will be the subject of thi day’s main address by Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 At 10 o'clock, teachers will begin a series of individual Ger man, Italian, Russian, Spanish and French programs dealing with li terary, professional and “Broadly cultural topics”
 Gode's talk at 2m. will be given at a general session in Nath an Seifer Auditorium, following uncheon, a business meeting and a welcoming address by Kermit Morsey .
 There were three co-editors of the i961 Aberjona in addition to a large and contributive staff .
 Joseph Maloney, a freshman at Wellesley, and Malcolm MacKen zie, son of Dr. and Mrs. MacKenie, are students at the Wellesley College .
 Winchester friendB solicited donations of money, fgod and clothing for Winchester friend's help . Winchester friends are looking to help Winchester friends during the holiday season .
 It wasn't the best day possible, weather --wise --wise, but considering the pre-game heavy rain the field was in surprisingly good shape . Maxwell R MeCreery, Treasurer 4 Curtis Street, PA 9-2036 .
 The scats held between seven and eight thousand and there were surely two thousand standing around the field and on the hill, possibly more . There were perhaps two thousand people in attendance at the event .
 Both the Woburn band, un der Edson Kimball, und the Win Chester Band, under Fred Murray entertained at half-time with the Winchester Tumblettes also doing their stuff . Winchester Tumblesttes also did their stuff as well .
 Fred Murray, who has replaced Wendell Withington as director o the Winchester band, didn’t even have a topcoat on against the weather .
 Fred works so hard with his musicians that perhaps he did n’t need one, perhaps he didn't need one . Fred works hard with musicians .
 He rates an accolade from the Star for eliminating th< trumpet fanfare from the star Spangled Banner .
 Winchester band did its usual Thanksgiving routine, forming a big church and playing “Come, Ye Faithful Peo pie, Come” at half-time . Cheerleaders and tumblettes entered the church and knelt in the nave . Winchester band played ‘Come,
 Winchester didn't have too much to be thankful about as far as the game was concerned, but the loea fans did have the satisfaction of seeing their team stay in there and score in the last minute or so of play . Winchester didn’t have a lot of things to be
 Win Chester’s final touchdown looked very good . Coach Knowlton trotted out to score Win Chester's final touchdown . Win Chester won’t be surprised by the scoreline .
 Bob Bran ley barked sig nals to halfbacks Ed Cutting and Silm Rotondi with Steve Goldin at fullback . Bob Bran barked the sig nal to halfback Ed Cutting . Ed Cutting was replaced by Steve Cutting at halfback .
 One white setter gave the ofifi cials and players a bad time as he dashed around the field looking for a place to get out . There was the usual collection of dogs on the gridiron .
 Joe Bellino, former Winchester football star and Navy All Ameri can, sat in the stands at about the fifty-yard line, watching his broth er, Mi key, bow out with a great exhibition . Trainer Lou Goddu did not partiei .
 Coach Knowlton thought his team played its best game of the season against the potent Tanners . He said such a game would be a dilly, but that he would hpve to pick Woburn .
 Coach Walter White of Woburn thought Bellino was the best back his team faced all season . Bellino is best back he's faced all year, coach says .
 Tommy Quinn, center, and quarterback, were voted Woburn’s outstanding lineman and back in the game . Ed Foley, quarterback, received the Foley Memorial Awards . Tommy Quinn and Ed Foley received a tre mentions .
 Center Tom Mooney and full hack Mike Bellino got the Hevey and McCormack Trophies for best Winchester lineman and back . Center Mooney got the best back and center center .
 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow .
 Remote control chute chute handle directs stream of snow 25 feet in the direction you want . Remote control handle directs 25 feet of snow to the direction of the chute .
 Boston Globe sports staff, covered the game and was impressed with the Tanners’ Fnley .
 Most popular place on the field was the chuck wagon with its hot dogs and coffee for the chilled inner men and gals . The chuck wagon was the most popular place to sit down and relax .
 Winchester has won 27 of the 27 matches for Winchester . Woburn has won seven of the seven ties . Winchester won the series 27 times last year .
 The girls and boys of Miss Beatrice Hutchison’s third grade held a Thanksgiving Assembly at Lincoln . The program showed how the Indians and Pilgrims lived together in a friendly way .
 Dressed in Pilgrim costume Mary Belliston introduced the audinece to a group of Indians . John Sarapina as Massasoit, Richard Maggio as Squanto and Gary Colbert as Samoset .
 How the Indians built their tepees and hunted for food was told by Sandra Cavallo, Camille Figucia, John Crysdale, and Betty Ann Ellis .
 Bruce Jones demonstrated Indian language with Tom-toms . Michael Stevenson, Victor Judge and Victor Judge also demonstrated the language .
 Deborah Rolli, Donna Penta, Nancy Casterlin, Michael Stevenson and Anthony Pizzo gave the poem “Indian Children” in choral speaking . The poem "Indian Children" was read by Deborah rolli .
 The Pilgrim father, Sam Nowell, and mother, Jane Todesca, invited the Indians to join in a great feast . Bruce Hill and Mary Ann Bates told of their hard voyage to this country .
 Readers provided interesting accounts of back-ground events in the life of the Pilgrims . Readers Carol Bradley, Debbie Snow, Wendy Walker and David Benson provided accounts .
 The group joined together in singing a hymn of thanksgiving such as the Pilgrims might have done just before their first Thanksgiving dinner . The group sang the hymn, "thankgiving"
 18 WHS musicians have earned the honor to represent the school in the fourth annual Northeastern District Concert to be held in Marblehead on December 15 .
 The largest number ever to be chosen from Winchester . The eighteen students passed competitive auditions held with musicians from more than fifty high schools making up Essex and Middlesex Counties .
 Neal Baker, Robert Carroll, Betty Hauek, Paul Johnian, Joan Segerstrom and Joan Wilson will play in the Northeastern District Orchestra . Traveling to Marblehead to play in Marblehead will be Neal Baker .
 Of these three have been accorded special honors by being selected to play solo chair in each of their respective sections . The three players have been given special honors for their performances .
 Tohnian will be concert master, first violin; Hauck, viola, first chair . Wilson will be second violin, first viola .
 Kenneth Carlson, Robert Chase, Gwen Eugley, Laurel Ingraham, Deborah Nichols, Deborah . Nichols, Janet £Ules, Donald Orton and Susan Waldron are among the writers .
 Ancis of ASSISI with Bradford Hillman in Cinemascope and Color Also. fRAncis .
 A crowd estimated as in excess of 10,000 turned out for the classic on a damp cold day . Despite the one-sided score, saw an interesting and exciting game .
 Woburn was just too good for Winchester, hut to the Sachems’ credit it should be said that they never quit trying in the face of heavy odds . Winchester was beaten by Winchester in the final game of the season .
 Eddie Foley, Woburn’s crack quarterback lived up to all his adthe deep field men into the end 1 ed and arched a pretty pass to Mevance press raves, passing beauti| zone fully and running very well on Sachems' Best Show
 The Star will submit that it was the huge Orange line that made the difference and made it possible for both Foley and Durkin to shine as they did . Without taking a thing from either of these boys, the Star writes that it is the Orange line .
 Woburn outplayed Sachem forwards with big edge up front . Foley picked out his receivers to pick out his wide receiver . Foley's side beat the Sachem in the first half .
 Tanner quarterback was all alone behind the line, simply standing there waiting for a receiver to show up . At times, Tanner was often left waiting for receivers to arrive .
 No Winchester rusher could get through the Woburn protecting linemen to harry him at all . No Winchester player could get a rusher through the defense .
 Foley's passing has to be effective under such conditions . Foley is a sharp-shooter like Foley . Foley has a reputation for being a sharp shooter .
 Winchester's defense was generally wiped out by the surge of Orange blockers ahead of the runner . It would have been interesting to see how Foley and Durkin would have done behind Winchester's line .
 Eddie would not have been standing still on pass* plays motioning a receiver to get into position, and neither he nor Don would have gotten into the clear so easily . Neither would have been able to get in the clear .
 It would have been equally interesting to see how Mikey Bellino would have fared given the help the Woburn backs received from their interference . It would be equally curious to see if Bellino had received the help he needed .
 There were at least a couple of times, when a down field block would have let the flying Rellino go all the way .
 On defense he made key tackle after key tack le, postponing for the time being Woburn scores apparently in the making . On defense, he made several key tackles .
 Winchester played its best game of the season, and though the Sachems left the field defeated they were far from dis graced . Winchester's entire Winchester team played their best game, and it was not their worst performance .
 Statistically, the game was a lot closer than most would think after hearing the score . The game was played in a much closer than the game would think .
 Foley was the difference, but don't forget the part that horrendous Woburn line played in his effectiveness . Foley's offensive line played a key role in the victory . Foley is a senior in the history of high school football .
 For a wet cold day the ball handling was very good, and the field was in good condition . The ball handling and field handling were very good for the game .
 Winchester's Chilly Vozzella kicked off for Winchester . Winchester was the first team to kick off for the team . Winchester's win was a first-of-the-year state championship game .
 Jim Periera ran the ball back 10 yards to the Woburn 30, and what followed made it look like a long cold morning for Win Chester . Win Chester won the game by a score of 14-6 .
 Foley immediately passed to Dulong for a first down at the Winchester 43 . Eaton was racked up hard at the line, but still picked up three, and Foley picked up the first down . Dulong then passed to Foley for a second down .
 Foley carried to the 34, but on the next play the Orange was offisde, and the ball went back to the 39 . Foley carried the ball to the . 34, and on the . next play, the ball was returned to the the 39, but the . Orange was
 Foley passed, this time to Periera, who was hauled down by Graham at the Winchester 21 . Foley passed Foley again, but Periera was caught by Graham . Graham was the first person to pass Foley in the first half .
 McDonough picked up five to the 16, and on the next play Winchester was called for defensive holding, and the ball was moved ahead to the nine . Winchester was also called for holding, but the ball moved ahead .
 Mooney postponed trouble by dropping McDonough back on the 11, but Durkin bulled through to the five and then to the two . Mooney: "I'm not going to let Durkin get away from me"
 Foley flipped a dinky little pass to McDonough for the touchdown . Foley flipped the dinky pass to the quarterback for a touchdown .
 Dulong scored a late try for Foley . Foley was trapped well back of the line of scrimmage, but with two men hanging to him spotted Dulong alone in the end zone and hit him easy as pie .
 Bellino swept for 24 yards and a first down at the Woburn 41 . A short kick was downed at the Sachems’ 43, and a short kick at the 43, was downed . A first down was a 24-yard pass for Bellino .
 Bellino carried seven out of ten times . Winchester moved to the Tanner 14 where on fourth down Colliander hit Timpone with a pass, only to have the Tanners drop the big end at the 10 and take the ball on downs . Then with Bellino carrying seven out
 Woburn had a first down at the Winchester 30 as the first quarter ended . Effective running by Foley and Durkin, coupled with passes to McDonough and Durkins, gave the team an early first down .
 Charlie advises you girls to wear the sweater rather than trying to ski with - them . McDonough, Foley and Durkin reached the 17, and here Foley fad fad .
 WINE FLASKS — 3.95 6.95 WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. Winchmore .
 PArkview 9-1931 “Quality Jj Our Wait Prttioul -Amt ” Donough, just inside the back line of the end zone . Donough was the quarterback of the day in the 1930s .
 Foley passed to Periera for the two bonus points that made the score 16-0 . McDonough was hit by Bellino with a jarring tackle on the play and was taken out . Foley passed Foley to Foley for the second bonus point of the match .
 Bellino brought the crowd to its feet with a scamper from his own 41 to the Woburn 39, a 20 yard sprint . Winchester couldn’t go after the kickoff, though Bellino ran a 20-yard sprint .
 Bellino had to kick a penalty on a pass play back on the Winchester 49 . Two plays later, big Rocky Nelson broke through to drop Colliander on a play back .
 Winchester braced and forced Foley to kick, and his boot went only eight yards to the Woburn 28 . Winchester's boot went eight yards from Foley's side of the field . Winchester was forced to kick his boot, and Foley kicked it eight yards away .
 Sachems Score Rowe picked up four and offside against Woburn put the ball at the 19th minute . Rowe scored four and Rowe was offside at the end of the first half . Rowe also had an offside in the second half of the match .
 With the ball at the 14 Bellino swept to the Woburn two and then in two bucks got over, though he was hurled back by the huge Orange line after the score . Bellino sweeps to the two-point lead in two minutes .
 On the kickoff Woburn was called for a personal foul and the ball went back to the Orange 24 . On the return of the kickoff, the ball was returned to the field .
 Foley faded and flipped a little screen pass to Durkin and Durkin . The big half back rambled to the Winchester 21 where he was hauled down from behind by Donlon . Foley faded in the first half but Durkin made a fine effort to score the try .
 Foley immediately rolled out and was just knocked outside by Bellino at the Winchester three . Foley rolled out immediately and was knocked out of the ring . Bellino knocked Foley to the outside .
 It took big Durkin two tries at the line to get over, and Foley on a rollout added the extra points . Foley added an extra point for the second half .
 Winchester had a chance to yell in the final minute of the half when Colliander hit Donlon with a pass and the left end lateralled out to Bellino . Bellino was knocked outside at the Woburn 35 at the end of the first half .
 A little more running room or one of those down field blocks would have sprung Mikey for a score . Mikey had a little more room or a few more blocking room or blocking blocks would've helped him score .
 As it was three passes fell incomplete and it was 24-6 as the teams left the field . The teams were playing in the final quarter .
 Winchester got a bad break when shortly after the kickoff Bellino ran 35 yards from his 30 to the Woburn 35, only to have the ball brought back to the Winchester 21 for a clipping infraction . Winchester got the ball back for a second time in the third quarter . Winchester
 Bellino had to kick, and his boot was squarely blocked by Doherty and recovered by Sapienza of Woburn . Doherty blocked Bellino's boot, and recovered, at the Winchester 10.10.
 Foley immediately swept the Winchester left flank behind effective blocking to go into the end zone standing up, but his attempted pass for thfc extra point fell incomplete . Foley's pass for the extra point failed to fall incomplete .
 Facing a 30-6 count the Sachems scored in three plays after the kickoff which Donlon ran back to the Winchester 40 . Winchester scored in just three plays in the first quarter .
 Colliander hit Timpone for seven yards and Bellino drove through to midfield . Bellino scored a late goal for the visitors .
 Great Run by Bellino from the 50 Bellino broke through the line and cut out to the right . Bellino is a member of the 50-mile team .
 He got a good block up close and then cut back in, twisting away from one tackier, faking another and dodging a third . He got good blocks up close, then turned around and dodged a third of the tackier ones .
 Sachems stopped Woburn after the kickoff, Foley kicking to Macdonald who got to the Winchester 38 . Bellino failed to get over for the bonus points, but the score seemed to buck up . Foley kicked the ball over for Winchester .
 Woburn refused a penalty after being called for holding on the kickoff . Instead of accepting the penalty, the Orange refused to kick from their fifteen instead of their 30-yard field .
 Colliander hit Donlon, who again lateralled to Bellino, before Bellino was knocked outside at midfield . Winchester were awarded off-side after the teams swapped off-sides .
 An eight-yard pass to Timpone and a quick opener with Cutting carrying reached the thirty . Cutting carried the ball in the end of the first quarter . Cutting was the only player to make a tackle tackle tackle for a touchdown .
 Rowe picked up five and Bellino, on a sweep left was knocked outside at the Woburn 11 . Rowe picked pick up five . Bellino was knocked out by Rowe on his sweep left . Rowe also picked up a five-run victory .
 Bellino got only three on third down and a fourth down pass fell incomplete . Bellino and Cutting failed to score a touchdown in the first half .
 Foley on a roll out fled along the near sideline to the Winchester 17, where he was dropped from behind by Graham, after being slowed up by Bellino . Foley was caught by Graham and Bellino in the first half of the match at Winchester 17 .
 A Foley pass went squarely into the arms of a Winchester defender, only to be muffed to keep Woburn alive . A Foley's Foley pass was muffed in the first half to keep Winchester alive .
 50-yard touchdown sprints Donlon on knees after throwing block . Bellino ruts in oil hi. Bellino: "I don't think it's a good thing for me to be in an oil-rich state"
 Colliander in background as Ryerson's third quarter ends . Collianders is a member of the Ryerson Collegiate Collegiate Institute . Ryerson is a junior college at Ryerson .
 Foof Woburn defenders in the end missed a first down on a roll out and then sneaked to the 18 . The end ley just missed a 1-yard first down in the final drive .
 Eaton on a sweep, fumbled and recovered to reach the two . A pass to Dulong reached the eight, and Eaton on an eight, reached the two. Eaton fumbled but recovered to make it to the two and reach the eight . Eaton was the last man to reach a
 Eaton drilled through inside tackle for the touchdown . The extra points by Foley was no good for Foley .
 The locals missed a probable score after a pass to Donlon and a run off a fake kick reached the Woburn 41 . The locals miss a possible score in the first half .
 Colliander threw to Donlon to start a forward lateral play, but his lateral intended for Bellino, was wide of the mark . Dulong dropped on the ball for Woburn and Dulong took the ball .
 Had the lateral been completed Bellino would have been long gone, with no one in position to stop him . Bellino has been linked with a move to Manchester United in 2015 .
 Durkin swept right, reaching the Winchester seven where he was brought down by Bellino . Bellino was the only person to bring Durkin down . Durkin was the last man to be brought down in the final .
 Boh Branley scored a touchdown in the first quarter of the game . Coach Knowlton had a lot of second team men in the action .
 Goldin was piled short short on the try for extra points . The final whistle blew four plays later on the final whistle .
 It, Nowell, Vozzella, Zengella, Bates, Bates; le, Donlon. Mahoney, DulTy, J Minucci; . Minucci, It, It. Nowell and DulTy .
 Winchester rn Winchester 4 12—42 6—18 . Touchdowns, McDonough . Winchester 4 . 12 . 6 . Touchdown . Winchester . 4 12 . 12: 42, Winchester . 6: 18, Winchester. Touchdown. Winchester 4. 12: 22, Winchester
 Winchester’s Joe Bellino, a superlative football player at Winchester High School and the United States Naval Academy, will be on the air Saturday afternoon with Sports Announcer Curt Gowdy and Paul Christman at the Army and Navy football game at -Soldiers’
 With Joe will be Army’s great full b a c k of yesteryear, Felix “Doc” Blanchard, the inside runner, with Glen Davis, the outside, of one of the most devastating onetwo punches in the history of intercolleg
 Winchester’s Bill West played in the Army backfield with “Doc” and Glen. Winchester” West played with ‘Doc’ and ‘Glen’ Glen. ‘ Doc’ West played for the Army .
 Both Joe and "Doc" will be heard Saturday commenting on the game . The game should get a lot of TVs switched on for this most colorful of all football battles .
 Starting at the Woburn sparked by seven yard gains Rotondi and Cutting Winchester made a first down . Winchester made the first-down at the  27. The first down was made by Winchester . Winchester also made the second down at the 27.
 Richard H Bateman of 88 Ba49, i con Street, was another Winchester boy in the Exeter lineup in the New Hampshire prep school’s losing football game .
 Tom, a 6 ft. pound end, Woburn put the ball on the 12. | this fall, but made his letter and Here Goldin, running hard on a sweep right reached the three, and ,1S an upper middler will he availDonlon passed to
 Winchester Sons of Italy Bowling League will resume action this week after a two weeks break because of the Thanksgiving Holiday . Have you been DISAPPOINT? Please email us at www.bowling.com .
 The ninety-eight participants are rolling them off as you are reading this column . They are rolling off the participants as you read this column. You can see the participants rolling off their rolls .
 This particular affair is planned every second year in honor of the immediate Ex-Venerable and those before him . The Ex-venerable's funeral will be held in his honor .
 Brother Michael D Saraco was the M.C. and after explaining the meaning of “Venerable’s Night,” he called upon the present Venerable Frank “Boss” Dattilo . He said he was very happy to be Assistant V
 Carmine “Mingy” Frongillo was a charter member of the organization and its first venerable in 1930 . Mingy was mentioned as the organization's first venerable member .
 Mingy has served three terms as the man with the gavel . Mingy was elected a delegate to the annual S.O.I. annual conventions each year and has throughout the years been a member of the organization .
 Mingy recalled how Winchester Lodge has grown to be one of the best in the state . Mingy said Winchester Lodge is now one of state's best lodges . Winchester Lodge was founded in 1881 .
 Brother Dattilo brought the audience back to the days when the first meetings of the S.O.I. were held at the Lyceum Hall, Chester Street, the old homestead on Swanton Street, and then moved to the fine new quarters .
 Angelo "Musky" Tofuri was then called forward and said he was happy that wives were attending this affair because previous to now Venerables’ Night was always a stag event . Angelo “Musky’s” said he is happy wives are attending this
 Those asked by the M.C. to stand be recognized for the fine work they have done in various activities were Randy Kazazian, Bill and Mrs. Mrs. Kazazian . Those asked to stand to be recognized were Randy and Bill Kazazerian . Randy Kazazer
 Venerable Frank “Boss” Ijattilo presented a beau tiful bouquet of roses to Mrs. Mrs. Jattilo . Frank ‘Boss’ presented a bouquet to her with roses .
 Chick was presented with a wrist watch for his excellent two terms as Venerable, on behalf of all members of the Mens’ Lodge . Saraco presented him with a watch at the end of his two terms .
 In accepting the gift ‘Chick’ mentioned that his work as Venerable would not have been so successful had it not been for the fine men he had on his committees and for the support the members gave .
 “Mr. Chick” then thanked all who worked for him and under him . He wished the best of luck to the present office-holders for a most successful year ahead .
 Saraco extended an invitation to all to remain for refreshments and dancing to Bob Fiore’s music makers .
 Frank A and “Boss” Dattilo, Dom Provinzano, Angelo Tofuri, Gene Rotondi; Mingy Frongillo, Randy Kazazian, Pat Bruno, Carl Bertolucci, Richie Penta and chairman Mike D Saraco .
 The next regular meeting of the Mens’ Lodge is to be held at the Club Hall on Monday evening, Dec. 31 .
 At this meeting it is urged that all members of the champion Softhall Team, S.O.I., he present because sweaters are to he presented to those hoys who represented the S.I. during the Town Softball League contests .
 Strike Lanes dropped further back of the pace while Atlantic Gelatin gained attempting to take over third place from last year’s champs . Atlantic gelatin gained trying to take on third place in the race . Strike L lanes dropped further .
 The biggest three string total seen in a long time was rolled by B Fiore, of 363 . Fiore may also take the top spot from B Kelley if he keeps his current pace .
 The sets and costumes of the Tracy Music Library of Boston were the first item on view in Washington last week .
 This has much W inchester interest because of the president of the Library, Mrs. Mrs. Dorothy Drexler . This has been a major interest in the library since it was founded .
 The Department of Defense issued a directive 72 hours before opening that the three male leads, all servicemen, could not be in the show . The production, staged by the American Ligiit Opera Company, made local and national news .
 The ban was lifted by the Department of Defense within 24 hours . The Pentagon was deluged with complaints from interested parties . The ban, allegedly issued because of union pressure, was lifted 24 hours after complaints .
 Objection withdrawn, reportedly, when it learned that members of the American Light Opera Company cast were unpaid . Objection was withdrawn when it was learned that cast members were unpaid, reportedly .
 The story made headlines in the three Washington daily papers, the local radio and television stations, and was carried by UPT and AP wire services and the ABC and NBC networks .
 Tracy Music Library supplies costumes and sets for each of the ALOC's shows . ALOC is based in Tracy, California, and is based at the Tracy Music Museum in Tracy .
 Gene Barth, who for five years was artistic director of Theatre Marque, offBroadway, off-Broadway . Barth: "Theatre Marque is a great place to raise money for people who want to see theatre."
 The sets and costumes were executed by Tracy Music Li brary . After this production will become part of its vast lend ing library which supplies theatre groups across the country .
 Senior Choir of the First Congregational Church will present a Christmas Vesper program in the main sanctuary from 4 to 5 m. December 10 .
 The program will consist of excerpts from Benjamin Britten’s “A Christmas of Carols’ and other Christmas choral favorites . The program is based on excerpts from Britten's "A Christmas Carols"
 A great range of musical styles will be presented dating from the 16th century up to the present time . The show will be held in London, London and London .
 Robert Anderson, harpist, will be featured guest instrumentalist for the program . Robert Anderson will be the featured guest musician .
 Anderson will present harp solos in addition to providing an accompaniment for some of the choral music . Anderson will perform harp solo solos .
 The entire community is invited to attend this program of Christmas music . The program will be held on December 25 at 8 p.m. EST .
 This program is being planned and directed by Robert A White, choirmaster . This program will be a free program for children .
 To determine the number of directors to be elected and the term of years for which they will serve, the directors will be elected . To determine how many directors will serve and the terms of years, the director's term will be decided .
 Trustee for Three Years William F Morton nominated Howard W Bates, Mrs. Bates and Mr. Bates for 1962 . Trustee of three years William F. Morton nominated for three years .
 Mary M Cipolla attended the seminar of the American Electrolysis Association Sunday, November 12, at the Sheraton Plaza Htoel . Robert J Grenzeback. nov23-2t attended seminar .
 Medical lectures and electrolysis forums were the highlights of the seminar . Medical lectures were the highlight of the event .
 Dr. William Montagna, dermatologist, spoke on the “Biology of Hair Growth” Dr. Montagna also spoke about the ‘Biology’ of hair growth . The dermatologist is also a dermatologist .
 New officers were installed in A.E.A. followed by dinner and entertainment . New officers have been installed in the organisation's headquarters .
 The Children’s Theater School is under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. J. Smith . This week end at the Winchester High School Auditorium the Children's Theater School will perform .
 Carlene SamoilotT and her assistants, will present the results of ten weeks of hard work on its current production to the public . Carlene and her assistant will present results of the ten weeks' hard work .
 The forty young people help in all phases of the theatrical production, taking an active part in the designing and painting of the scenery, the casting of the plays and the creating of the characters .
 The musical background gives children an opportunity to play their roles in the scenes from “Robinson Crusoe” and “Midsummer Night’s Dream” with vivacity and verve . Children will be able to play scenes from "Heidi," "
 Everyone will enjoy the singing and dancing of the lively and talented actors . The show is set to be held in New York City, New York .
 Friday, December 1, performance at 3:45m. is the annual Community School Association live theater presentation . The performance will be held at 3.45m .
 The proceeds of the performance on Saturday, December 2, at 2:00m. will be given to WGBH-Channel 2 . Performances will be held at 2 p.m. on December 2 .
 Tickets are also available at Hevey's Pharmacy and McCormack's Apothecary . Tickets will also be sold at the door .
 The Rending Symphony Orchestra will give the first concert of its twenty-ninth season in the Reading Memorial High School Auditorium on December 2 .
 Weston L Brannon, well known in Winchester, will begin his thirteenth year as conduct 1 or of the orchestra . Brannon is well known for his role in the Winchester Orchestra .
 Local musicians who will perform in this concert include Theodore Messer, violin; Mary Jane Anderson, harp; and Robert Mingolelli, trumpet . Local musicians will also perform in the concert .
 Any Winchester musicians who are interested in joining this wellestablished orchestra will be most welcome . Contact Weston Brannen, 2 Lincoln Street, Stoneham, for information .
 The all day sale, from 9m. to 5m. will feature hundreds of special items, including gifts from prominent citizens .
 The sale is being sponsored by the Woman’s Auxiliary to Morgan Memorial which maintains the Goodwill Day Nursery, caring for 50 children of working mothers . Morgan Memorial is located in Morgan Memorial .
 Elected to the hoard of trustees was Edward V French of 2 Ledgej wood Road . Elected for the trust in the trust .
 Charles E Greene j of 7 Lewis Road was elected a corporate member . Mr Lewis M j Foster of 34 Lloyd Street was named to the executive committee . Mr Greene j was elected to the Executive Committee .
 David Anderson, professor of Physics at Oberlin College will he be the speaker . David Anderson will be a guest speaker at this week's event .
 Increased convenience by grouping telephone numbers into geographical areas . Increased convenience of overall directory usage by grouping numbers .
 Easier handling of Boston Directory because of more convenient size and weight . Easier . handling of . more convenient . size .
 Listings of all other telephones in Boston and Vicinity appear in one of the three existing regional directories . North Suburban, South Suburban and West Suburban directories .
 The Boston Yellow Pages Directory will continue to be published without change . The Boston yellow Pages Directory continues without change.
 It will cover the same area as formerly and every business customer will continue to be listed in it . The area will be covered by the same business customers as formerly .
 Suburban Directories will also have their Yellow Pages sections as well as the Yellow Pages section as at present . Suburban directories will also feature Yellow Pages as well .
 With the completion of the delivery of new directories in December, each customer will have a complete set of four — plus a return postcard . The City of Boston, including Downtown Exchanges Brighton Charlestown Dorchester, Dorchester and East Boston .
 The postcard is to be used to indicate future directory requirements, and should be filled out and mailed promptly . The postcards should be sent promptly .
 If additional copies of any current directory are required, they may be obtained, without obligation, from any Telephone Business Office . ADDITIONAL DIRECTORIES ON REVIEW .
 The Winchester Star features a daily feature on 11th November . Use these photos to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 Trvinjr Street wishos to express her thanks to Winchester Police Department and auxiliary police for their kind assistance in rushing her father to the Hospital on November 7 . The Winchester police department and the auxiliary police were kind assistance .
 CZ//z£J fooLcj.aiee^-^ PA 9-2990 TV Service Phono Radio . Winchester iance Co. Co. CZ //z££JfooLlcj: "CZ //Z£J FooL
 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats . CASHMERE SWEATERS with Mink Coats with MINK COLLARS and LINED *47.50 HAVE YOUR OLD FUR COAT REMODELED into a CAPE,
 The Senior MYF will leave the church by auto to attend Handel’s ‘‘MeHHiah’ at Symphony Hall . The Senior MyF will attend the Handel's ‘Me HHiah” at Symphony .
 This will be ‘Christian Enlistment’ Sunday for all members and frienda of the church . The sacrament of Holy Communion will be observed .
 Meeting of all canvassers for the Christian Enlistment will meet at the church 6:00 a.m. Meeting will be held in the church .
 Let us tell us about the advantages of oiL Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArkview 9-3000 iukr2-lt . Tuesday, December 5. Tuesday, Dec. 5. Join us for our weekly feature program .
 Meeting of the Ministerial Association at the First Congregational Church at 8:00 a.m. Meeting of ministerial Association .
 IMMACULATE CONCEPTION CHURCH 1004 Main Street, Winchester, Winchester . Rev. Roy W Horn, Prop. Roy Horn proposes a new church in July 2013 .
 Sunday School is held at the same time n« the Church S*»rvfr*» Wednesday evening testimonial meeting at 8 :00 o'clock .
 Spiritual understanding of God’s creation helps meet everyday problems . Spiritual understanding is key to overcoming everyday problems, author says .
 Lesson-Sermon entitled “God the Only Cause and Creator’s Creator” to be heard at Christian Science churches Sunday . Christian Science is Christian Science .
 The Welcome Wagon Will Knock on Your Door with Gifts & Greetings from Friendly Business Neighbors und Your Civic and Social Welfare Leaders . ARRIVAL OF NEWCOMER Parents of New Babies is Monday December 4 .
 Advent Corporate Communion for men and boys followed by breakfast in Hadley HaJl. 9:15m. Advent corporate Communion .
 The Y.P.F. started a new series on “YoungMarriages. F News” on November 26 . The series will focus on young couples in the United States .
 A movie entitled “How Much Affection” was shown and was followed by an interesting discussion . M. M was joined by a group of people discussing the topic .
 Next week, December 3, there will be a program on “The Special Problems of Teen-Age Marriage” with speaker Mr Batten, Christian Education .
 The Winchester Star is published on Thursday, November 30, at 8 p.m. ET .
 LAfayette 3-5730 INSURANCE OF EVERY DESERT DESERT 44 . On Tuesday morning of this week at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson .
 ‘Decade coffee’ was held for recent graduates of Wellesley College now living in Winchester . Wellesley graduates of the college now live in the city .
 This social get-together was sponsored by the Winchester Wellesley Club . This social event was held at the Winchester Wesley Club .
 Charles T Main, 2nd, president of the* club were present to welcome these young alumnae . Among whom were several who had only recently moved to Winchester . Charles T . Main was present .
 Marycliff Academy will present its second annual Minstrel Show on Friday evening December 1 . Let’s Sing Along With Mary Cliffs Academy will perform at the school's second annual show .
 The show, co-sponsored by the Sodality and Mission Club, will be held at 7:15 in the Winchester school auditorium .
 For the second year, Father David Cummiskey, S.J., will direct the girls efforts . For the first time, he has directed the girls' efforts for the second time . The girls' father is also directing their efforts .
 Interest on Your Savings INVESTED IN CATHOLIC CHURCH AND HOSPITAL BONDS In Units of $500 or More .
 The Symmes’ Back from Tour Of the Orient is located in PA 9-2696 WI .
 Marshall Symmes of Yale Street have returned from a two-month tour of the Orient . They visited major cities of Japan, including Tokyo, Nara, Osaka, Kobe, Kyoto, and Yokohama .
 They also visited the Presidential Palace in Manila, and the war memorial to those lost in World War II located just outside Fort McKinley in the Philippines .
 Anthony Duquette, formerly of Winchester, was captured by the Japanese on Corregidor and perished in a ship at sea . He was killed in a battle with the Japanese .
 At Kamakura, Japan, the Symmes visited the famous “Daibutsu,” or Great Buddha, which they say is some three stories tall . They say it is a great tourist attraction .
 In Tokyo the Symmes stayed at the Imperial Hotel at the same time that President Sukarno of Indonesia and his entourage were booked at the hotel . In Tokyo they stayed in the hotel at the time that the president was booked there .
 The Symmes did not get to travel in Communist China, although they did visit the port of Kowloon and looked across the “bamboo” curtain, which is, of course, actually an electrified steel fence .
 The Symmes also visited the beautiful port of Hong Kong and stopped off at Hawaii on the way home .
 On their way to Japan they flew to Seattle where they had supper . They flew by night over the Pacific to have breakfast in Tokyo .
 Symmes travel lectures will be still more interesting . We suspect that with the hundreds of pictures they took during their new travels, they will be even more interesting.
 Marshall Symmes made it back to Town Meeting Monday night in time to keep up his record of attendance . In any case, he returned to the Town Meeting to continue his attendance record .
 Christmas Bazaar of Medieal Missionaries of Mary held December 2 at novitiate house on Arlington Street .
 The LORD WAKEFIELD Hotel and Restaurants will open on or about December 15 . Rapid access to all major routes joining 128 .
 The Medical Missionaries of Mary announce their annual Christmas Bazaar for Saturday, December 2 . The Bazaar will be held at their Novitiate House .
 The Bazaar will be open from nine in the morning until nine at night . Two Sisters from Winchester will join with their colleagues from England and Ireland to travel to East Africa .
 Sister M Denjse Donovan, M.M., R.N., is flying on December 6 from Dublin to Croyden, England, via Amsterdam and Cairo to Addis Adak, Ethiopia .
 She will reside temporarily in the capitol, Addis Abteous bakery tables to which many of Winchester’s ladies contribute their finest cakes and specialties . She will stay temporarily in AddisAbteous Bakery .
 The public is invited to attend, and to partake of the excellent meals served for their enjoyment . The public will be able to attend .
 Among the largest Teddy Bears ever seen in Winchester is one of the largest ever seen . Teddy Bears will thrill the hearts of all youngsters at the Winchester Bazaar .
 Proceeds of this Bazaar will be devoted to the support of the work conducted by these medical Sisters in various parts of the mission world . Bazaar Aids Missions will be held in honor of the medical Sisters .
 It is j aba, with Medical Missionaries of Mary assigned there, until the new ‘ 1 "" ' ' ’ j hospital in Jimma is ready for occupation .
 Sister M Elizabeth, M.M., B.S., will also leave Ireland in December, travelling by boat to Tanganyika, via the Suez Canal . Sister Elizabeth, a registered Medieal Technician, will also travel by boat in December .
 Mother M Therese, M.M. is now in charge of the Sisters stationed in Dareda, Tanganyika, and will work under the former Superior of the Winchester Novitiate .
 A third mission group is now on the high seas, bound via the Suez for the Island of Taiwan (Formosa) where they will open the first Oriental hospital of the Medical Missionaries of Mary .
 The Sisters' mission work is led by an outstanding group of volunteers belonging to the Men’s Committee, and to the ladies in | charge of the various booths . Generous support to the mission work of the Sisters will be given by many people of Winchester, who are led by
 New-to-the-murket six-room older Colonial on quiet street in Washington School area .
 Three chambers, ceramic tile bath, ceramic-tile bath, private hath with master bedroom and 22x22 family room . Private residence includes master bedroom, bathroom, master bedroom . 22-22 family rooms, 22-bedroom home .
 Lower level has large recreation room with fireplace and oversized workshop area, lavatory, laundry, dark room and two-car garage . Lower level includes large recreation center with fireplace, oversized workshop .
 This interesting home was designed and contoured to tit a most delightful tree-studded lot .
 18 Church Street I* A 9-1320, 0047, 5612, 2672. 1161, 5016, and EX 5-1784 WINCHESTER . Charm and dignity lend enchantment to this large, gracious home .
 Entertaining will be easy with the facilities of an ultra-modern kitchen . The kitchen is equipped with a range of kitchen facilities .
 If you appreciate the exquisite woodwork and solid structure of an older home situated on threefourths of an acre of land, you should make an appointment today to see this value at only $43,900 .
 Winchester P\ 9-6100 is located in Winchester, Winchester, Washington . Winchester is located on the campus of Parkhurst High School . The school has all the rooms you need. Winchester has the most bedrooms in the world .
 Living room, dining room, fully equipped kitchen, paneled den, master bedroom and tiled bath on first floor . Fully equipped kitchen and fully equipped master bedroom .
 Upstairs you'll find a large bedroom, another even larger, and a sceond tiled tiled roof . Upstairs there's also a large room and a large bathroom .
 Paneled recreation room, breezeway, and two-car garage complete the picture . Paneled Recreation Room is located in the home's first floor floor .
 Evening phone numbers Gertrude 11.05-11.05.05: 11.07-05: 08.07.07: 08/05.07 . 08/09: 07/05 . 09/05: 09/07.05 . 07/09/
 Three-year-old Cape Ranch in one of Winchester’s finest locations, on beautiful wooded, landscaped lot . Cape Ranch is traditionally styled Cape Ranch .
 Quality construction and architectural design are evident at first glance. Quality construction is evident at the first glance .
 Three twin bedrooms, two baths, spacious fireplaced living room, dining room, modern kitchen with breakfast area . Modern kitchen with a modern kitchen and modern living room .
 Lower level is completely and artistically finished and includes a family room with fireplace, a large play area, laundry, workshop, lavatory, plus a newly constructed fallout shelter . Lower level includes a newly built fallout shelter and a large family room .
 Attractive pre-war Cape, offers large living room, dining room, modern electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor . Features large electric kitchen and modern electric bathroom .
 Unusual four-bedroom, 2-bath home with den in secluded wooded area near Washington School . Four-bedroom home has den with den, two-bath house with den .
 Features of this three-bedroom house include ultra-modern kitchen, 1 V L.» baths, small den in addition to a living room and dining room .
 Long, rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shingle English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline .
 Large reception hall with graceful curved stairway, step-down 17x28 baywindowed fireplaced living room, panelled den, panelling den, 20-foot fireplaced dining room, all-electric built-in kitchen, jalousied porch, powdei room
 Six bedrooms and three baths on second floor including fireplaced master bedroom suite . Six bedrooms, three baths and six bathrooms .
 This home is located in our absolutely best West Side location . For appointment call exclusive broker, BLXBY & NORTHRUP 24 Thompson Street REALTORS PArkview 9-4240 .
 WEDCEWOOD APARTMENTS on tin* shore of Wedge Pond in W inchester . JOSEPHSON Real Estate 5 Church Street PArkview 9-2426 ALL FORMS OF INSURANCE Evenings .
 Make an appointment today to sec lliese apartments about which the whole town is talking . Make an interview today to secure the apartments you need to secure .
 Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service 81 High St., Medford, EX 5-9775 j . Expanding National Paint Manufacturer has Dealer Franchise Available in Area . 12 to 36 months Financing Merchandising Demonstrising Demonstration Demonstrations Promotions National and
 WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows, Floors, Paint Washing, Rubbish Disposal. PArkview fr-4572 janl9-tf .
 Wella 5-0169 augl2-tf Gutters Cleaned and Oiled ROOFS REPAIRED STORm WINDOWS installed PA 9-5917 Call after 6:00m. nov28-2t .
 WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 Fireplace Wood . Well-seasoned flak & Maple. Well-Seasoned flaks .
 H<> sizes 4-6 woman’* clothing* clothing . H <> size US; 9*12 Mi ac.i suits, topcoat topcoat. size US .
 Winchester PArkview 9-3193 93 Spring Street, Medford EXport 6-7300 Edward P Lynch RUBBISH REMOVAL 48 White Street, Winchester .
 Far the finest, most dependable TV-BADIO -HI-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMBOS TYPING SERVICE l WILL DO any kind of typing . Far the best, most reliable TV-badio -HI
 Antiques — Bric-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc. Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester, PA .
 Universal electric range 3Hin.8-1939 . Call Stoneham.8.8 . John J FOLEY juul-tf for SALK .
 Ruy my pracliLnldy new J‘Vf«0 Hillman f » » »• only Demonstration arranged . Demonstration was arranged .
 Frigidnire G.M. refrigerator only 7 years old, family size, storage <k>or family size or storage . For more from CNN.com: http://www.cnn.com/2013/2014/2014 .
 1951 De Soto 4-door sedan is on sale for $30,000 . Call OUver 8-3293. For more information, visit www.td.shift.com .
 "Dirt cheap because we UBe remnants. Call MO 3-3836. nov23-3t * ReupHOLSTERING .
 Haverty, WElls 3-6889. septl2-tf FOR SALE . $26,600 compact English brick in excellent West Sitle location .
 Pleasant center entrance hull, 22-foot fi replaced living room, dining room, kitchen with dishwasher, disposal. screen porch. Screen porch .
 Upstairs, large master bedroom, 2 twin-sized bedrooms, nursery, and tiled bath . Upstairs: Large master bedroom . 2 twins-size bedrooms, 3 twin-size rooms, nursery and tile bath .
 1955 Pontiac convertible in good running condition, but needing body work . Pontiac needs body work, but it's running good . 1955 convertible is in good condition and needs bodywork .
 Combination living-bedroom, private bath, kitchenette, all utilities, parking . For rent for $1,800-square-foot apartment . For more rent at $2,800 a month, rent includes all utilities .
 Professional office space with parking on grounds, central location . Call PA 9-0898. nov23-2t .
 Private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, also top price for other coins . Call PA 9-5860.
 Winchester High School teacher needs recent model Chevrolet. Call PA 9-3340. nov30-3t \y
 Reliable woman will mind children and do light housekeeping two days a week . Reliable, reliable woman would mind children . Needed to be a reliable housekeeping assistant .
 Luw-uwuy 7 Avon Cosmetics will show you how to pay for a Christmas gift . Luwuuy 7 will be on sale at 7 p.m. EST on Thursday .
 Reliable young wornan wishes to* cure for children in her home for working mothers . Work WANTED: Work for a young woman who wants to be a mother to her children .
 “Many accidents and serious traffic delays on # Massachusetts highways during past winters were* caused by cars being stuck in snow or skidding on ice.” “Cars being stuck or skidded on ice’s Massachusetts highways caused by accidents and traffic delays,�
 Much of the trouble encountered by motorists could have been prevented by proper vehicle maintenance, equipment and more thoughtful driver practices, said registrar .
 Good snow tires can provide up to 51 per cent better traction in loosely packed snow and up to 28 per cent improvement on ice than will regular tires if road conditions are not too severe or too steep .
 A car with regular treads travelling 20 MPH on dry pavement can be stopped in 21 feet . A car travelling 20 mph on dry ground can be pulled over in just 21 feet, experts say .
 Use of vehicles only when necessary when snow and ice are on highways or when serious storms are threatened will reduce the hazards of driving .
 21-year-old Swedish girl wishes work as mother’s helper, live in Sweden . WINCHESTER SAVINGS HANK Ralph W Hutch, Treasurer of the State .
 TcL WElla 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There is a way out. There is also a way to deal with the problem .
 All makes ineluding Japanese manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service . 35 years in Japan .
 Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use . NOrmandy 5-4620. Do It Youself LUMBER and Hardware .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and nil Over The World can be niude at tar ill rates by calling your Authorized Truvel Agent .
 A petition bus been presented to said Court for probute of a certain instrument purporting to be the lust will of said deceased by BEATRICE L SMITH of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond
 John C Leggut, Esquire, was the First Judge of suid Court, this twenty-seventh day of November 1961 . He was the first judge in the United States .
 FRANCIS MEREDITH COOPER also known as F. F. M. FMEREDITH Cooper late of Winchester in snid County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of FR. F . F . M. Frederick Cooper, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to snid Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the Inst will of snid deceased by MARGARET LOUISE COOPER of Winchester in the County of Middlesex pmying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by PERCY BUGBEE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that be be appointed administrator with the will annexed of said estate, without giving a sure
 A libel has been presented to said Court by your wife JANE E ZIMMER praying that a divorce from the bond of matrimony between herself and you be decreed for the cause of cruel and abusive treatment . She prayed for alimony and for custody of and allowance for minor
 John V Harvey, Register. nov23-3t STONEHAJV^ /LUMBER 1)1 11.1 . l ( 21 J MAIN STREET 4.1818.18. l .
 MARY AGNES McCORMACK late of Win Chester in Sliid County, deceased . To nil persons interested in the estate of MARY . McCorMACK .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ROBERT MICHAEL McCOR MACK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying he be appointed oxecutor thereof without giving a surety .
 Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this sixteenth duy of November 1961. Esquire . Esquire was First Judge .
 Mr Clarence Blake spoke on pewter at the November meeting of the Antique Study Group . Mr Blake was speaking at the meeting in November .
 He started his talk by explaining that pewter is an alloy composed principally of tin with copper, antimony and antimony, bismuth and sometimes lead as the other ingredients .
 Early pewter was manufactured by the English method, comparing it with the American method .
 These are quite different from the large, deep hammer marks of modern pewter . These were quite different to the large and deep hammer mark of modern .
 Mr Blake gave the names and dates of the leading early pewterers of this country . He also gave a list of the names of those who died in 17th century .
 He told members what is rare, what is desired by collectors, what was made before 1825 and what followed .
 Brittannia is a superior grade of pewter and was used for all sorts of household objects . Most of the made after 1825 is made from Brittania . This is the superior grade .
 Marks were explained and again comparisons were made between the English and American . Marks were also explained and were compared to each other .
 Marks help but one with a good knowledge of pewter can recognize a piece as being made by a certain man by telltale characteristics . The piece was made by the same man in the 1930s .
 Any members wishing to do re-search on pewter know what books to read and where they can be found as Mr Blake was, as always, generous with his knowledge .
 Blake brought in pieces from their own collection for the group to see and study at close range . Blake also brought in some pieces from his own collection .
 As Mr Blake was explaining he was showing a piece to illustrate his remarks, he showed a piece of his remarks .
 Brittannia ware offers variety, pleasing design and sound workmanship . Those who can never hope to own a piece of early pewter can be happy in the knowledge .
 The pre-service music at 10:40m. will consist of traditional carols sung by the full choir and the male choir . It will be followed by selections from the Christmas Oratorio by SaintSaens .
 The choir soloists are Estelle MeNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney Blanchard, Jr., baritone . The soloists will sing at the end of each performance .
 Four generations gathered for Thanksgiving this year at the home of Mr and Mrs. George and Mr. George . The family enjoyed a traditional American Thanksgiving at their home in Texas .
 Heading the group were Mr C E Clarke of Winchester and his daughter, Marion, father and sister of Mrs Clarke, Marion . The group was led by Mr Clarke's daughter and father of Mrs. Clarke's sister .
 C Emery Knight and his wife, Linda Knight, have been married for more than 20 years . The Knight family also have three children, Linda, Barbara, Barbara and Judy Knight .
 Deroo and their children, Nancy, Charles, Beth, I George and Helen; and Mr and Mrs. Charles F Deroo . Deroo is also married to Charles Deroo, Charles and I George Deroo; and his wife, Nancy Deroo.
 Rounding out the gathering were two family friends, Miss Mabel Burns of Cambridge and Miss Marguerite Troop of Winchester . The family friends also included two family members from Winchester and Cambridge .
 Send $1.50 for ITCH-AID Now — PHARMACY GIRL, Inc. f Labs Fifth Ave. Fifth Ave., Brookfield, Conn. Don’t Put Off —Send $1,50 for Itchy-Aide Now .
 Food, medical and baby survival kits available for use in case of nuclear attack . Food and medical kits available to use for use of nuclear weapons .
 Carefully balanced diet, assembled according to Civil Defense specifications . Civil Defense meals are prepared for Civil Defense purposes .
 By providing checking accounts, bills can be safely paid via the postal route . And banking-by-mail service, so deposits can be made any time at the depositor’s convenience .
 "Acting promptly on applications for creditloans to help meet urgent home repair needs" has saved local people countless dollars . And our policy of acting promptly on . applications for . creditloan loans has saved people countless . dollars, says the mayor .
 One of the most awful things about this war hysteria is the cal lousness of mind that it breeds . Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon .
 Shelters have apparently become a status symbol on the order of swimming pools . Shelters cost millions of dollars a year to build .
 Let us not follow the lead of the Abombinable Tyrant in the Kremlin and emulate Soviet brutality . Let us maintain dignity, decency, and Christian charity and refrain from further testing .
 If I had time, I think I’d brood Upon my grievous aptitude For sanding wood, repainting chairs, And miscellaneous repairs, he writes .
 My friends and neighbors call on me to stop a leak, replant a tree, Upholster chairs, adjust a clock, or fix a lock . I'm not afraid to ask for help, but I want to help my neighbors .
 TB Christmas Seal campaign chairman of Middlesex County thought of a method recently that some residents are using now as they send their checks to the Christmas Seal Campaign . Some residents are now using this method to send checks .
 “Mickles and dimes can add very quickly to make dollars that fight tuberculosis in Middlesex County,” she said. “It’s very important to fight tuberculosis,’ she said .
 One may, of course, walk out on it, hut possibly the feature is to follow, and we hate to sacrifice our seat . One may walk out .
 One way out is to direct our attention, not to plot or action, but to the sheer me chanical manipulation of the many and various factors involved in the production of even a poor picture . Let us assume that a book or play has been accepted for the screen .
 Immediately an intricate and complicated series of events springs into being. Immediately an elaborate series of . events springs to being. "Immediately an intricate . series of of events spring into being"
 Hangings are selected in the drapery department, which is a complete little shop with shelves of material, samples, counters and clerks . Hangings can be hung in a small shop in a tiny little shop .
 The restaurant feeds the players and prepares any scenes of a culinary nature . The restaurant also prepares the scenes of any scenes .
 Headquarters and Maintenance Support Company of t lie 79 1st Ordnance Battalion, 94th Infantry Division, was awarded the Military Order of World Wars Trophy for having the outstanding combat or combat support company in Greater Boston .
 Ting department edits the whole, and the picture is then ready for distribution . The Hinxinans live at 53 Shore Road, Winchester .
 The wonder is that, with all the multifarious departments and thousands of individuals concerned, anything ever emerges that provides even a semblance of continuity, of naturalness, or of life itself .
 Once a backwoodsman boasted that his hound Tige was the best hunting dog in seven counties . The dog was once a hunting hound .
 He said he never went hunting that Tige did not tree a varmint, and that by the way he barked old Tige always told him what the varmint was . He said Tige told him by the time he went hunting he would never go hunting again .
 A newcomer to the settlement, who thought that the old-timer must be stretching the blanket a bit, offered to bet that old Tige could not tell one varmint from another . A newcomer thought that Tige must have been stretching his blanket .
 When they reached the tree and held up their torch, sure enough there was a bobcat . The bobcat was the first bobcat to be seen in the wild .
 The newcomer was ready to pay the wager, but the night was young and old-timer was eager for more hunting . The old-timer was eager to more hunting, but he was ready for more .
 Then suddenly his bark hanged to a long howl that seemed to shake the trees and hills . Then suddenly he howled with a long, high bark that shook the hills .
 Chairman for the evening, Joe Maloney, will introduce Leo Laughlin, agent-in-charge of the Boston office of the F.R.L. Because of his wide experience, the club is assured of a very interesting evening .
 Plans are underway for the ‘Holiday Hop’ on Friday evening, December 29 . The event will take place on December 29, 2015 .
 John and Virginia O’Grady and Charles and Helen McLaughlin, tickets; Ray i and Kay Dunn, refreshments; and Oscar and Mary Baerenwald, decoI rations. John and . Virginia O'Grady, Virginia O.Grady; Charles and
 More than 2000 Greater Boston men and women have enrolled as workers for Action Day Sunday December 3 . Action Day will help boost Israel Bond sales to the 1961 goal of $1,500,000 .
 Volunteers will visit more than 30,000 Jewish homes in the Greater Boston area to sell Israel Bonds . Action Day will take place in Greater Boston, Boston, on Friday .
 How to mail your Christmas cards and gifts to insure prompt and safe delivery before December 25 . Check out these helpful hints on how to mail Christmas cards .
 Sent by First Class mail, they are sorted and delivered first, and if you include your return address on each envelope, they will he forwarded in the event of a change of address, or if they are undeliverable, it will be returned .
 Only your signature is authorized on cards sent at the 3 cents, unsealed Third Class rate . Also, you can write a personal message on the Christmas cards sent by First Class .
 An extra label carrying the recipients and senders name and address inside every package . Put an extra label around the world inside each package .
 Postmaster said, “By taking a little extra care with your Christmas mailings right now, you’ll avoid disappointing friends and loved ones.”
 Admission for members of the V.F.W. and it* auxiliary is a 1962 Dues Card . Admission is required to join the society . Admission to the society is required by a 1962 membership card .
 Any ladies or men from Winchester interested in joining the V.F.W. or its auxiliary are cordially invited to attend . The Winchester ladies and men will be invited to the event .
 It is hoped many veterans from Winchester who have served overseas and their wives, mothers, sisters, daughters or grandaughters 16 years of age or older will attend this social .
 Stoneham, Medford, Melrose and Melrose, Malden, Everett, Reading and North Reading . North Reading is one of Reading's seven boroughs .
 Quality Footwear for men, women and children since 1060 Coward Shoe Shop daily 9:15m. to 5:30m. Coward .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . Free DELIVERATION ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER . We carry a Complete stock of quality Liquors .
 Governor has granted this time to his home town high school to speak for a purpose to which he is known to be dedicated . The Governor is known for his dedication to his hometown high school .
 The talk is regretfully not open to the public as the auditorium accommodates only the student body . The talk will not be available to the general public .
 Governor Volpe is himself a graduate of neighboring Malden High School and Wentworth Institute in Boston .
 21 Everett Avenue challenged House Speaker John F Thompson to conduct public hearings to review Rep. Harrison C hadwick . That Gamblers Contact State Legislators contact State legislators .
 Chadwick’s charges that state legislators and higher political figures maintained contacts with organized gamblers . Chadwick: State legislators, higher political officials maintained contacts .
 Winchester’s Joe Bellino is still in demand for personal appearances . The Winchester High School alum is a former All American football star .
 Bullfct Joe went to the White House to present President Kennedy with the yearbook of the Annapolis Class of 1961 . BullfCT Joe presented the President with the book .
 While there he presented the President's son with a copy of “Navy’s Joe Bellino,” the popular history of Bellino's life in Winchester and at Annapolis .
 Saturday Joe will be in Baltimore for radio and TV appearances and to autograph copies of his hook at Rutzler’s, big department store . Saturday Joe is in Baltimore to appear on radio, TV appearances .
 Christmas In Center Decorations Up Of Town Today . First public Christmas decorations in years go up in W inchester Centre .
 Christinas decorations in years are lighted in the Centre . And the people to credit for this lie are the people who are responsible for it .
 There will be four large wreaths on the arches of the Boston and Maine overpass in the Centre proper . Wreaths will be placed on the Boston-Maine overpasses .
 There will be two large wreaths on the B & M overhead at Watertield Road . There will also be a large wreath on the ground at the end of the day .
 The large tree on the Mill Pond island will be decorated with blue lights . In addition, the large tree will also have blue lights on it .
 The decorations were made possible by generous contributions from Winchester merchants and firms, plus a $300 appropriation voted by Town Meeting last Spring . Town Meeting voted to approve the decorations .
 At least two contributions came from former Winchester residents now living in other parts of the country . Winchester residents have contributed to the story .
 Winchester Unitariansturned out in force Sunday . Winchester Unitarians turned out for the first time Sunday in support of the community .
 December 3 to hear a sermon by tin* world-famous follower of Albert Schweitzer . World-famous followers of Schweitzer will give a sermon .
 Theodor Binder was a Unitarian Unitarian at the First Unitarian Church on Marboro Street .
 Binder left a thriving practice in Lima, Peril to serve as a doctor to the sick and poor of Peru’s jungle interior . Binder urged his listeners to transcend the “mass anonymity” of their impersonal age and make a personal decision .
 Binder said that ultimately we can blame no one but ourselves for the type of world in which we live . Binder: Ultimately we can't blame ourselves for what we live in the world .
 The hospital, named for Albert Schweitzer, was founded on January 11, 19(50, and is patterned after Dr. Schweitzer . The hospital was named after Albert . Schweitzer.
 Erica Anderson’s film “A Clearing in the Jungle” brilliantly evoked the heartache and suffering of these Peruvian jungle people . Winchester Unitarians saw the film on Sunday at the end of the sermon .
 The hospital attempts to serve by itself a 200square mile area in which eight out of ten children die of tuberculosis before age ten . The hospital is located in a 200sq mile area where 8 out of 10 children die from tuberculosis . Eight out of every ten children in the area die of
 With restraint and artistry Miss Anderson’s camera moved through the hospital from bed to bed, from young face to old face . From pain to greater pain, from the anguish of illness to the joy of recovery .
 Boston Study Committee and Howard Whitmore, Jr., of Newton, were in full agreement on the need for some kind of advisory planning committee .
 Governor John Volpe and Boston Mayor Collins exchange harsh words . Governor John A Volpe of Boston and Mayor Collins of Boston exchanged harsh words over Boston shooting .
 The mayor charged the Governor with inaction in the face of corruption in the Boston police department . Mayor charged the governor with inaction .
 Governor said he would take vigorous action on the disclosures immediately upon his return . Governor replied from his California vacation spot that he would be taking vigorous action .
 Representative Chadwick said he first heard that Mr Thompson had sent him a letter when he was informed of this fact by a Boston Globe reporter . Rep. Chadwick says he had first heard of Mr Thompson's letter when informed by a reporter .
 That the hearing be open to the public and the press; and That he be accorded the courtesy of bringing with him such legal counsel as he desired . That the public should be given the courtesy to bring with him any legal counsel .
 Father Joyce made the point that the need for long-range planning is national in scope and is not confined to isolated cities as we are accustomed to view them . Singing New & Group .
 Winchester is a part of the Federally-defined standard Metropolitan area which included 77 eities and towns tied to Boston by various services . Winchester is one of the largest cities in the Boston metropolitan area . Winchester was part of Boston's Boston-area Metropolitan area .
 Father Joyce cautioned the audience that planning is essential if we are to avoid tragic mistakes in building for the future . Father Joyce told the audience planning is necessary to avoid tragedies .
 He used the transportation problem to illustrate the direction or growth that a Metropolitan area can take . The transportation problem illustrates the direction of growth in the area .
 Planning is simply consideration for the future, and stressed in governmental citizen interest in governmental implementation of plans .
 ‘The desire for lutonomy and desire for Home Rule is a failure to understand the nature of the problem.’
 Mr Whitmore urged onsideration of the present bill coming before the Legislature this year . The bill would set up an Advisory Council and would in no way Dad to metropolitan government .
 All three speakers made an eloquent and logical plea for more public interest and better political leadership . It is hoped to put the rink ing metropolitan areas into use .
 Winchester has a new singing group, a male quartet formed with the help of the Two By Fours . Winchester's 8-year old male double quartet is the community's eight-year-old male double quadruet .
 Members of the quartet were selected from 11 candidates who tried out for the four parts during the past five weeks . The quartet was selected from members of the choir .
 Singing in the new group will be Robert Horne of 24 Mayflower Road; Bradford Johnson of Winchester, a former Winchester resident now living in Watertown; Dr. Dr. Robert Dr. Bradford Johnson, a Winchester resident, will sing in the group .
 It is understood that the quartet, at present without a name, will not he directly associated with the Two By Fours . It will perform many Two By Four arrangements suitable for four-part singing .
 We fully and humbly recognize our presumptuousness in daring to make selections from so able a group of candidates . We did so only in view of what appeared to be a job that we felt needed to be done .
 Transportation Authority HARRISON W CHADWICK At the Star office . SINGING, continued on page 4 Transportation Authority .
 Representative Chadwick repeated his statement that he would talk anywhere on this matter, so long as any hearing on the question was not closed to the public and press . “1 think this is a matter about which the public ... have not only a right but a duty to be informed,
 Mr Chadwick said that the question of alleged liaison between legislators and officials and organized gambling was at once a moral, economic, and political issue .
 W inchester and whatever other tow operators would like to join it to lease the track for use as a commuter line . It passed, the bill would take the form of enabling legislation permitting W. inchester to lease it .
 Mr Chadwick has filed the bill, he told the Star, in response to information from Mr McGinnis, president of the B & M line .
 The opening up of Route 93 has cut into commuter use of the railroad so badly that operation is no longer financially supportable, says McGinnis . Route 93 opened up Route 93 to make it easier for commuters to use the railroad .
 Winchester could probably not break even financially in operating such a transportation authority, says Mr Chadwick . Winchester could not be financially viable, he says .
 It is highly probable that if such towns as Lowell and Nashua on the B & M New Hampshire division, and other communities like Wilmington, Lowell, Woburn, and Andover join with us to operate Budd car service .
 Upon completing his studies he became associated with the Beggs and Cobb Tanning Company until the company ceased its Winchester operation in December of 1957 .
 I bis group of anti-litter buggers is on the war path against every hit of refuse in every corner of Winchester, Winchester . Ibis group is 'on war path' against 'every hit of rubbish' Winchester residents .
 A single gum wrapper left between Cambridge Street and Forest Street when they gel through, it won’t be their fault . It won't be the first gum wrapper to be left on Cambridge Street between the two streets .
 The park department has constructed an outdoor skating rink at the corner of Shore Road and Spruce Street . The rink is in the graded area to the west of the Little League baseball field .
 The banked area will be flooded and with the advent of colder weather . Winchester residents are proud of this town and are now making :ui effort to make this the outstanding town in the state .
 A lot of this is due to the lack of proper trash containers, but steps are now being taken to provide facilities where rubbish may be deposited . The city is now taking steps to improve its rubbish disposal facilities .
 In weeks to come, it is expected that Mr Fitzsimmons and his supporters will step up their drive to make Winchester a still nicer place to live .
 Teenagers in ehestra gather at Boston I nivcrsityN Sargent Gamp workshop . They earnestly seek the help of anyone who shares their pride in their town .
 Shown with Gomhirtnr Marvin Rahin of casual trip to the Centre will show .
 Needham, New Hampshire, held a week-long music festival in Needham . Needham was the site of the Needham Music Festival .
 Drop in * 0011 - 0011 . Drop in also pay pontage BO’I H way* when yon *ave-hv-mail.
 Archie T O’Connell Feted at Testimonial Banquet at Town Line Cafe in Woburn . Friends, relatives and former associates gathered at a testimonial banquet in his honor .
 Tames A Cullen, former chairman of the Board of Selectmen and of the Middlesex County Commissioners, ably filled the important role of toastmaster . The guest of honor was Officer O’Connell’s brother and sister-inlaw, Police Lt. and Mrs.
 Nancy O’Connor is the widow of a retired police officer from Lynn, Massachusetts . The ceremony was held at the Board of Selectmen’s headquarters in Lynn .
 Several speakers paid tribute to the years and quality of Officer O’Connell’s service to the town . The head table guests were introduced .
 Chief Derro, on behalf of the Police Department, presented Officer O’Connell with a purse of money and his own thanks for his cooperation and devotion to duty . O'Connell was the honor guest .
 Officer O’Connell was presented with a gold police badge by the Board of Selectmen . Mr Saltmarsh, on behalf of the town, praised his long and faithful service to the town .
 John Elliott, presented Officer O’Connell with a handsomely engraved Hamilton wrist watch . The gift was the gift of his many associates and friends . John Elliott presented the officer with the gift .
 Among the guests was an old police "buddy" of Officer O'Connell, Benjamin O’Connor, a retired member of the Lynn Police . It is of interest that among the guests at the event was Benjamin O'Connor, an old officer .
 Officer O’Connell, previous to joining the Winchester Department, worked wrth Officer O'Connor in the Metropolitan District Police . O'Connell previously worked with O'Conner in Metropolitan District police .
 Dancing to the tunes of Daniel Noonan of Woburn brought the testimonial to a pleasing close .
 Anchors machine firmly, reduces noise, lessens fatigue and increases 6peed and accuracy . Anchors reduce noise, reduces fatigue and reduces fatigue . Anchor machine reduces noise and reduces noise .
 UNICORN ROOM LION ROOM is located in the Lion Room . Beautifully appointed for banquets, wedding receptions, business meetings, dances or luncheons .
 The 1902 Evening Study Groups of the Winchester College Club have been announced by Mr and Mrs. Robert White, Director of Music Coffee Hour in Chidley Hall .
 Six books from a list including Thoreau, Machiavelli, Graham Greene, and Sherman Adams will be discussed . Meetings will be held on alternate Mondays beginning January 22 .
 Forest Maddix will again instruct the Contract Bridge Group, with Mr and Mrs. Maddix again instructing .
 There will be eight two-hour sessions of supervised play with review, theory and discussion of the techniques of a good bridge game . There will also be a possible look at duplicate bridge if the group so desires .
 The Great Decisions Group, under the chairmanship of Mr Malcolm C Boggs, will meet for eight Thursdays beginning February 8 .
 Each meeting will commence with the group watching a half-hour television discussion of some aspect of U.S. foreign policy .
 Group discussion will follow, with background information available in kit form . Group discussion to follow, and background information is also available .
 Meeting on alternate Tuesdays beginning January 30 will be the Investments Group, to be led by Mr and Mrs. Mrs.
 Investment objectives will be carefully analyzed, as well as planning to meet these objectives . Investment objectives are carefully analyzed and planned to meet them .
 Sources of information and advice will be covered, and a few investment portfolios will be examined . Investing portfolios will also be examined in a few days .
 Experts will be present to make suggestions and answer questions of participants . While no formal lectures are scheduled, experts will make suggestions .
 The Arlington Center Center year is under the chairmanship of Mr and Mrs. Mill St., near Arlington Center year .
 Members in previous years know the excitement of adventurous tales accompanied by vivid color slides . The meetings will be held on alternate Mondays starting January 29 .
 Folders with further information on fees and registration instructions have recently been mailed . Registration instructions have been recently mailed .
 Plans are under way for the opening dinner meeting for all groups which will he held on January 15 at 6:30m., at the Craw---u ford Memorial Church . Plans are also under way .
 Vincent Caputo, a senior center and co-captain of the team, Peter Sullivan, a quarterback, and Roger DeMinico, a sophomore end . The three players were Vincent, a junior center, and a senior j quarterback .
 Head football coach Vic Fusia complimented the j team collectively for their selfless efforts which resulted in the Redmen’s second consecutive winning season .
 Dr. Warren P McGuirk is Dean of the School of Physical Education and Director of Athletics . Dr. McGuirk was also the Director of the Physical Education at the University of Maryland .
 Don Orione Horne shown at reeent benefit j dinner at Sons of Italy Hail . Worker* for lln. Horne was shown at benefit dinner .
 Winchester Friends of Don Orione held a highly successful dinner and evening of entertainment at the Sons of Italy Hall . I Hall Charity's sweet name received high honors Tuesday night . Winchester Friends held a successful dinner for the Winchester Friends .
 "The excellent turnout showed the kindly spirit felt for this great charitable cause by so many of our citizens," said the mayor . The excellent turnout of the event was a huge success .
 The sincere thanks and appreciation of State Chairman Leonard Barbo and local chairman Dr. Dr. James Barbo are given .
 Angelo L Maietta were expressed for the wonderful cooperation received from the committees and the Winchester Star . Angelo LMaietta expressed his appreciation for the cooperation received by the committees .
 Chief Joseph Derro was lauded for his superb job of handling the funds of the drive . Mrs. Mrs. Derro also praised for her role in the drive to raise funds for the event .
 A ldo A Minotti for her diligent work as secretary and chairman of publicity . Minotti is also the chairman of the board of publicity.
 Mr S Cantella of Prince Macaroni was especially dted for his great generosity in supplying food and chefs . Mr Cantella was especially given the honour for his generosity in providing the food .
 Mr Joseph Canarozza provided splendid entertainment with Sal Cavieehio, star of radio and TV, and the Wandering Minstrels Barbershop Quartet . Mr Joseph canarozza provides splendid entertainment .
 Mario Buzzotta was in charge of the telephone committee and her girls worked diligently for two weeks making calls . The girls made two weeks of making calls to the committee .
 Miss Eunice Maietta and her girls did a fine job of handling the ticket collections . Miss Maiettta did a great job with the ticket collection .
 Lucy Maiullari, who was in charge of waitesses, worked very hard with her group . The waitresses looked very pretty in their caps and aprons .
 Ollic Jean’s Scalp Clinic for Men specializes in hair hair . Clinic for men specializes in Scalp TREA TMENTS . Clinic runs from 4:30 to 8:30 a.m.
 All Harvard Alumni living in Melrose, Reading, Stoneham, Wakefield, Winchester and Woburn are invited to attend the next meeting of the Harvard Club of Eastern Middlesex . Room 1, Masonic Building Winchester, Mass.
 It will be held at the Winchester Country Club on Tuesday, December 19, 1961, with a social hour at 6:30 and dinner at 7:30 .
 Baaron Pittinger, Jr., Director of Sports Information at Harvard will be the speaker and will show the movie “Highlights of the 1961 Season” Harvard men are requested to notify the secretary, Edward J Sullivan of 8 Plymouth Road, Winchester, if they can attend .
 Harvard is co-champions of the Ivy League . This is the first time Harvard has won a game of its own football season . The game will be the first of its kind .
 For the past year he has been an assistant to the Fleet and •Truck Manager, and also on the Board of Directors of Sun Auto Rental Company, Inc., an affiliate of West End Chevrolet . He has also been on the board of directors for the past 12 years .
 This fall he completed an intensive five-week course at Chevrolet Motor Division’s Post Graduate School of Modern Merchandising and Management in Detroit . The school is based in Detroit, Michigan .
 Luscious Squash And Apple Pies Old Fashioned Plum Puddings Rich Fruit Cakes Real Butter Rolls FINE BAKING FOODS Super Market 7 Mt. Mt. Mount Mt. M. Muddings. Rich fruit Cakes .
 HOOD’s COTTAGE CHEESE Hi :iic 12-oz. pkgs.c — COOKIES and FAMOUS ASSORTEDCOOKIES SESAME THINS EDUCATOR NOEL COOKIE EDUCator SALTINES
 Winchester Jaycees held their 2rd general business meeting Thursday, November 30 at the Red Cross House . The meeting was the 2nd general meeting for Winchester Jayccees .
 Charter Night chairman Jim Ferriman reported the final plans for the upcoming bugfet dance to be held this Saturday evening, December 9 . Rill Bird presided, swore in two directors, Larry Smith and A1 Ruggles .
 Ticket reservations have been great, but some tickets will be available at the door . Some tickets will also be available for the show at the venue .
 Miss Lexington, Susan Nanry of Winchester, will be among the invited guests . Nanry will display her fine talent with several songs during the evening .
 Miss Lexington is sponsored by the Lexington Jaycee Chapter . Miss Lexington will be Miss Lexington . Lexington members will attend . Jaycees from Boston, Burlington, Woburn and other surrounding towns .
 Miss Lexington, Susan Nanry of Winchester, and Mr James Ferriman of Winchester . Bird thanked all members who contributed to the preparation of this big event .
 Jayceo Charter Night Buffet-Dance to be held Dec. Dec. at the Town Hall . Winchester Jaycees Sec. of the Winchester Jayckees and Chairman of the Jaycee Charter Night .
 Several projects were discussed it the meeting, including a Bicycle Safety Program, a Youth Activity Program and Community Development .
 Temporary chairmen will look into these projects and give their reports at the next general business meeting, January 2 . Temporary chairsmen will report on the projects .
 Lindy Lane, Internal V.P. served refreshments at the close of the meeting .
 Richard Parkhurst ably filled the office of Local Chairman of the Unitarian Service Committee . Unitarian Post has been in charge for two years .
 He has been in charge of fund raising for world wide projects in India . He has also raised funds for world-wide projects .
 Africa, South America, Greece and Korea as well as in our continental U.S. as well .
 The Service Committee is a non-sectarian organization, aware of the basic needs of mankind . It is devoted to helping man help himself .
 Davies is a past President of the Winchester Alliance and the Alliance of Unitarian Women . Davies was a member of the Unitarian Alliance . Davies is also a past president of the . Winchester Alliance .
 At Bowdoin he culminated three years of work on the ‘Orient,” the student newspaper, by being elected editor-in-chief of the paper in his senior year .
 He was a member of the board of the Bowdoin Publishing Company . He contributed to the “Bugle,” the college yearbook, and was a Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity .
 The Columbia sub-chapter, the only one of its kind, was organized May 11, 1961 . Columbia is the only sub-sub-chapter organized in the United States .
 Its initiates will he given opportunity upon graduation to become professional members of the Deadline Club and other professional chapters of SDX throughout the country .
 Buren H McCormack, vice president and editorial director of the “Wall Street Journal, was guest of j honor and principal speaker at the j initiation and accompanying banj quet . McCormack was vice president of the new national president of SDX .
 A lovely Christmas tea, program and meeting have been planned for the group . Christmas Tea will be held on December 26 .
 Florence Crittenton League, Winchester Circle, will meet at 2:30m. December meeting of the League .
 Monbleau’s talk will feature the relationship of music to the Christmas story as it is told in the Bible . The talk will be held at the University of Notre Dame in Paris .
 She is a well-known speaker and director of music . The circle is eagerly looking forward to hearing her .
 Mrs Adams and her tea committee have planned a beautiful tea in the lovely setting of Mrs. Adams . The event will take place at the end of Mrs Adams' visit to her home .
 Report to be given by bazaar chairmen on recent Christmas sale in Boston .
 Florence Crittenton Christmas meeting will take place tomorrow . All members, new and old, are urged to begin the holiday season at the meeting .
 Attending Seminar Miss Dorothy Sprague Clove, Director of the Children’s Own School and Mrs. Clove . The Children's Own School was in attendance at the seminar .
 Helen Means, head teacher of pre-school division of that School, will be attending this week a Seminar sponsored by the American Montessori Society at Greenwich, Connecticut .
 The seminar is to be held at the very interesting and much publicised Whitby School .
 DAILY l*ti *mr. PLEASE SEND ME a ONEY YEAR SUBSCRIPTION TO THE WINCHESTER STAR NAME > ADDRESS TOW N Enclose $4.00 Check or Money Order MAIL THIS COl PON TO THE WESCHES
 "Because they are human beings, because they, like we, are alive, we are responsible for them," says President Obama . "We're responsible for [the] people who are alive," says Obama .
 We in the West have brought much suffering to the world, as well as many blessings,” Or. Or . Or. T. Or. Ghitis .
 Schweitzer w rites, “is nothing else than Reverence for Life, a, universal ethic,” Schweitzer said . Schweitzer: "Reverence for life, a universal ethic" Schweitzer was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Reverence for Life affords me my fundamental principle of morality, namely that good consists in maintaining, assisting and enhancing life, and that to destroy, to harm or hinder life is evil . To destroy or harm life, evil is evil.
 It is a warm hand of assurance to an old woman at a hospital bed, an operation to restore health, a clean bed in which a stricken body can find rest . A clean bed is a super that helps a tubercular patient or leper find strength .
 Schweitzer once said, “so that I could practice the ethic of Jesus without having to talk "" It is this ethic which inspires Dr. Dr. Schweitzer .
 "I one senses a pride, an exhiliration j in him, too," he writes . "I'm proud and proud, but I'm not alone," he says . "But I one senses ... a pride," he adds .
 The writer watched him say goodbye to two Winchester children before he left the church . He said goodbye to his two children before leaving the church.
 Peruvian tribes once mutually hostile to each other have helped each other . It is no doubt this innate kindliness that has inspired this kind of cooperation .
 Dr. and Mrs. Rendall of Ardley Place served as his host and hostess . Dr. Edward Rendall and Dr. Richard Rendall also served as hosts and hosts .
 Binder will soon be on his w r ay back to the jungle, after doing what he can to secure help from charitable institutions of all churches . Binder has secured help from all churches.
 Christmas lights are shining now, the weather’s growing colder . Santa's Bazaar Christmas lights shine now . Santa’�s Bazaar will be on sale at the end of the year .
 Santa’s Bazaar will take place tomorrow afternoon in the George Washington School auditorium in the school auditorium . Families of the students will have a prime opportunity to stop and shop .
 The doors to this bargainfilled wonderland will open for the children at 3:15 . For the first hour they will have an unhurried chance to select beautiful and unusual gifts for every member of the family .
 There will be a chance table with a baby doll, two wiggle walkers and an etch and sketch kit for wideeyed winners .
 Of special interest to mothers will be the table of exotic and glamorous Christmas decorations . The fathers’ table with unique barbecue aprons and travelling shoe bags . The babies' table with handmade dainties and knitted goods, and the mothers’ .
 Alice Perkins and her hard-working ways and means committee, Claire Ball, Mary Ciroli, Betty Pease, Jean McGoldrick, Evelyn Penta, Martha Loftus, Nancy Russo, Polly Lombardi, Ruth Barry, Mary Villari, Mary Jones and Grace Johnson
 James R Stewart, Jr., president of the Winchester Council of Girl Scouts, officiated at the ceremony . The ceremony was held in Winchester .
 Twenty-two girls made their Brownie Scout promise and were pinned and welcomed into the troop . The girls were pinned and welcomed in the troop.
 Karen D’Andraia, Christine Delano, Barbara Doe, Kathy Dowd, Julie Downes, Janet Dunn, Dorothy Elliott, Susan Friborg, Janye Greco, Barbara Harkins, Ellen Harper, Kristine Lindberg, Jacqueline Nadeau
 One of the highlights of the afternoon was the centerpiece on the table, a Brownie doll peering into a miniature "pool" banked with greens .
 The new Brownies are looking forward to many happy and useful years as part of the Girl Scout Organization . Dec. Juliette Low Meeting cabin, 3:45 5:00m.
 ITCH-AID is COOLING, COLORLESS, STAINLESS, in STANT DRYING . First Baptist Women’s Fellowship Mrs. Smith .
 John A Volpe has accepted the invitation of the Women’s Fellowship of the First Baptist Church to be a guest at the annual Christmas tea .
 Tea will be held in the social hall of the church on Wednesday, December 13, at 1:30m. The tea will he held in . The tea is held at 1.30m .
 Members and friends of the local women’s groups also have been invited to attend .
 Bell Haven "Bell Ringers’* of Westori will present a delightful program of music . The Bell Haven “Bell Ringer’s’”* will perform at Bell Haven . Bell Haven is located in Westori, Oregon .
 C Francis Whittemore, director, will tell about her bell collection and the hobby which grew into this organized bell-ringing group . Director of the bell ringers will talk about her Bell collection .
 She and Mr Whittemore are members of the American Bell Association . They now have a complete set of 61 Whitechapel Handbells from London .
 Bell Ringers give many concerts during the Christmas season, and frequent concerts throughout the year . The Bell ringers give often concerts in the Christmas period .
 Lucille Sheppard, extends a cordial invitation to members and friends to come and bring their friends . Lucille has invited members of the public to join her family .
 Baby-sitting will be provided in the nursery for pre-school and kindergarten-age children .
 The Foster Parents’ Program of three social service agencies are having their annual Christmas Tea for their Foster Mothers on Wednesday, December 13, at 2:00m.
 A color film will illustrate with a baby’s first year of growth and development . Dr. Dr. John Sutter will discuss, and also illustrate, with a color film, a baby's first year . He will discuss and illustrate the development of a baby .
 Meyer is the acting chief of the Child Health Division of the Children’s Medical Center . Meyer is a former child health expert .
 Wyman Parents’ Association held an executive board meeting of Wyman parents' Association held at the home of the recording secretary, Mrs. Barbara Wyman .
 Donald King Lewis was unanimously elected the new vicepresident to succeed Mrs. Hillary Clinton . Mrs. Clinton was elected to succeed her predecessor as vicepresident of the United States .
 Morrill is moving out of the state, which necessitated her resignation . Morrill's resignation is due to move out of state, forcing her to leave .
 Lewis will assume her new duties currently, as she will I l>e the president-elect for 1962 . Lewis will take over as President-elect of 1962 .
 Ham is an old fr iend to Winchester audiences ami to Garden Club members in particular . Ham is a favorite of Winchester audiences, but Ham is not a new addition to the Garden Club .
 Her fine philosophy of life, which she artfully weaves through all her talks, weaves . Her sincere appreciation for everyone’s creative achievements make her own artistic ability happily received by her audiences .
 She has a great gift for sparking an' audience’s enthusiasm and sending them home inspired to create beautiful things they have seen .
 Few speakers can take the simple and the ordinary everyday things and make them such gay and artistic decorations . Few speakers have taken the simple, ordinary everyday everyday things to make them gay and beautiful .
 Her theme might well be “The Art of Living as Well as Decorating” beginning promptly at 1 :30m. Her theme may be ‘The Art . of living as well as decorating’ beginning promptly . at 1:30m .
 George Ham gave one of the finest Christmas programs the club has had . George Ham, who gave the club's best Christmas programs, gave the best Christmas program ever .
 She sent everyone away with a real feeling for the true spirit of Christmas that transcends all real Christmas decorations .
 Brad Johnson, a graduate of Winchester High School and Amherst College, is second tenor . Brad Johnson is a graduate from Winchester High . Johnson: "It's a great life for me. I'm going to be a success"
 Brad started singing with the Winchester High School Glee Club and First Congregational Church Choir . Brad is a member of the Winchester, Winchester, High School choir . He sings at the Winchester Church and Winchester High .
 Frank Bates, baritone, is a graduate of MIT and Harvard Medical School . Bates is a baritone singer .
 Singing experience includes high school chorus, barbershop quartets, . Augusta Choral Society, Lexington Choral . Society and First Congregational Church Choir . Singing .
 In December they will entertain at the Florence Crfttenton House in Brighton, at the Winchester Country Club, and at the Charlestown Savings Bank .
 Charles Potts of Standish lane is on the Charlestown Savings entertainment committee . Charles is also a member of the Standish Lane Savings Entertainment Committee .
 The double quartet is rehearsing new music for events scheduled during the winter and spring seasons . Double quartet also rehearses new music .
 Cadillac is built in one plant by craftsmen who share their skills with no other car . Craftsmen know only Cadillac’s high standard of quality . Cadillac's quality is the same as that of any other .
 The average Cadillac craftsman has been working to these high standards for more than a decade . Secondly, Cadillac craftsmen have been working with the company for over a decade.
 The skills are checked by more than 1400 separate separate inspections . And finally, all these skills were checked by over 1400 separate tests .
 A revelation drive at„ your authorized dealer will give you the story of Cadillac craftsmanship first hand . Cadillac Craftsmanship is a must-have experience at Cadillac .
 Zipper Skinned — Heavy with Juice — Rich in Flavor tangerines 2 Grapefruit Peppers Green Cabbage Indian River Seedless, Low in Calories . Fresh, Crisp Adds Zest to Salads New — Firm, Fresh Green Heads .
 The Reverend Cyril R Dej laney, S.1., a member of the faj eulty of the College of t he Holy I ( foss, Worcester, will be celebrant ""1 the 7:45m. The Reverend will be a celebrant of the 7
 The Colonial Master Smoked Shoulder with an 8 oz pkg of Beef . Lean and savory, fine quality of fine quality, Chuck Roast of Beef — Juicy, tasty and oh so tender . Chuck Roasts of Beef is a classic American classic .
 Stamps f^baked FINAST BLUEBERRY^ PIE EXTRA W: STAMPS fYnasT FRESH PUMPKIN SQU ARE EXTRA frM: STamPS ^ t a ]Z FINAST ENGLISH MUFFINS EXT
 Weatherly by Lenox Place Setting $19.95 . Chanson by Chanson $2.95.95 4-pc.
 Swanson’s is one of the best-selling items in the world . You can buy some of the missing pieces in her place settings or silverware .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist Church will revert to eleven o’clock starting this Sunday, December 10 . Sx j Methodists Return To 11 0’Clock Service . Crawford Memorial Methodists will hold their morning worship service at 11 o'clock .
 For the past ten weeks th‘e service was slightly earlier, but this was done on an experimental basis . It is now deemed advisable to return to the former time of eleven o'clock .
 This will also effect the Nursery, Kindergarten and Primary Departments of the Church School . The Church School will also be affected by this decision .
 The features of the Youth Choir, Youth Sermon and rehearsal periods will be retained in the program as now . The Youth Sermons, Youth Choirs and rehearsals will also be retained .
 Mrs. Roland Nadeau, will sing an anthem appropriate to the season of Advent and Mrs. Mrs. Carol will sing the song at the end of the year .
 The Senior Methodist Youth Fellowship will meet in the sanctuary this Sunday evening at 6:30 o’clock . The Youth Fellowship is a youth ministry .
 The pastor will speak to the group on the “Holy Communion” and with the assistance of the Rev. The Rev. Rev. David Miller, the pastor of the group, will also speak .
 James J Connelly of Mystic Valley Parkway are the parents of a third child, first son, James J Jr., born December 4 at the Winchester Hospital . James Jr. was born at Winchester Hospital on December 4 .
 Marvin Russell Wilson of Reading, Reading, gave birth to a daughter, Deborah Anne Wilson, November 21, at the Richardson House, Boston . Marvin Russell Russell Wilson's first child was a daughter born November 21 .
 Gary Cooke and Gary Cooke of Topeka, Kansas, are the parents of a son, born December 5 . Cooke and Cooke were married at the age of 18 .
 Robinson S Whitten, II, was born on December 4 at the Winchester Hospital . Charles R Whitten announce the birth of a son, Robinson S. Whitten II, II .
 Lynch Junior High School building committee had no trouble at last week’s special town meeting getting the needed funds beyond their original appropriation . A permanent building committee was approved for a permanent permanent building .
 The one voice raised in opposition questioned the building committee’s paying for items such as a wellhrld fence, and tvqyewriters, feeling that by the terms of the original vote to take the land for a school the fence was the School Committee's responsibility .
 The Lynch committee has done a good job, had the school open for business when they said they would, and came out within some two per cent of their appropriation . The school is now in operation .
 We wondered if perhaps a permanent group, selected for their knowledge of building procedures could not have foreseen some of the things that needed adjusting, or additional funds after the school was completed .
 Building a school costing a million and one half dollars is a complicated job, requiring technical knowledge . Few citizens appointed to municipal building committees know how to build a school .
 This is in no sense of a reflection upon the ability or integrity of any Winchester building committee, present or past . Winchester's building committee is not responsible for the decision . This is not a reflection on the integrity of the building committee or its ability .
 Building a school nowadays is a cor.. plicated business, much more so than it used to be . Building a new school is a much more complex business than it was in the days before .
 Up a building in the old days with a solid foundation, good roof and plumbing, and the requisite number of rooms . Your job was pretty much over with. But up a building with a good foundation and a good roof, good plumbing and a requisite room is over .
 You didn’t have to worry about audio-visual aid. Language laboratories, speech rooms, conference rooms, kitchens and other adjuncts of modern education. Worry about audio and visual aids.
 It is possible for a building committee to become so engrossed in some of the features thought desirable by the school authorities that they spend money on side issues which should have gone, so far, for straight construction and necessary furnishings .
 It is the Star's opinion that the Lynch commit tee could have completed this school within its appropriation if it had not been for features sought bv the school committee .
 We do not question the desirability of most of these features, but a good argument can be made for their not being the building committee’s responsibility .
 In discussing the possibility of a permanent building committee with one who lias had considerable experience with school building commit‘ tees, we were told that such a committee might be a good thing .
 Such a committee, we were told, should include an accountant, a lawyer, an engineer and some one acquainted with building procedures and contracts, some one who could talk the language of the architect and contractor . We were told that such a committee should include accountant, lawyer, engineer, lawyer
 Such a committee would take over once the town decides to build anything . The committee would be in charge of the town's development plans .
 Its members might of course make mistakes, hut from their specialized knowledge their mistakes should not be serious, and should grow less as the committee continues to function .
 Building committee members would start with a knowledge of building your average building committee member has to acquire by costly trial and error . Building committee would have to learn a lot from building experts .
 He had just been cut off as he was entering atertieldield from the I’arkway by an operator headed in the opposite direction . Without warning of any kind, he swooped to a l turn in front of his automobile to sneak into a parking spice that was
 W inchester driver estimate of drivers carries more than a little truth . As the Star secs it the visiting operator’s estimate of Winchester drivers carries a lot of truth .
 More and more people are doing more and more crazy things with cars . With the Christmas rush of shoppers just ahead we may well have an accident that will sadden us all for the holidays .
 Let its all drive with more consideration for the other fellow, and what better time could there be to do so than al Christmas? Let's all drive more with consideration for other fellow .
 I have read with the greatest interest your excellent editorial on civil defense and the letters of reply . I'm very pleased with your excellent response to your editorial and your excellent letter .
 You are to be commended for having performed an important public .service in your community by creating a public discussion on this issue, which has previously been the subject of one-sided and misleading handouts from the Civil Defense authorities .
 The scientific statements made in your editorial are in the main correct, and the small corrections submitted by Dr. Dr. John Defterios are in fact correct . Dr. Defterios says the scientific statements are correct .
 First, defense against anything but an unimaginably small nuclear attack is not possible . Defense against a nuclear attack would not be possible, experts say .
 The destruction to our economy and social structure would permanently end democratic government . That is, al though some individuals might survive, some individuals may survive . The destruction of our economy would permanently stop democratic government. That is al though though some people might survive .
 False security engendered by the civil defense program materially increases the danger of war . False security is offsetting any potential, marginal protection offered by the program, says author .
 Your readers may by now be tired of numbers in this connection, but the following data, taken from an analysis by Prof. Prof. John Defterios, is a former Air Force Officer of the UK Air Force .
 Gordon S Christiansen, chairman of the Chemistry Department at Connecticut College, may serve as an antidote to the totally unrealistic letter of Mr Boecker .
 The radiation level at the end of the first hour would be 7500 roentgens per hour . In a region remote from the blast and fire area, but in the direct path of the fallout, the radiation level would be more than 7500 per hour. In a remote region
 In any area which for any reason has a higher level, for example being a little closer to one of the explosions, or as a result of a larger attack, there might well be as much as 15,000 roentgens per hour .
 Under these conditions, it would be impossible to come out of the shelter after two weeks . Between the 0th and 12th month, the average level would be 7 roentgens per hour, coming to 3000 per hour . This is very likely a fatal dose .
 Under these conditions, it would be possible to emerge only for very brief periods of say an hour a week for the first six months . Under such conditions, the government would only be able to emerge for an hour-a-week .
 "How one expects society to be rebuilt in the face of all the other obstacles with only that much labor is a mystery to me," says author . "I don't know how society can be rebuilt with that little labor," she says .
 It would be more appropriate for us to ask them the same thing. Perhaps it would be better if we had asked them to tell them the truth .
 Wooden structures out to 18 miles would be flattened before being ignited . Wooden structures would have to be flattened and then ignited .
 These fires would cause a firestorm which would burn until every combustible item in the fire radius was consumed . The firestorm would then burn until all combustible items in a radius were consumed .
 Such a firestorm was caused in Hamburg in World War II by 2.5 kilotons of incendiary bombs . The bombs boiled the water in the canals and glazed the bricks in the buildings .
 Such a firestorm on a very small scale occurred in Los Angeles in the recent brush fire, destroying Dr. Dr. Martin. Martin .
 Libby Libby is a noted nuclear physicist and expert on shelters . Libby's articles on thermonuclear survival are appearing in newspapers throughout the country .
 In this case, the intense heat set fire to the railroad ties which were used to reinforce the shelter .
 Within the firestorm area, almost everyone will die, Tom asphyxiation, carbon monoxide poisoning, or burns, he says . Not to labor the point, it suffices <> say .
 There is no reason whatever to l doubt that, if they wished, the Russians, with their giant rocket boosters, could place in orbit, bombs of much larger size which ould do that much damage without even being brought to earth .
 It is absolutely untrue that the Russians are unable to deliver such weapons in view of their ability to orbit very largo satellites . The Russians are not incapable of delivering such weapons, it is said .
 Even if they could not, one of their trawlers could very easily drop such a weapon into the ocean off our coast, where, when it exploded, it would do almost as much damage to our nearby coastline, and deliver much more radioactivity .
 The above considerations also answer most of the points of your corespondent Mr Brooks .
 He raises the question of treason in addition, however, and this is worth a few words . The question is raised by the president of the United States .
 Brooks thinks that honest differences of opinion are “near treasonable,” I am puzzled as to why he wants to defend this country at all . Brooks' views on differing opinions are ‘near treble-asonable”
 Free speech is one of the things which distinguishes America from Russia. Surely, free speech is a thing which distinguishes us from Russia? Russia .
 We have received about 1,000 re-plies to date, of which 90 per cent supported our viewpoint . We are happy to clarify that we have received more than a million re-tweets .
 There is evidence already that the Administration is making drastic changes in its program and downgrading individual shelters . Other faculty members around the country are republishing the letter with hundreds of additional Signatures .
 I hope all this will give your critics reason to reexamine their position. I hope it will give them reason to rethink their position . I hope this will inspire them to re-evaluate their views.
 A California housewife, Mrs. Barbara Bush, has been accused of hiding in fallout shelters . She says she has been a victim of the fallout shelter debate .
 Wayne El wood of Palo Alto, California, has sent the $1,000 it would have required to build a fallout shelter . El wood has sent as a donation to the United Nations as a gift to the UN .
 Pledges of similar action have been received from 28 persons in North Carolina . Pledged of similar actions have been made by 28 people .
 Here is a new and healthy trend, a civilized and unselfish way of facing up to the cold reality that confronts us, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Publication of Government’s new booklet on instructions to citizens in the event of nuclear attack has been held up because of disagreement among scientists . Publication of the new booklet is due to be published by the end of the year .
 Estimates of destruction and deaths depend on the exact nature and extent of a possible attack, and the particular objectives it would be concentrated .
 Also under debate is the effectiveness of shelters, whether they would prove havens of refuge or death traps . Also under question is whether shelters are havens or fiendishly efficient death traps.
 Even the doubtful protection that shelters may provide can be shared by only a small section of the community . Even though shelters can provide, they can't be shared with a small group of people .
 We know that possession of individual shelters is already resulting in un-neighborly and un-Christian attitudes toward our less fortunate friends and neighbors . The shelter is a place for people who are less fortunate to live under shelter .
 In addition, billions of public or private money spent to this end are at best profoundly speculative, quite possibly wasted . In addition to the billions of dollars spent on this end, the money spent on the project is also profoundly speculative .
 We do know that, assuming survival, the world to which we would emerge would be a nightmare of horror, with knee-deep ash, radioactive fallout for an indefinite period, transportation and communication obliterated, buildings reduced to rubble .
 The one thing worthy of intensive thought and action is the development of retaliatory power that can be understood by even Russia (which, I am confident, has been and is being done) Redoubled exertions for negotiations tending toward international disarmament and nuclear control .
 The Star is very grateful to Mr Jones for citing the inspiring action of Mrs. Mrs. Jones . The Star has been in touch with the family for more than two decades .
 Elwood in giving to the United Nations the $1,000 with which she had intended to build a fallout shelter . Elwood gave the U.N. the money she intended to use as a shelter .
 Mrs. Drexler was aware of the facts concerning the unrealam of shelters in a nuclear war . She was able to find a safe place in a shelter in her home .
 Three of the most solid, thoughtful, and responsible editorials I have read in the Ameri can press in many a day . These are three of the best editorials in the country's history .
 In a time when many are falling into the “Red or Dead” panic, we need to have this kind of steady and thoughtful journalism . We need very much to have a steady, thoughtful journalism, says John Sutter .
 There is one aspect of the present situation which would deserve the same kind of factual and thoughtful treatment one of these days . There is another aspect which deserves the same sort of treatment .
 The primary issue separating the Soviet Union and the United States from agreement on anything else of importance is the question of Germany . The U.S. and Soviet Union are divided on the issue of Germany, historian says .
 The people to the east of Germany who have suffered so frightfully from attacks from that couptry and especially from the Nazis have, understandably, an almost pathological fear of the Germans . The people in the east have suffered from a very severe form of fear .
 There is no blinking the fact that some of the topmost military commanders of Western Germany are former trusted officers of Hitler . There is little evidence of their having changed their ideas very radically since those days .
 General Hans Heussinger was chief of Hitler’s high command in the Wehrmacht after Hitler had dismissed the generals in whom he had lost confidence as not certainly loyal to him . As an example, one may take General Hans .
 His appointment was protested by several countries of Western Europe who had Jonger memories than we, but there is there he is .
 In the long run, it might be as advantageous to us as to the Russians to reverse this build-up of military power in the hands of people who have not shown the highest degree of reliability in the handling of such power . Russia has been building up its own military power, says
 I am not suggesting that we now begin a hate campaign against the Germans. I'm not saying that we need to begin a hatred campaign against Germans, I say . I'm just not suggesting we start a campaign of hatred against Germans .
 The U.S. should not be so eager to risk all the people of the United States and indeed, the population of the world for the sake of defending our right to place such frightful power in the hands of such men as General Heussinger .
 Winchester parents and their children have lost one of their best friends . Winchester parents, children lost their best friend . Winchester residents say they will always remember the Winchester family member .
 Miss Lillian Salice was the modest possessor of great inner warmth and intelligence . Miss Salice, Mystic School fourth grade teacher, was impeccable .
 She was truly capable of encouraging the best in those entrusted to her care and direction both intellectually and morally . She was able to encourage the best of those entrusted with her care .
 Through the years this dedicated woman of the world’s noblest profession gave of herself entirely . Our children have come away better human beings for just having come under her sphere of influence, says the author .
 To her and all those like her who endeavor so selflessly and then pass quietly from our legions just as they lived, go our everlasting gratitude . We are grateful for those who have left a mark in our hearts .
 "This group of humanitarians do not look down on folks who are at their wits end," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "They don't look down"
 A family in small town surrounding Winhester, who had no blankets and who are without food a great deal ind their light bill needed to be paid, and someone notified the Salvation Army . The family is without blankets and without food .
 Anyone feeling generous at hristmas would he doing a fine thing to do something for this family . Anyone feeling . generous at this Christmas would he do something to do .
 I am learning much from the debate on shelters which is taking place in the Star . I feel greatly indebted to you for initiating it and contributing to it, and also to those who have written letters. I am .
 Winchester School Committee to send pupils home in the event of a nuclear attack . School Committee's policy points up our greatest need at the moment, says author .
 This is the basic source of our confusion, both locally and nationally. This is a source of national confusion . This is not the first time we've seen this confusion, but it's a good thing .
 There is as yet no ‘overall town policy’ and there is no clearly-defined overall national policy . There is still no “overall city policy” in the United States .
 This is because the elected representatives of the people have not as yet faced up to this question and debated it to the end of defining a policy, as sooner or later they must . And this is so because of the fact that they have not faced up this question .
 The White House has announced a program of building family shelters on the advice of the Pentagon . The Pentagon has advised the government to build shelters, the White House says .
 Because it has raised so many questions it has now been abandoned in favor of a program of community shelters, which raises just as many questions, it has been abandoned .
 I for one want our elected representatives to arrept. their responsibility for thinking through this matter, so that we may have a public policy . The waste of public funds and serious effects for pubic morale are serious .
 This is an extremely complex issue, which involves much more than questions of military expediency to he decided by the Pentagon . This is a very complex issue. This is not just a matter of whether or not, but it's a very serious matter of national security .
 "It is a matter of life and death, not only for individual Americans, but for the whole human race," says President Obama . Obama: "It's a matter for individual people, not just for individual individuals," but for "human race"
 If the U.S. is to be allowed to make its positive contribution to humanity, we must work out a policy through our elected representatives on every level of government .
 This should be the number one item on the legislative agenda . Involving at it does the fate of humanity, this should be a priority for the government .
 Let us as citizens demand that it . be confronted and thought through now, before we get any more confused . Let us . demand that . it . confront and think through now . Let’s call for it to be confronted now, not before it is too late .
 Donald T Rowlingson 15 Ridge Street tions were completely disastrous for both extreme right and leftwing parties . Sincerely yours .
 Nazism and Communism are on the decline in Western Germany rather than on the comeback, according to the historian .
 In essence, what I am trying to point out is that one should have some idea of the political and economic picture, both past and present .
 World understanding is not furthered by biased and unsupported arguments . World understanding will not be furthered with biased, unsupported arguments. World understanding needs to be enhanced by biased arguments, experts say .
 Tctens is a reputable scholar who has taken great pains to document his book . He is the author of “The New Germany and the Old Nazis"
 The Star will publish Mr Tetens’ reply, and forward a copy of it to Mr Stepper when he returns to Germany next week .
 Reading of the review in the Winchester Star of November 30 of “The New Germany and the old Nazis” must be a challenge to every German citizen, says the writer .
 The Germans slowly have become accustomed to accusations of being “militarists’ or “neo-Nazists"" from sources behind the Iron Curtain . The Germans have become increasingly accustomed to being accused of being "militaristists" or ‘neo
 It's disconcerting to hear the same arguments emanating from the Western side . However, it is disconcerted to hear that it is not the same .
 It might not be known that many people joined the party because of political and economic pressures . Conditions in East Germany today are similar to those prevailing in the country today .
 Few people knew about decisions of the top party council due to the excellent propaganda machinery conducted by Goebbels and his staff . Few people tried to find out because of fear of the Gestapo . As a matter of fact, relatively few people knew of decisions made by the party council
 Mr Tetens now, 1(5 years after the end of the third Reich “comes to the inescapable conclusion that the Nazis have had a quiet comeback almost everywhere” he can only refer to those party members who passed the “Entnazifizierung
 Tetens as a ‘Germanic scholar’ should know that only those cleared by the Allies were allowed to accept a public position .
 German courts have prosecuted many of the Nazi officials responsible for crimes conducted during the Nazi regime . A careful reader of German newspapers will also have noticed that many of these officials have been prosecuted .
 I would agree with Mr Tetens’s opinion that Mr Globke perhaps should not be in his present position . I would also agree with him that he should not have been in his current position .
 Mr Tetens’ opinion of the others mentioned in the article is incredible . doubt that it can be substantiated by real facts. However, Mr Teten’s opinion of others mentioned is incredible, and I doubt that any of them are substantiated .
 A social tea for second grade teacher at Parkhurst School will be held by the room mother . Second grade teacher, Miss Quinn, will be at the school in Parkhurst .
 Reciprocal foreign trade builds vital channels for the free exchange of ideas . Reciprocrocatable foreign trade is vital to free trade in the world, says President Obama . The U.S. should be able to use its own currency to make it easier to trade freely .
 Trade is as essential to the well-being of a country as oxygen is to a human . Trade is a vital part of a nation's well being, says John Defterios . He says trade is essential to a country's survival .
 Conservative elements in our country rejoice in labelling people un-American . Here is the point: conservative elements in the U.S. rejoice in labeling people 'un-American'
 Representative Mason of Illinois is a prime advocate of protectionism, i.e., the abolition of free reciprocal foreign trade . Mason supports a system that is a serious threat to America’s standing and well-being .
 Protectionism, also a major plank of the large conservative group’s platform, is something of the past, something that would rot this great country . Protectionism is also a feature of the conservative group's platform, but would rot the country .
 Hanna Hall of 4 Holton Street observed her 9(5) birthday on November 22 . Hanna Hall, 9, celebrated her 9th birthday on Nov. 22 .
 There are not too many, even in these days of longevity, who reach such an advanced age . She observed it quietly with no particular fanfare, though there were no fanfare for her .
 Hall suspect that plans were underway for a big party and reception in her honor on Saturday evening . Hall suspects that plans are underway for the event .
 She was greeted with an enthusiastic rendition of “Happy Birthday to You” as she entered the living room .
 She received many flowers and other anniversary presents . She thoroughly enjoyed every minute of the evening . Entertainment was presented and refreshments were served .
 Natalie Hall; and the four great-grandsons, Robert, Richard, Jackie and David Hall. Natalie Hall is also a great-granddaughter of David Hall . Natalie Hall was married to David Hall's wife, Robert Hall, who died in 2011 .
 Though many of the younger guests at the party stiffed an occasional yawn the day after, Mrs. Mrs. Smith said, "It was a great night for the party"
 She is generally in excellent health, keeps her end up with the household chores and can, if necessary, do a trick in the family delicatessen .
 Hall is the widow of John A Hall, for many years an employee of the Water Department . Hall is also a former Water Department employee . Hall was married to Hall, who died in 2008 .
 She has lived in Winchester for 55 years and enjoys a wide circle of friends . She has made her home in Winchester, Winchester, for more than 55 years .
 To their host wishes, the Star adds its very special congratulations to one of our most popular senior citizens .
 EastWest hostilities are assessed in terms of psychology by Dr. Wilson . Parkhurst Tea For Miss Quinn will be presented at the end of the war .
 “An Inquiry into the Facts and Fictions of Foreign Policy’s Foreign Policy,” Dr. David Rothkopf concludes . The book is published by Dr. Aaron Miller, a professor at New York University .
 It deals boldly but competently with “the nature of the Soviet system,” the problem of China and Germany, and the callous arithmetic of nuclear war “computers” like Kissinger and Kahn .
 Fromm's rebuttal of Mr Kahn’s unrealistic estimates of nuclear war and amoral appraisals of ‘acceptable’ mass deaths is the most effective I have seen . Fromm: ‘Fromm’’ is the best rebuttal I’
 Fromm’s most durable pages in this 252page study are those in which he examines the cold war in terms of humanist psychology . Fromm: "The Cold War is the Cold War, with a humanist perspective, and with a dark side side, it's not
 Fromm observes that the sane man distinguishes between subjective reactions and objective facts . Fromm says the sane person distinguishes between objective facts and subjective reactions . For example, Fromm writes: "Sane man distinguishes from subjective reactions to objective facts"
 Fear and hysteria exist between Washington and Moscow, he says, because both see each other not realistically as they are but in terms of their rigid ideological views of the world .
 The Soviet Union looks at America and ‘sees’ not a reformed and progressive capitalism, but as a fictional 19thcentury feudal state . Wall Street tyrants whip hungry workers to heel, the Soviet Union says .
 We look at the Soviet not as the comparatively conservative and highly class-structured managerial society it has become but in terms of a 14th century Muscovite empire, with no justice for anyone . Similarly, Fromm argues, we look at . not as a comparatively conservative .
 Both Russia and America look at themselves with equal unrealism, Fromm believes . Fromm: 'There is every indication that the Stalinist error has been reduced'
 The Soviet Union likes to picture itself as a classless workers’ and peasants’ state encircled by “war-mongering” capitalist vultures . While it strives onward and upward toward an egalitarian state with equal rights and duties for all, the Soviet Union
 Russia is ruled by a bureaucracy, permits severe salary differentials and sharply divided into managerial and worker classes . Russia has placed the interests of the Soviet nation above those of the international communist movement whenever the two have conflicted .
 America likes to consider itself itself a bastion of Thoreauvian individualism, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. says . Dr. King was a pioneer of individualism in the U.S.
 Fromm says we are becoming a nation of faceless “organization men” characterized by collective thinking and worshipping the Almighty dollar with more evident solemnity than the Almighty . Fromm, says, in spite of the fact that we are . becoming . becoming a . nation
 Both sides, looking unrealistically at themselves and at their world, cannot come to terms at the conference table . Both sides cannot make the best of a had show .
 He does say, however, that the change must ultimately be accepted either violently or voluntarily . The change must be accepted, he says .
 Fromm says that while we arc technically and intellectually in the Atomic Age we are emotionally in the Stone Age . He says morally not much better than the Aztecs and their ritual sacrifices . Fromm: While we are technically in the atomic Age, we are morally not morally not better
 The cold war blunts our sensibility to pain, subverts our faith in the power of democracy’s competitive strength and thrusts us into an irrational “red or dead” psychosis . We seem to believe that the only alternative open to us in life is capitulation
 In peaceful competition they can arrive at an understanding tolerable, to both, if not totally satisfactory . In peaceful cooperation they can come to an agreement tolerable to both .
 Two-thirds of the world that goes to bed hungry and suffers a standard of living only 5 to 109r of ours . Their prime arena of competition; aiding the two-thirds that goes hungry and suffering only 5-109r .
 Unless we deal with this world rationally, neither we nor the Russians can expect victory even in peace, Fromm concludes . Neither we nor Russia can expect peace in peace .
 The Winchester Star assumes no flnsnrial responsibility for typograhpiral errors in advertisements but will publish without 'hsrge a correction in the next issue .
 Page Seven 96 th Birthday DaiffaIBP Hi* Photo by Ryenton A Gardenia for “THE COLONEL/' Mrs.
 Hanna Hall, known to many as “The Colonel/’ at the recent party in honor of Mrs. Mrs. Hall, attended the party . Mrs. Hanna Hall was known as the Colonel/' .
 Winchester Unitarian Choir will present the fourth pre-service program of sacred music . Unitarian choir will perform at 10:40 a.m. on December 10 at 10.40m.
 The choir under the direction of Mary Ranton Witham will sing some unusual carols from foreign lands as well as some traditional Christmas music . The choir will sing a variety of Christmas carols .
 Soloists will he Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; William . Jeffery; Sidney C Blanchard, Jr., baritone; Sidney . Blancheard Jr. is baritone .
 Miss Anne Mar Donald of Winchester became the bride of ; Joseph Failla of Woburn . The bride was born at St. Mary’s S Church in Winchester .
 Driscoll, pastor of the Immaculate Conception Church, was seated in the sanctuary . He was a member of the congregation at the time .
 Given in marriage by her uncle, Mr Edward MacDonald of Winj » poster . Miss Cerardlne Cannon of West j Roxbury .
 The bride wore a floor length gown of nylon lace with a fingertip veil . She carried a bouquet of white roses, chrysanthemums and stephanotis .
 Her maid of honor wore a royal blue satin dress with matching accessories and carried a bouquet of bronze chrysanthemums and French flame roses .
 James Abbrezzese of Revere was Mr Failla’s best man . William MacDonald, brother of the bride, and Michael Stoico of Woburn, were ushering . The wedding was held in Revere, Massachusetts .
 After a reception at the home of the bride on Stone Avenue, Mr and Mrs. Smith were married . The newlyweds were married at a private ceremony in New York City .
 Robert Storer will speak at the Senior Forum Chapel Service Sunday at 9:15m. at the First Congregational Church . Storer is Minister of the Unitarian Church in Winchester .
 "Because of his great love for all young people in the community and his ability to speak to them in terms of their own interests and needs Dr. Dr. Martin says he is proud of his love for young people . He is proud to be able to talk to them about their own
 Storer has long been a favorite guest of Forum Forum and his visits are always eagerly anticipated by the youngpeople . Storer will be a guest of the Forum at the end of the year .
 Larry Wholley and Richard Starkweather will be chaplains . William Keeton and Robert Ryder will serve as deacons . Robert Cowles and Douglas Cann will be ushers . William Cowles, Douglas Cann are ushers.
 Forum members are busy preparing for the food sale which they are sponsoring this Saturday at the Converse Market to benefit their Spring Trip Fund . General arrangements are in charge of Gwen Eugley .
 Forum Forum will not hold tree sale again this year . Forum has not held tree sale in more than 50 years . Forum's tree sale will be omitted from Forum's annual tree sale .
 Forum Dramatics Committee will present their Christmas play in Chidley Hall . December 17 at 7:00 at 7 p.m. The play will be presented to members parents and friends . Forum Dramatic Com mittee will perform the play .
 Miss Rose M McKenna, formerly of East Boston, was living in Winchester with her niece, Mrs. Mrs. McKenna . James Hollinshead advisor. Miss McKenna was also a niece of Miss McKenna .
 Until her re| tirement she was a clerk in the ^ Registry of Probate for Suffolk I County . She was well known to Registry personnel as well as those who regularly transacted business there .
 In East Boston Miss McKenna was a member of Sacred Heart Church, in East Boston and Winchester . In Winchester she was a . member of St. Mary's Church, Winchester .
 Besides her niece in Winchester, she leaves two nephews, Hugh and Edward F McKenna of Staten Island .
 The funeral was held Monday morning from the Richard C Kirby Funeral Home at Orient Heights in East Boston with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at Sacred Heart Church .
 Reverend Mother Jannin R.C.E. and the officers of the Marycliff Guild are presenting an unusual program for the monthly meeting on Thursday, December 14, at 8 p.m.
 Parents, friends and students in the seventh, eighth and High School grades will be welcomed . The event will be held at 7th, 8th and 9th grades .
 Father Powers is a distinguished musician and director . He received his training at the NewEngland Conservatory of Music and Harvard .
 He is noted as the first producer to present an amateur production of any Rodgers and Hammerstein Musical . He is also noted for being the first to present a musical in amateur productions of the musical .
 With his opening line, “Christ j mas is a time for song and story,” | Father Powers joyously sets the theme of that first Holy Night .
 Walter E Murphy of 2925 South West (54th Avenue, Miami, Florida) is a former resident of Winchester and father of Mrs. Ronel ‘s TOY SHOP .
 John A Horn of Hemingway Street, died Thursday, November 30, suddenly at his home . Horn died of a heart attack at the age of 92 .
 Following his retirement and before he went to Miami ten years ago he made his home with his daughter in Winchester, Winchester . He moved to Miami 10 years ago and now lives in Miami .
 He leaves behind three children in Miami, Frances, Sherwood P. Murphy, and Walter E Murphy, Jr. He also leaves a daughter, Mrs. Mrs. Horn .
 Velvin Kelly, living in Connecticut, and Reginald K Alley, of Watertown, Connecticut, are featured in this week's photo series . The two men live in Connecticut and Connecticut .
 The funeral was held at the Lane Funeral Home Monday afternoon with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister attended the funeral . Lister's funeral was attended by the Reverend Lister .
 H Newton Clay, pastor of Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, officiated at the funeral .
 She was born April 27, 1904, in East Cambridge, East Cambridge . She grew up in Winchester, attending the Winchester I schools and graduating from Winj chester High School in 1921 .
 From September of that year until June of 1949 Miss Saliee taught the special class at the Lincoln School with great skill, enjoying the liking of her pupils .
 After a Sabbatical year in 1949 to 1950, she returned to her teaching . She was assigned to the third grade at the Mystic School .
 There she remained through last June, heloVed alike by her pupils, her teaching associates, and by all who knew her .
 Miss Saliee was a member of the Winchester Teachers Club, National Education Association, Massachusetts Teachers Association and the Sodality of the Immaculate Conception Church .
 The funeral was held Tuesday morning from the Lane Funeral Home with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at the Immaculate Conception Church . Funeral was held at the Immaculate Conception Church .
 A delegation of teachers, headed by Superintendent of Schools Harry V Gilson attended the service . The service was attended by teachers from around the country .
 Burial was in Wildwood Cemetery where the committal prayers were read by Father Kenny . Father Kenny was also present at the service .
 He is an excellent speaker and deserves the attendance of all the members of the Society . He is a great speaker and should be invited to speak at the event .
 Marion DeMinico died Tuesday morning, December 5, at her home following an illness of six months . She was a long time highly respected resident of Winchester, Winchester, and a well respected resident .
 DeMinico was born December 14, 1884, in Italy, but came as a girl in her teens to this country . For the past 58 years, she had made her home in Winchester, Winchester .
 Thomas Raftis and Miss Josephine DeMinico, all of Winchester; four sons, Carmine, John J., both of Winchester, and Francis A., of Stoneham, and Alfred F DeMinica of Malden .
 The funeral will be held Saturday morning from the Lane Funeral Home at 9 o’clock with solemn requiem high mass celebrated at St. Mary's Catholic Church .
 Visiting hours at the funeral home will be on Thursday and Friday, from 3 to 5 p.m. and from 7 to 10 m. m. ET . The funeral home is scheduled for Friday and Saturday at 3 to 6 a.m .
 Cecilia Lowe died Monday, December 4, at the Winchester Hospital after a brief illness at the age of 81 . Cecilia C Lowe was the widow of Alfred J Lowe and mother of Richard A Lowe .
 Lowe had been visiting her son here for several months when she became ill . Lowe had visited her son several months before she fell ill. Lowe was visiting his son at the time .
 Stella Gray, wife of Freeman M Gray, died suddenly Friday, December 1, at her home . Stella Gray died at 9 Hillside Avenue, of Hillside Ave.
 She had lived in Winchester, Winchester, for the past seven years . She is survived only by her husband, who she married in 2007 .
 Burial was in Bethel Cemetery, Paramus, N.J. On Friday afternoon, November 24, at St. Francis' funeral home .
 Richard Carter Alden of Rochester, N.Y. became the bride of Charles William Stevens, son of Mr. and Mrs. Mrs. Stevens . Charles is the son of Richard and Charles Alden . Richard is married to Charles, William Stevens of Rochester .
 Frederick P Taft read the service and a reception followed at the home of the bride’s parents . The couple were married at the time of the wedding .
 The bride was gowned in white silk appliqued with clusters of white satin roses . Her gown was fashioned with a fitted bodice and a full skirt .
 Her headpiece was French illusion veiling caught to a circlet of orange blossoms and pearls . She also carried a bouquet of white roses .
 George W Chase of Plainfield, N.J., sister of the bridegroom; . Miss Melinda Marsters and Miss Jo Anna G Edgell, both of Rochester, are among the bridesmaids . Mrs Chase will be buried in New York .
 Their gowns were of emerald green velvet and they carried bouquets of white chrysanthemums .
 The bridegroom had his father attend him as best man and ushering were George W Chase, Stanley G French, Jr., Webster H Francis, III, and Webster Francis, Jr. John M Alden .
 Stevens attended Columbia, and Hartley schools in Rochester, and Florence, Italy, and also studied in India . Stevens studied in Florence, India and India .
 He graduated from Army Language School in Monterey, California . He served in West Berlin .
 Tickets have been distributed to youth council members by Miss (Jail Snelling, recreational chairman).
 The Winchester Unitarian Society will meet on Tuesday . The Women’s Alliance of the j Winchester Unitar Society will j meet . The meeting will be held at the Unitarium .
 Miss Crawford will have slides from the museum’s collection of paintings of the Holy Family . Miss Crawford is well known to students of art in Winchester from her lectures .
 By explaining the meaning behind the symbols used in the Nativity and Holy Family scenes, she greatly enriches our enjoyment of the paintings . She also explains the meaning of the symbols .
 Her well illustrated and lucid explanation of the pictures is of value to the layman as well as to the serious student of art . Her lucid explanation will be appreciated by laymen and students alike .
 Christmas carols will be sung by a group of young people from the j Junior High Glee Club . An added treat in this program will be the Christmas carol sung by the Junior High glee club .
 There will also be a sale of Christmas gifts and decorations in the Sy mines Room .
 Every one ■ of these fine used cars has been reconditioned bv our factory-trained mechanics .
 Arlington Center Mission 3-8000 is located at Arlington Center, Arlington Center . The mission is based in Arlington, Texas, and offers personalized stationery for every one .
 With the hope that the season will bring you abiding happiness. I A % A% A A * -H 4 1 I 5 J - - - .
 Comfy Slippers are a comfortable slipper that conies in fabric or leather . Comfy slippers are available in fabric and leather and provide extra warmth .
 Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION’s FUNDS SAFEGUARD the neat rgg of your aocial, fraternal or church organization .
 Your club's funds will earn a nice profit, he fully insured and readily available . He is fully insured, he is fully available .
 Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 CHURCH STREET Generous Dividends Paid Regularly novHO-’/t Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club Newsy .
 Emily Mabel Fish, of Winchester, has been elected vice president of the Choir at Fairfax Hall, Waynesboro, Virginia, where she is a member of the senior class .
 Dorothy Ellis, serving Winches, 52 Wyman Street, West Medford .
 The book NAVY’S JOE BELLINO is available at the Winchestar Star, the Winchester News and Mary Spauldings .
 Two Winchester boys, Joel Peckham and Vandy French, are playing on the varsity basketball team at Tufts this year . The Winchester boys are playing for Tufts .
 Get your personally autographed copies of NAVY’S JOE BELLINO while they last . Join the 1962 Christmas Club for which applications are now available at the Winchester Trust Company. nov23-3t
 Any young person who attended Winchester High School will appreciate receiving this as a Christmas gift . The gift will be given to anyone who attended the high school .
 Paul T Mulloy Jr., Jr., of 15 Ware Road, recently received his varsity letter . Mulloy was a member of the Worcester Academy unbeaten football team this fall .
 Mother Dorothy McGuire of Marycliff Academy and W Howard Niblock of Winchester High School will attend the 76th annual meeting of the New England Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools Friday, December 8, at the Statler-Hilton Hotel in Boston . Join the 1962 Christmas Club for
 PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m. apr6-tf Maternity Sweaters, all types, are available for sale .
 Miss Myra Brennan of Clearwater Road is among the guests recently arriving for a winter vacation at Pinehurst, N.C. She is registered at the Carolina Hotel .
 Walter Murphy, 76, a former resident of Stoneham and Woburn, died suddenly last week in Miami, Florida . Murphy leaves a daughter in Winchester, Mrs. Mrs. Murphy, who was born in Stoneham, left behind a daughter .
 Harrison Chadwick of 24 Everett Avenue has been re-elected as a director of the Massachusetts Moderators Association . Chadwick is a member of the group .
 College Club Art Group will meet at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts at 10:15 a.m.
 First Congregational Church Mission Union Guild Guild Luncheon, Chidley Hall . Mission Union Union Guild luncheon was held at Chidly Hall . The Guild will meet at the end of the day .
 All garments returned in beautiful Christmas garment hags — wonderful for wrapping Christmas presents . The hags are beautiful hags for wrapping presents .
 Dick and Lolly won the Belfry Club’s open pairs event in Lexington . Earlier in the year, the ‘Big Chief’ had won individual tournament laurels . Last month, Dick and his wife won the club's open pairs tournament .
 Marion Davis was in fourth place along with partner Lydia Splaine from Lynn . Davis' husband was out at the nationals in Houston, Texas .
 Ernest Pinson of Hanscom Field, along with Barbara Sawyer and Fredna Perkins, are the stars of this week's show . Pinson and Perkins are also the queens of hearts .
 The real hero of the evening in our view was club treasurer Ralph Atkinson . Atkinson sacrificed a shot at the title by stepping aside at the last minute and volunteering to direct the second section .
 Section B results were (average 22%) Maxine Glynn and M Blakely, 30% Ralph Atkinson and Mr Hayes, 26 Gertrude Cox and Molly Fitzgerald, 24% Rose Hickey and Lillian Sheridan, 22 .
 In the championship session held last week, two hoards were placed at each table . Two hoards of gold were placed each table at each of the two sessions .
 Charlie Watson were sitting, and they were able to amass only 4% points out of a possible 20 . Charlie Watson are sitting, with just 4% of the points they scored .
 Meat, fish and poultry saasoning, truly a miracle, | it makes food taste so good . It's a miracle that meat, fish, poultry and meat can still be cooked in the oven .
 Top score was shared between the teams of Bill Wetmore and Alta Stewart-Donna Redpath .
 They were not doubled because of the fear that they would run out to 4 Spades, not realizing that Spades too could he doubled .
 It is hard to believe that such seasoned players as A1 Oszy-George Coffin could thus get only % point instead of 7% because they did not double . Coffin was a seasoned player who has been with the club for more than a decade .
 Their N-S contract of 4 Spades was punished to the extent of 1400 points . The contract was punished for the breach of the contract .
 E-W Vulnerable North A Q 5 2 ¥ Q 10 8 4 KQJ6543 West East, Dealer A A K 8 1 3 A J 10 9 6 ¥ A K J 6 1 3 ¥ 9 7 5 2 4 4 4 10 A Q 9 A A Q
 A Diamond small slam can be made against any lead and a grand slam against any other lead except a Spade . It is also unique in that a small slam is made against every lead and the grand slam can also be made .
 All this can lie accomplished with but 15 of the 30 or 40 high-card points generally required for slam bidding .
 The two pairs played against contracts of 6 Hearts and 6 Spades . However, this defense was not found by the two pairs .
 Top NorthSouth score was won by Gloria and Lloyd Butterfield when their contract of 7 Diamonds was attacked with the lead of the Club Ace . Gloria Butterfield's contract with Club Ace was attacked by the club .
 Care must be taken in the play to ruff at least one of the Clubs with a high trump and leave a high Diamond in the South hand .
 East-West top was scored by Arthur-Nikula when they brought home their contract of 6 Spades, doubled up . Arthur Nikula scored the goal .
 Pass; Pass; 1 Heart; 2 Diamonds; 2 Hearts; 2 . Hearts; 6 Diamonds. Double; Double; Pass . Pass; pass; Pass. Double or Pass.
 I don’t know whether Blair, as declarer, thought of me as an idiot or a genius for this strange 6 Diamond hid, but I suspect the former . I’m not sure whether Blair thought he was a genius or an idiot .
 He recovered his composure quickly enough, however, to make his contract and give us a good score . He recovered quickly enough to make the contract and score a good goal .
 The cards were donated by Draper, Sears & Co. & Co., a well-known local investment firm . These particular cards were new and were new .
 I am not sure that the results obtained from them were | good examples of the way to make investments in the stock market . I am sure that . the results . obtained from . them were . not good examples .
 Homecoming of District Deputy, Francis Lappin will be held this coming Sunday, December 10, at Liberty Hall in Lowell Auditorium at 3m. Elks News .
 Guitarist Roger Williams is one of the world's most famous pianists . Williams' career spanned more than 40 years . He has been a prolific soloist .
 Songstress CONNIE FRANCIS u Never on Similar” ami Other Themes MGM 3063 □ Connie h Favorite Folk Songs MCM 3969 Q Connie’s Created Hits, Vol. 1 .
 The Sachems concluded a football season that certainly would not rank with t lu i r Iwrst. Field, Thanksgiving 1 Day morning .
 Four wins, four losses and a tie wouldn’t constitute ton had a record at many high schools nun 1 1 Kira hie to Winchester . Winchester fans impatient with anything but a lopsided figure in the win column .
 Breaking even on a season is tantamount to defeat for the Winchester team . Many another team would he happy to win as mam as they lose . Winchester would be happy to lose as much as they win as they do .
 Ryan's shot from Ih.-U Saturday afternoon at l-ymj thp rlifht winif Hew by the .stumee.e. Hy to Ryan, whose shot from .h-U . Saturday afternoon .
 Paul Ryan played fine hockey j pleted at 7:04 of the third period I after opening-period jitters . I he he young team led by < ap Winchester’s scoring* was com1 tain Paul Ryan .
 A j when Paul Ryan drew the LexingWinehester penalty led to the first j ton defense to his side and passed Lexington -score when Victor Lawsmartly to Cutting, who scored his I I I . I am .
 Of these Fahey stands 6ft 4in, Papadinis, 6ft Sin, and Faietta is 6ft 6in . I Bob Y'agjian and John Kerrigan are both 6ft and 6ft .
 Winchester has scrimmaged Malden Catholic, Winthrop and Winthrop . Winchester has done well enough, though handicapped by lack of height .
 The return of the football group has .helped, and the Sachems are looking forward to their first game with Woburn Tuesday afternoon, December 19, at the high school gym .
 Their second engagement is with Arlington here on Friday night, December 22 .
 Winchester High School Sachems are now dividing their time between hockey and basketball with a squad of more than 60 reporting to Coach Jim Phillips for the 1961-62 hoop campaign . Winchester doesn’t face the new season with any great degree of veteran strength, with only one really experienced
 Coach Phillips made his first cut in his huge squad last week in an effort to get his candidates down to a working number . Phillips: "With the reporting of the boys who played football during the fall the team is commencing to take shape"
 Coach Phillips stressed the fact that no jobs on the club are secure . Some of those expecting to win varsity berths may well find themselves displaced by hard working newcomers .
 Lennie Timpone, 6ft 3in, Richie Bond and Richie Bond are among his retained candidates . Bob Watson, Bob Watson and Jim Devaney are 6ft 2in centers . Bob DonIon, 5ft 1 1 1 in, is a football end, football end
 From his defense position last season, Scott scored one goal and five assists for a total of six points . Scott scored five assists and one goal in the NHL last season .
 The Raiders opened their third season in their new indoor ice rink Friday, December 1, against Rutgers . The Red Raiders open their new season against Rutgers at the end of December 1 .
 A rugged 22-game schedule plus a Christmas tournament at Providence awaits the Maroon sextet . The Maroon Sextet will play 22 games, including 22 games at Providence .
 Among the teams on the schedule are Bodwoin, Williams, Cornell, Princeton, Northeastern, Western Michigan, Army, and Middlebury . Army, Princeton and Army also feature on schedule .
 Liberty 2-7070 — BUY FROM EXPERTS — nov28-4t Bowling League . The league resumed bowling this week after a week’s absence due to the Thanksgiving holiday .
 The Jades maintain their posi tion in 1st place and have a strongenough lead to proclaim them winners of the first half .
 The Jades are, Captain Ann Caggiano, Gloria Monterisi, Mae Rotondi, Vi Bruno and Bette Cammarata . They are the Jades .
 This leaves second place in contention and the competition will be between the Rubies, Emeralds Diamonds, and Pearls . Rubies will be the most valuable in the world .
 In second place now are the Rubies, Captain Rose DeTeso, Virginia Macinanti, Jennie Amieo Anita DollofF. and Mary Fiorelli . The Rubies are now in second place .
 Emily Buzzotta was selected to assume the captaincy for the Opals . She replaces Mary Forgione, who was captain for the team . Buzzotta replaces former captain Mary ForGione .
 A newcomer to the century club, Marie Pizzo with a single string score of 103. She is the treasurer of the club . She is one of the first women to reach the century mark .
 Ginger Maggio bowled a total high three string of 288 and a high single of 110 . The chairlady bowled the highest bow of the week .
 Jades 37 7 7 13,071 Rubies 26 18 12,678 Emeralds 24 20 12,985 Diamonds 23 21 12,862 Pearls 22 22 12,843 Cameos 19 25 12,707 Sapphires . Gurnets 18 26 12,
 ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc. is a manufacturer of CHRYSLER BUILT CARS . The company is proud to offer all of its custom-made products .
 At times this potential showed up strongly, as in the Lexington, Reading and Melrose games . Even in the defeats by Wakefield and Woburn, the Sachems looked very good offensively .
 Winchester's offensive strength is not enough to counteract defensive weakness, especially against teams with good offenses . Winchester showed it could move the ball well, but its offensive strength was not enough . Winchester was beaten by Stoneham in every game save that with Stoneham .
 The Sachems were weak all year against effective passing . They were woefully weak against sweeps and off-tackle slants to the right . The defense was woefully unprepared for sweeps and slants .
 Winchester defensive players were continually being caught out of position, perhaps because of a lack of experience . Winchester's defensive players are constantly caught out-of-position . Winchester have a history of fielding errors in their defensive positions .
 Winchester started the season with only two regulars back, Captain Mike Bellino, fullback, and Joe Dattilo, guard . Winchester is looking to build a strong defensive line .
 The defensive play of the wingbacks was ineffective all year, and against fast moving teams like Wakefield and Woburn, fatal . The wingbacks were ineffective all season, and their poor form was fatal .
 At times, the Sachems looked as good offensively as any team they met all year, but defensively their play was ineffective . The local boys were outplayed, badly by the outstanding teams .
 Winchester finished fourth in the Middlesex League behind the winners, Wakefield, Melrose and Melrose, who were tied for second . Winchester finished in fourth place in the league . Wakefield won the league, while Lexington finished second .
 Winchester was about as good as any team on the circuit, with the possible exception of Wakefield . Winchester's win over Wakefield was their first ever in a row of victories .
 Captain Mike Bellino, Winchester’s big offensive threat this year, will be gone . Winchester's runner-up is Bob Benincasa, who will be replaced by Bob Beninincasa .
 Other letter backs graduating include Richie Casalinuovo, George Neumann, Neil MacArthur and Neil MacArthur . Other letter backers graduating include George Neuman and George Casalinovo .
 The all around play of Bellino will be a real loss another year as will be the running and tackling of Benincasa . The all-around play of the Bellino and Benincasas is a huge loss for the club .
 On the line Bob Donlon, end; Dave Whittaker and George Nowell tackles; Dan Mahoney, Roger McNeill, Joe Dattilo and John Chane, guards; and Tom Mooney and Ned Niblock, centers; are letter players who have played their last
 Lennie Timpone, Bill Graham, A1 Kimball and Dave Mullen, tackles; Jim Menucci and Dick Starkweather, guards; and John Colliander, Rich Rowe and Scott Erskine, backs . Coach Knowlton is without letter players Lennie
 If nothing happens in the meantime this will constitute a much better rounded group than that starting the past season . With the addition of several promising sophomores, like Ed Cutting, the outlook may not so drub .
 There seems to be several promising sophomore backs in the offing, but what they will run behind another year is a big one that must be answered .
 Bellino, Benincasa, Casalinuovo, Chane, Dattilo, Donlon, Mahoney, Macdonald, MacArthur, McNeill, Mooney, Neumann, Niblock, Nowell, Whittaker and managers, Ennis and Bennett .
 Juniors were Anderson, Bates, Bavuso, Borggaard, Branley, Cervizzi, Cleary, Colliander, Duffy, Erskine, Gaffney .
 Graham, Lindsey, Menucci, Mullen, Rotondi, Rowe, Snelling, Starkweather, Swanson, Timpone, Vozella, Walker, Wardwell, Winn, Zammarchi and Zenga .
 Sophomores were Aiello, R Branley, Crockett, Cutting, Kimball, Donovan, Eriksen, Ferazzi, Frongillo, Faietta, Grant, Goldin, Johnson, Larson, Lawson, Lowe, Migliaecio,
 This year’s team was again coached for the 21st consecutive year by Henry Knowlton, captained by Mike Bellino and managed by Reuben Ennis . Mel Bennett as senior assistant to the senior assistant .
 Winchester defeats Winchester 28-28; Concord, Concord, 6-6 . Winchester defeats Concord, Winchester, Winchester and Winchester . Concord defeats Winchester 7-6 at Concord . Winchester wins Winchester 28 .
 Northeys rink of the Toronto Cricket, Skating and Curling Club wins bonspiel . Northey's rink went undefeated through three ends of play . Curling club won bonschiel .
 Winchester scored an ‘eight end’ in the second round of play, a rare feat even more rare than a hole-in-one in golf . Winchester scored the rare feat in his first round of golf tournament . Winchester is the first person to score an eight-end in
 In addition to Neill, the Winchester curlers were Rod Bullen, lead; Tom Downes, second; and Dave Shean, Jr., third . Neill is a member of the Winchester team .
 Sam Blanc, junior high school curriculum director in Colorado; Richard Schulz, Iowa school consultant for science and mathmatics . Richard Schulmer, Iowa consultant for Iowa schools, also consults on curriculum .
 Albert Rains discusses “The Housing Bill and Y'ou” when Washington reports to the people . Rains: ‘The housing bill and Y’ou’ will be discussed in Washington, D.C.
 Dick Lowry, senior Lexington center, converted a nice pass from Ray Doneski at 2:13 of the period . Dick Lowry was the first to score a goal .
 Winchester settled down to fine position play and set up a nice triangle in the Lexington zone . Winchester settled into fine position plays and played well in the first half .
 A pass back to the defenseman from Paul Ryan was shot low and clean into the lower left-hand corner for the tieing goal at 7:19 . The goal came from a pass back from Ryan to Ryan in the first period .
 Lexington scored again at 8:53 when Ed Whittemore banged a long shot from the blue lino past the Winchester goalie . Winchester scored a goal in the second half of the game .
 Winchester looked like a different team in the second period . Winchester came out for the second time, looking like a new team . Winchester won the game 2-1 .
 Sachems set up their power play with Vic Lawson hanging the puck in to Ed Cutting . Ed Cutting slithered the disc to Paul Ryan, who tied the game again with a sizzler into the strings . Paul Ryan scored a goal for Lexington .
 The players skated their position well and appear to have mastered Coach Frank Finigan’s style of play . Coach Finigan's side have won their first two games of the season .
 The defense of Johns and Lawson did an adequate job, and Gerry Hills made some gotni moves in the nets .
 Sophomore boards and advanced course in George Murphy gained control of contract bridge . Three models, plus duplicate bridge, were good at 5:53 . Sophomore boarders, George Murphy and George Murphy were also good .
 Frank DiMambro, Angie Amico and Rudy Fiore helped in the win . Listed of a spare, a strike, a spare, three successive spares and a strike .
 Winchester Appliance Co. sells eKOwQJCj Winchester Appliances Co. These and other Fine LIBERTY Albums are available at eKOWQJCJ Winchester.com .
 Tony Chefalo out of high single by 17 pins and it looks like a sure bet to remain for the remainder of the schedule but one never knows the way these 98 members of the league go at it .
 Alabama split with Navy, but it still has a firm grip on third place . Alabama still holds third place in the league despite the split .
 Harvard is still in fourth place despite the fact it lost three points to last place St. Louis St. Francis . Harvard is ranked fourth in the league .
 Mary Mary’s victory were Tony Chefalo and Mike Sara co . Phil Murphy and Correcia Fiore were hot for Harvard .
 Maryland and Navy take the lead in pinfalls when considering wins and losses . Maryland is the fifth-place team in the league . Navy and Maryland are the second-ranked teams in the country . Navy is the third-ranked team in history .
 Maryland walked off with a 4-0 victory with the help of Babe Tofuri and Emile Doucette . They both challenged each other last week and Maryland won .
 Joe Marrone and Big Ted Peluso did well for the losers but their efforts were in vain . The loss to the New York Jets was the worst of the season for the Jets .
 Holy Cross defeats Penn 3-1 at home . Moose Bellino’s Holy Cross team had a rough time with Penn but came through with a win .
 For a time it looked like Jeff Caudioso and Louie DclSolio would pull Penn ahead but they didn't . Moose and Peter Fiore saw to it that they didn’t .
 FOREMANS ILK GUNS Of NAVARttK In CINEMASCOPE and COLOR Shown Daily at 1:55 and 7:10 • Sunday at 2:00, 5:00 and 8:00 .
 CHILDREN’s SKIS Steel Edges • Plastic Bottoms $9.50$20.00 . WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass., is located in the town .
 She got her teaching experience as a teaching assistant at Lincoln a year ago . She is now a teacher at Lincoln .
 Dan Gattineri, Richie Bucci and Art Dunbar fell far below their usual performances . Richie Buccini, Dan Gattaineri and Rich Bucci also under-performed .
 There may be several changes in the standings this time next week because the top teams are competing against each other . The top teams will be competing in the final standings next week .
 First place California facing off against runner-up Notre Dame . The big event will be California vs. Notre Dame in New Jersey .
 Fourth place Harvard should gain some ground when it takes on next-last-place Georgetown . Georgetown is the last-place team in the league . Harvard is ranked fourth in the nation .
 Ex-Venerable Chick Vespucci and Andy Buzzotta were the lucky ticket holders . Two attendance prizes were drawn last week and none other than ex-Chrissucci .
 California 31 9 9 16,649 Notre Dame 28 12 16,676 Alabama 26 14 16,683 Harvard 25 15 16,384 Maryland 24 16 16 16,277 Navy 24 1616 16,221 Holy Cross 20 20 16,325 Yale 19 21 16,126 Penn and Penn 19
 Children have been enjoying a Social Studies unit of work about Early American Indians . Because Indians played a very important part in the history of Winchester the children have been learning about them .
 At this time, all children dressed in the Indian clothing which they had made .
 Brent Hochdradel served as an Announcer as many pupils read their original reports about Indian life . Brent served as a guest at the end of the event .
 Guests included the children from kindergarten, the first three grades and parents . Guests included parents and children from the kindergarten to kindergarten .
 Breeje through snow removal with a rugged 3-4 HP snow thrower that handles even slush and heavily packed snow . M0T0-M0WER 20"
 Marry is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Marry . Marry will be available at 5:30 to 8:30 a.m. Saturdays .
 Maurice G Tompkins of 3339 Daleford Road, Shaker Heights, is former well-known residents of Winchester . Maurice G. Tompkin of 333 9/11, 3339 D.E. Road, is a former resident of the Winchester, Ohio .
 Marey lived in town as a child and is remembered by many of the teen-agers here . Marey herself lived in the town and is known for her role in the community .
 Her grandmother, Mrs. Frederick B Craven, live on Atherton Road and her grandmother on her father’s side, . Her father-in-law, Mr. Frederick Craven and Mrs. Mrs. Craven live in the same area . The Cravens
 Marcy commenced shooting in 1958 at Brown Lodge Camp near Burlington, Vt., and she took it up with the idea of proving to her parents she could do something well at camp . Marcy took up the shooting as a way to impress her parents and prove she could .
 Last winter she qualified for the Shaker Heights Junior Rifle Team . She began practicing outside of camp . She has been shooting since she was a teenager .
 There she shoots six hours a day, but she is limited to a few hours weekly during the school year . There is no time for her to shoot in the summer .
 Marcy is the only girl on the five-member Shaker Heights rifle team . She was selected by her coach to receive the National Rifle Association medal . The medal was awarded to the best all-around member of the team based on shooting, sportmanship and attitude .
 She gets a lot of support in her shooting from her parents, who follow her to every match possible and shoot every shot .
 Marcy's father taught marksmanship in the infantry during World War II . Her father, a former Winchester High athlete, used to shoot with Marcy frequently .
 Marcy is so fond of shooting that she urges all her friends to give it a whirl, and occasionally her urging backfires . Some of the boys who compete with her find themselves on the short end of the match .
 Born in Chicago, III., Miss Bonnaffon went with her parents to Philadelphia after only two weeks in the Windy City .
 She completed high school and conone in Scotland; and seven in Hngtinued to summer both in England land, and Switzerland . Played for the U.S. S Touring Team to play through the month of March 1962 .
 Barker’s husband studied architectural engineering and now has his own business designing and constructing buildings . Barker's husband is also an architect and has a successful business .
 He and his wife have six children, the oldest a junior at Winchester High School and the youngest in kindergarten . The youngest is in kindergarten and the oldest is a junior in high school .
 One of the children is a Korean boy whom the Barkers adopted just before the opening of the school year in September . The Barkers adopt the boy from a Korean orphanage .
 Barker simply said that with her teaching duties, her studies at Tufts and caring for her husband and children she has little free time in which to indulge any hobbies, whatever they might be .
 Miss Margaret Russell taught at the Lincoln back in 1957 when she was studying at Lesley College in Cambridge . She is now teaching Combination Grade 3-4 at Lincoln School .
 Miss Bonnaffon names skiing skating, drama and the study of voice as her hobbies .
 Town Bowling League last Tuesday night showed no change in the standings of the top four teams . No change in standings of top four .
 Winchester Winchester’s young Sachems face a favored Melrose team this Sat unlay at Lynn at 3m. Winchester Pucksters Face Melrose at 3pm . Winchester's young team will play at 3 p.m. Saturday .
 Melrose beat Belmont 7-0 in a surprise 7-1 victory . The Sachems beat Lexington 5-2 in their first game .
 It is expected that the MelroseWinchester-Melrose game will till the Sports Center . Melrose and Winchester will play each other on Saturday .
 Coach Henry Hughes of Melrose would like to wallop Winchester because of the last two seasons, in which Winchester spoiled Melrose’s chances for the Middlesex League title . Melrose coach Henry Hughes is hoping to win the title .
 Many elderly ami infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Christmas if this holiday is to be a happy occasion .
 Miss Russell was born in North Branford, Conn., and prepared for college at St. Mary's College . Miss Russell is Miss Sullivan, Miss Sullivan and Miss Russell's sister .
 Lesley spent a year at Ithaca College of Music before graduating from Lesley . Lesley graduated from the college of music in New York City .
 She first taught elementary grades in the base school for children of the Military at Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico . She also taught elementary grade at the base .
 She then went to England for a year, traveling in that country and on the continent . She then traveled to Europe and Africa .
 She taught in Stamford, Conn., before coining to Winchester . Winchester is Winchester, Connecticut, where she was born .
 Miss Russell lives in Cambridge and lists her hobbies as music, art and skiing .
 Miss Bonnaffon is teaching 4th grade at the Lincoln School under the Harvard internship teaching program . She speaks with a delightful English accent acquired during the years spent with her family in England .
 Winn Longshots 83 82 70 61 61 52 50 17 47 37 28 10 6 13 14 26 32 44 46 49 49 49 59 68 86 88 Pinfall 17.592 17,736 17,788 16,658 16,807 16,21 1 .
 S Team on record ever to play the English L Team, the strongest learn in the world, in the Wembley Stadium, Wembley, England, before 55,000 spectators . The S Team is the first ever to face the L Team in the World Series .
 This year the National Tournament was made up of 18 teams from the following sections of the country . Two from Great Lakes, two from Mideast; two from Midwest, three from Northeast, four from Philadelphia, and two from Southeast .
 Northeast 111 is well represented with a player on Northeast 111 . Winchester was well represented by a player from Northeast 111.
 Peg McNally and four players on Northeast I, Agnes Bixler, Marilyn Chase, Alison Hersey, and Ellie Keady, former Winchester coach. Peg McNelly; and four of the players on Northeastern I .
 In Beaver Swim Show Two Winchester girls, Louise Harrison Coady of 8 Wolcott Terrace, a sophomore, and Diane Elizabeth Elizabeth Doten of 52 Lorena Road, a freshman, are participating in the Beaver College Synchronized Swim Show .
 A graduate of Winchester High School, she is majoring in elementary education . She is a junior at the University of Winchester .
 Miss Doten is also a graduate of Winchester High School and is majoring in biology at Beaver . She is a junior at Beaver, where she is currently studying biology .
 "You think you're winning, and the next card sends you back where you started," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not going to let it slide back down, but I'm going to do it"
 At B Conference To Sing Christmas Vespers At First Church Sunday . A typist’s dream come true .
 Dr. Maurice Freeman will give a talk on Monday, December 18 . Dr. Freeman will be speaking at 8 p.m. at the University of Columbia .
 Edward Teller at 8:15ni. at the Roman Catholic Paulist Center, 5 Park Street, Boston . Teller will perform at the center at 8.15.
 Teller discusses the dangers of atomic fallout and the question of nuclear testing . Teller will discuss the nuclear issue in terms of the dangers and the possibility of nuclear tests .
 Mesdames Fred Greene, Philip Hovnanian, Aram Mouradian, George Thompson, Donald Van Roosen, Robert White, and the Misses Natalie Bellows, Diane Barchard, Barbara Croft and Barbara Croat .
 Branches, princess pine, centerpieces, straw flowers, ruscus, pine cones and other materials for do-it-yourself decorating .
 The Women’s Association of the church is sponsoring the concert and preparing for the social hour immediately following the concert .
 Robert Anderson of this town will be the featured guest instrumentalist . She will provide an accompaniment on the harp for the “Ceremony of Carols” by Benjamin Britten .
 James Guild of The Infant Saviour Promoted In Korea . Shoppers counting the days until Christmas will have a fine opportunity to select unusual gifts and ; holiday accessories at the Christ> mas sale being held on Tuesday, December 12 .
 This annual bazaar is sponsored by the Guild of the Infant Saviour, with the president of the organisation .
 All of the attractive articles on sale, including hand-made knits, jewelry, novelty stuffed toys, homecooked foods and candy, will represent the varied and creative abilities of the guild members .
 Hintlian Thread and Needle Shop — Mrs. Koko formerly the lemmens Distinctive Christmas gifts and decorative accessories for the Home Sp/4 TONY TOFuri .
 He had originally been due home this month, but now his plans have been changed and his duty in Korea has been extended by four months . He was originally due to return home from Korea this month .
 The use of 1961 plates in 1962 will be validated by a wandshield sticker . The 1961 plates will be validated by the use of a sticker .
 Place this sticker at the middle of the bottom of your windshield December 31 . It will be placed on your windshield .
 The last day for receipt of receipt of 11)62 registration applications through the mail is Monday, December 11 . Registration is free for 11.62 registration .
 Built-in filter that lets you use same roll of color film for both indoor and outdoor shooting . Has electric eye that sets the lens automatically for a good shot every shot . Has built-in filters for indoor or outdoor use .
 Open the flash compartment, and the ‘autoihift’ shutter is automatically set for flash . Close it, and you’re ready for outdoor shots .
 Built-in flash takes color and black-and-white snaps, plus color slides . Fast f/8 lens takes color, black and white snaps . Fast lens also takes color snaps, takes black-white and white photos .
 Camera captures black-and-white or color snapshots and color super-slides . Camera takes black and white photos and super-lapse videos .
 Dec. 7, 1061 Pnr*o Thirteen FORESTER’s * FLOWER SHOP * CUT FLOWERS ir WEDDINGFLOWERS if FLORAL DESKrNS PA 9-1077 Eves. DECEMBER 7,
 Mr Paul O’Neil of 2f> Park Avenue, took title to the business on December 1, not as the Star announced on December 21 . The new owner, Paul O'Neil, of 2F> Park Ave, was not as reported as December 1 .
 Mr O’Neil is now operating the pharmacy as owner . He will be pleased to welcome all his patrons and friends old and new .
 Catch — 22, by Joseph Heller, by Pierre R<>. ulle ulle False Entry, by Hortenae Cal isher For Every Hero, by Sylvia Wilcox The Game of Kings, by Dorothy Dun nett Night Song, by John A Williams The Old West in Fiction
 Winfred Van Atta Non-Fiction Clarence House, by Christopher H. ussey Death in the Afternoon, by Ernest Hemingway The Divided Union, by James G Randall The High-Stepping Horses, by Frances K Clarke, comp. Winfred van Atta
 Robert A Storer, Minister 33 Glen Green, PA 9-1384 Sunday 9« »rvic*» at 11:00m. at 11 a.m.
 The comforting and assuring message of the Keautitudea < Matt.f* ) will be featured at Christ inn Science service* Sunday .
 The Losson-Scrmon on the subject ""God the Preserver of Man” will consist of Scriptural texts and correlative passages from “Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures” by Mary Baker Kddy .
 Junior Hi(rh P.F. will put on a play on the life of Moses for their parents . The show will be held in front of their parents at the age of 16 .
 EMBASSY Laundry 6k. Shirts Laundered in 24 Hours Same-Day Dry Cleaning Service on Most Garments . Two-Day Tailoring Service on most Garments on most .
 A Christmas concert will be played by Douglas Rafter, director of music and associate of the American Guild of Organists, on the Albert O Wilson Memorial organ at Boston's historic Park Street Church . The organ, dedicated earlier this year, was named in recognition of the faithful services of the
 Wilson of 23 Yale Street, and the Wilson Family assisted the memorial with a substantial gift . The memorial service will be held in New Haven, Connecticut .
 Rolland Tapley, first violinist of Boston Symphony and conductor of North Shore Philharmonic, is guest artist . Tapley: "The North Shore Symphony is a great place to play" Tapley is conductor of the Boston Symphony .
 Mr Raymond Shannon, Organist and Choir Director. Dwight L Cart, D.D., Minister PArkview 9-0328 THE LUTHERAN CHURCH OF THE REDEEMER Montvale Avenue at Prospect Street, Woburn .
 See our latest-style Mink Paw and Muskrat Coats . CASHMERE SWEATERS with Mink Coats with MINK COLLARS and LINED s 47.50 . Have your fur coat REMODELED for Christmas into a CAPE, ST
 Mes»nge ‘The Cost of Pence’ extended sesnion for Nursery through 6th Crude. 3:00 a.m.
 Annual Christmas Vespers at the First Congregational Church, ull invited. 6:15m.
 Junior High Fellowship, “Christmas In Japan,” illustrated with slides, illustrated with slide slides, nt the Ondrejkn home .
 Medford First Baptist Youth Fellowship. Senior High Fellowship members of Medford High School. Medford, Massaquaquaqua High School, attended Medford School of Medicine .
 Couples Club, dessert and coffee at Ralph Swansons, 44 Swan Road, proceed to Lexington to hear the “Messiah” Lexington Choral Society . The Lexington group will sing the "Messiah"
 The pastor will speak on “The Meaning of the Holy Communion” and will administer the Sacrament . Pastor will also give a presentation on ‘The Meaning’ of the Communion .
 The title of his sermon will be ""The Kingdom Within You’s 9:15 and 11:00m. The title will be "The Kingdom within You"
 Elmer Orinnell and the program "Script and Score" by Langdon und Anderson, monologist and harpist .
 Those who cannot attend the banquet will be welcome for the program which follows at 8 :00 o’clock . The program will be held at 8:00 .
 Board of Christian Education events of the week: December 11, December 11 . Dec. 11, Dec. 12, December 14, December 15, December 10, December 13, December 25, December 8, December 9, December 12 . Board members of the board of Christian education board will
 1962 “calendar towels” size 17 x 13, in genuine textured linen, hand-screened prints in tasteful colors to fit any decor, $1.25, at the Star .
 Since the close of World War II Mr Brown has been in charge of all sales activities of Pilgrim Laundry Co., Boston, most recently as vice president-sales and board member .
 Mr Brown was sales manager of Glendale Farms and Harrington & Co., retail and wholesale milk distributors in the Newark, New Jersey area . Prior to the war years he had been sales manager at Glendale and Harrington .
 While in Newark, he also was editorial contributor and columnist for several trade journals of the dairy industry .
 Mr Brown is widely known in New England for his interest in rocks and minerals . In addition to his business activity, Mr Brown has an interest in minerals .
 This hobby has led him to acquire one of the largest and finest collections of fluorescent minerals in New England .
 His interest in the earth sciences has also led him into putting together a very strong library of earth science material, books and publications . The library is probably the largest in the Ejoston area, outside of the colleges and universities .
 Mr Brown has frequently been a speaker at various meetings and conventions, as well as a contributor to various publications . Both in relation to his business activity and his hobby interests, Mr Brown is a hobbyist .
 He is currently a member of the Advertising Club of Boston, the Boston Sales Executives Club, and the Boston Mineral Club . He is also the president of Boston's Advertising Club .
 A panel discussion on “The Sunday Observance Laws’ was featured after the Cardinal’s message . The Cardinal's message was featured on a panel discussion .
 Following the panel session, delegates marched to Holy Trinity Church . Following the session, all delegates gathered at Holy Trinity church .
 Mr Flahive is a past president of Immaculate Conception Holy Name Society . He served also as treasurer and secretary of the Woburn District District .
 He is a former Archdiucesan program chairman and Archdiocesan secretary . He has just completed the term of Archdiocese secretary .
 Other Archdiocesan officers installed were Leo C Renard, Jamaica Plain, President; Joseph H McPherson, Jr., Newtonville, Vice President; and J William LeClair, Quincy, Secretary .
 New Sliderule Makes Musical Keys and Scales Easy . New slide rule makes musical keys and scales easy to play .
 You have completed your mathematical problem with sufficient accuracy for all intents and purposes . You have successfully completed your math problem .
 Roswell Boutwell, 3rd, of Sheffield Road was one of the Speakers who conducted tours Tuesday evening at the Museum of Fine Arts for foreign students and their friends . Roswell M Boutwell was the speaker for the tours .
 French students were admiring the Museum’s great French Impressionist collection . Chinese and Japanese art collection is the finest in the Western world .
 Students from Harvard, Radcliffe and Wellesley were being introduced to the Museum by Speakers from the Museum’s Ladies’ Committee . Speakers were at Harvard and Radcliffe University .
 The Museum hopes to be able to acquaint interested foreign students in the cultural and recreational advantages offered free of charge and within easy reach of their colleges and universities . The museum hopes during the year to be . able to . to acquaint foreign students with the cultural . advantages .
 Each foreign student was accompanied by an American student who will continue to give a helping hand . The students were accompanied by American students who will help the students .
 The Student Committee who assisted the Ladies’ Committee included from Radcliffe the Misses Ann Jennings, Carmine Omstead and Belinda Burley . From Harvard the Harvard Mr Thomas Wardell, Mr Thomas Mayer and Mr Gil Leaf .
 A Winchester man has completed a musical slide rule for scales arid keys in music . The new slide rule has been completed by a Winchester man . It is similar to the orthodox slide rule used for figures in the music industry .
 The musical slide rule was designed for the piano and associated orchestra instruments . Its inventor, Herbert F Rondeau of 57 Thornberry Road, calls it a “scale chart” and says it has been designed for piano .
 Chart scale tells you in just -what key to play with open instruments like the piano, strings and trombone . Simple manipulation of the chart scale will interest you especially, for a simple manipulation .
 Mr Rondeau was born in Cambridge Springs, Pa., and was graduated from high school there .
 He got a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Case Institute of Technology . He has spent 24 years in industry .
 He is now an industrial physicist, advanced design engineer and consultant in materials, measurements, analysis and design .
 Mr Rondeau is the holder of three patents, two more applied for and three in process . A relative newcomer to Winchester, he has lived here only 19 months .
 His hobbies are oil painting, theological philosophy and the study of musical engineering .
 Even basic chords or triads which add body and color to a melody are clearly displayed . Even the basic chords and triads are clearly visible .
 Not only are the more common major and minor scales shown but also the less common and perhaps more exotic harmonic and melodic minor scales . The scales are shown in the most common major, minor scales in the world . The most common and most common harmonic and minor scale scales are those shown
 A window displays the sharps or flats in the treble and bass clefs of the musical score that represents a given scale . Also a window displays a window displaying sharps/flats in treble/treble clefs that represent a musical score . A window also displays the
 In such an event the musician must transpose the score to a key other than that played by the piano . In such a transpose, the composer must use a different key to play the score .
 Scale Chart makes this transposition for the three types of wind instruments in a single setting . Scale Chart transposes wind instruments to wind instruments . Scale chart is based on three wind instruments, instruments and instruments .
 A chart is given which correlates the eighty-eight piano keys with the corresponding musical notes on the treble and bass clefs . Also a chart gives a chart showing how the keys are connected to the notes on each of the piano keys .
 The unique display of information will speed up the comprehension of these basic facts of musical knowledge . And it will also help you learn more about your favourite songs .
 This is why music teachers stress the importance of a thorough knowledge of them . Music teachers stress importance of knowledge of these subjects .
 Present With a Futurel A gift of securities rivals any other present for originality and thoughtfulness . Present With A Future is presented with a gift of originality, thoughtfulness and originality .
 It’s a wonderful present for anyone— youngster • . • new investor . . or market veteran . The best way to buy a new investment is to buy into the market .
 The gift is a gift that can keep on giving year after year because it represents a share in American industry . And it’s a gift .
 Allyn Co. Allyn office or mail coupon for free folder entitled “This Year Give Securities’s” ri i i i ri • • i i – i i - i -i - i- i-i-i . i i: i-
 ANNE R WILD 45 Church Street PA 9-3268 nov.'i-tf . ANne R. WILD is looking for a home . Rea. Wilde & Son INSURANCE AGencies .
 " INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED" " Homeowner S PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage al Less Cost I Mt. Mt. Mount Mt. A Mt.A.
 Fortnightly To Observe 80th Birthday on Monday, December eleventh in the Social Hall of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church in Pennsylvania .
 Charles E Shepard, president of the Massachusetts State Federation >f Women’s Clubs, and Mrs. Mrs. Shepard, were honored at the ceremony .
 A reception for the invited Presidents and guests and Club members will be at one o’clock . A reception will be held at the end of the day .
 Ralph W Hatch, the club's president, will honor the guests by cutting the Birthday cake during the Social Hour at one-thirty .
 Phyllis Howes Soprano and Robert Phillips Organist will perform . Herbert D Thompson, program chairman, will present the talented performers .
 1927 Winchester High School football team captained by Henry Knowlton was last to play in the old Mystic Valley League . Team Roy Horn dropped in Tuesday morning to tell us our statement that the 1927 football team was the last .
 1928 team captained hy “Nutsey” Amico was j the last to play in the Mystic League . According to Roy the 1928 team was captained by "Nutsey"
 Eugene J Riagi, Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee of the American Legion, Dept, of Massachusetts, has just mailed to each member in the State their Rehabilitation Stamps (shown in illustration above) for 1902 .
 The income from the sale of these stamps goes towards making the life of veterans in the hospital a happier one .
 It gives them a pack of cards, a carton of cigarettes, a personal needed gift, a radio for a recreation room, and small projects on which to work and help while away the long, lonely hours . It also provides assistance for needy families of hospitalized veterans .
 EXCLUSIVE LEXINGTON — Four-bedroom Cape , radiant heat . Four-bed Cape . Exclusive four-bedroom home .
 Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitchen, two bedrooms, and bath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area . Each apartment is located in one of the world's most exclusive homes .
 Built on the site of the original Myopia Hunt Club is this King-Sized Family Home with woodwork that cannot be duplicated today . Call PA 9-5800 Monday through Friday.
 This home is in beautiful condition, with most attractive modern kitchen and new heating system . New heating system and new kitchen are included .
 Exclusive Brokers for appointment to see this real value . If you would choose a home of conservative elegance with an air of great cheerfulness, wc suggest that you call us as Exclusive Broker for appointment .
 Three-bedroom, two-bath Ranch with den, den, family room and two car garage . In the Thirties Three-bed Ranch . Ranch .
 Throe-bedroom, two-and-a-half-lmth Ranch . Ranch with family room and two-car garage . Two-bedroom ranch . Ranch .
 One-and-a-half-bath brick-front Colonial Colonial with large paneled den, family room and two-car garage . Throo-hedroom. Throohedroom .
 Florence M Salyer. Murphy, BA 9-6213 Marion R Ferrimon, BA . 9-1136 Charles T McCarthy 9-5972 Florence M. Murphy 9-6072 . Florence M . Murphy 9/6213 . Marion Ferriman 9/11
 NEW: Comfortable family home near center . BA 9-4750 HELP KEEP WINCHESTER SPOTLESS WINCHER .
 Two living rooms, dining room, kitchen, heated porch on first floor . Four bedrooms and four bedrooms on second floor; finished third floor . Finished third floor.
 This is an ideal home for a family with children . Located on a dead-end street, this is the perfect place to live in .
 Realtor WINCHESTER CAPE offers large living room, dining room, modern electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor .
 Unusual four-bedroom, 2Vi> -bath home with den in secluded wooded area near Washington School . Four-bedroom home has two-bedroom, four-bed, two-bath home .
 GRACHOUS CENTER-ENTRANCE COLONIAL . Large dining room, living room, music room and lovely reception hall invite entertaining .
 Four large bedrooms, one with fireplace, on the second floor, and three more on the third floor . Sun porch and two-car garage add further value to this desirable property .
 Rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shinglo English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline .
 Large reception hall with graceful curved stairway, step-down 17x28 baywindowed fireplaced living room, panelled den, panelling den, 20-foot fireplaced dining room, all-electric built-in kitchen, jalousied porch, powdet room,
 It is very difficult to find a split level with four large bedrooms . For appointment call exclusive broker, BIXBY & NORTHRUP REALTORS 21 Thompson Street PArkview .
 Main features include 2 , *s baths, den, basement play room, and a large kitchen with all the latest equipment . Main features are 2 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms, 2 baths and den .
 Out-of-town owner is asking $44,500, but will consider reasonable offers . Owner is asking for reasonable offers, asking for more than $50,000 .
 For the discriminating buyer we offer a young spacious Ranch situated midst the atmosphere of Revolutionary days . 24x16 living room, with fireplace and hay window, wall-to-wall carpeting included . $43,500 .
 Lower level has large recreation room with fireplace and oversized workshop area, lavatory, laundry, dark room and two-ear garage . Lower level includes large recreation center with fireplace .
 This interesting home was designed and contoured to lit to lit a most delightful tree-studded lot .
 DA 2-3997 deo7-4t FLOORS ELECTRATIONAL APPLIANCES, WASHING MACHINES REPAIRED . Dressmaking, Alterations.
 Medford Laundromat and Appliance Service HI High St., Medford, EX 5-9775 nov30-2t . Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters, Painting, Plastering <& Masonry.
 WILLIAM BUTTS 40 Marlboro Rd. WE 3-3417 nuv30-4t . ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. We are happy to provide an easy way to reach out to the owner .
 Wood well-seasoned Oak & Maple . PArkview 9-5123 augl2-tf .
 Brick Steps Flagstone Walks & Terraces Brick, Block & Stone Walls Brick Flower Boxes New und Repair Work Satisfaction Guaranteed .
 Completely rebuilt Itcndix GyromntixGyromntic Automatic Clothe** Washer . Washer.
 Two ballet costumes, sizen 8 and lu, worn once, (haul Christmas gift) Also two ballet costumes .
 Picture 3 at 5 Winslow Press 3j 2A Mt. Mt. 2A . iWWWW WWWWWW* _ Picture | Framing 3 at Winslow press 3j 3j . iwwWWWWWWww* iwwwwwwwww.
 Bud liners, 30 freight can* including automatic operators, 3 transformers, 15 automatic switches and stations, stations, trestle, numerous buildings and accessor iw . Complete truckage and 16xIH ft table. Bud linners .
 iy58 hard top Impalu Chevrolet, 2-door, &., &., and uut. transmission, is on sale for $58,000 . Chevrolet, two-door 2,door, and Uut.2-door .
 New two rose-colored foamed armless chairs ami one gray, never sut on . New rose-color foamed foamed armsless chairs for sale .
 New 1961 famous make, equipped to sig-zag, buttonhole, darn and monogram, $23.99 . New 1961 make .
 In Winchester, Winchester, a room upper apartment, fireplace, oil heat, porch, garage, garage . The apartment has a fireplace, fireplace and oil heat .
 Professional office space with parking with parking on grounds, control location . For rent, professional office space is available for rent .
 Five-room apartment in newly completed Wedge wood Apartments . $190 up. Call WElls 3-2334 .
 3-room furnished apartment, bedroom with twin beds, living room, kitchen, bath with shower, private entrance and parking space . Call PA 9-5860.
 Pleasant room near transportation. business gentleman preferred . Pleasant room with transportation. Businessman preferred .
 Old coin**, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, also top price for other coins . Private collector will buy old coin for $12 .
 WANTED — Ladies’ second-hand skis approximately 6'7""", reasonably modern . Needed — ladies’ 2"7" skis . Approximately 6'8""," reasonably modern modern modern .
 The December meeting of the College Ulub Art Group will be held at the Boston Muaeum of Fine Arts on Friday, the fifteenth, in the morning of December 15 .
 At 10:15 we shall have the privilege of being’ conducted through the lovely, newly-decorated French Galleries by Miss Morna Crawford of the Museum staff .
 Miss Crawford will show us paintings by many of our favorite artist friends, Cezanne, Matisse, Van Gotfh, Gauguin, and others .
 These painters belong to the group who followed the Impressionists (such as Monet and Renoir), hut because they stressed different emphasis and changed their approach to painting, they became known as the Post-Impressionists .
 We look forward to hearing her again on Friday, December 15th . As she has spoken to the Winchester Art Group many times in past years, it is with happy anticipation .
 The exhibition of “Chinese National Art Treasures” is on view through January 14th . The second important opportunwhich the Museum offers us is to see the outstanding exhibition .
 Since 1949, the Government of the Republic of China has had these words of art stored in subterranian vaults, for safe keeping .
 Chinese paintings, bronzes, porcelains, jades, and other masterpieces of art, never before shown in Western countries . This important collection includes Chinese paintings and bronzes .
 We suggest that after Miss Crawford's talk in the French Galleries our group go down to the lunch room at 11:30 (before the rowds) and afterward meet in the Chinese Exhibition Gallery on the second floor .
 It is the custom of the Museum to have no gallery talks on these large, special exhi bitions . We can go around to gether, even if we do not have a gallery talk .
 Those who are member of the Museum must show their membership cards . Others will be asked to pay the usual small en trance fee .
 This should be one of the most delightful and important meetings of the Art Group . Art Group will meet in New York City on Thursday .
 Reliable young woman wishes to care for children in her home for working mothers . Work WANTED: Reliable, reliable young woman needs to care of children in home for mothers .
 Far the finest, most dependable TVRADIO HI-FI repair PArkview 9-3491 .
 Antique* — IJric-u-Brau China, Glu**, Furniture, etc. Call PA 9-5758 or write N alley K Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester, PA .
 8-1939 John J FOLEY juoA-tf AVON COSMETICS . . . help# you own ua you learn. Call Stoneham.8-191939 JOHN J FOley juoja .
 TeL WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker 1 Ifhere is a way out. TeL .
 AH makes including Jupunese manufacture, 35 yearn of prompt, courteous service . AH makes includes Jupuunese, 35 years old, and 35 year old .
 Do It You'reself Boat LUMBER AND HARDWARE . Complete line of building materials for home and industrial use . John V Harvey, Register. nov23-3t .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rates by calling your Authorised Travel Agent .
 Let us know your travel plans and w# will be lutppy to work out with you .
 Winchester Jaycees held their monthly business meeting on November 30 at the Red Cross House . This report will inform all just what business was discussed and acted upon . Winchester Jayccees are a 501-501-501 organization .
 President Bill Bird opened the meeting and led the Jaycee creed . Pat Patterson led the members and guests in reciting the creed . President Bird led the meeting .
 Ted von Rosenvinge's treasurer’s report was read and it was announced there are still some outstanding dues to he paid .
 Charter Night to be held Saturday night, December 9 at our Town Hall, buffet, ceremonies, dancing . All plans are complete and all members should report reservations now to insure a table .
 To date are twice as many reservations us against last year’s attendance . To date, there have been more reservations than last year .
 Larry Smith announced that he and Elliott Walters wore attending the town Christmas Decorations Committee meeting Monday, December 4 and that they would give a report at our next business meeting on Wednesday January 3 .
 Bill Bird passed out a list of other possible 1962 projects which members have submitted . Members of the 1962 Congress have submitted several possible projects .
 Lindy Lane and Craig Wal k have done a great job in completing the Charter night program book . Craig Walk has completed the book .
 The books will he distributed at the dance and will also be sent to other Jaycee chapters and to our most worthy advertisers . The books are being distributed to all Jaycees and other chapters in the community .
 Projects discussed one by one and it was voted that a committee be selected to investigate the facts and possibilities .
 Temporary committee chairmen will report their findings at the next meeting . Temporary committee chairs will report findings at next meeting of the committee .
 Winchester Jaycee’s welcome Wagon A1 Stiles PA 9-6374 . If you have ideas on other possible projects which you might incorporate, call Bill Bird PA9-6496 .
 The meeting was closed by the presentation of pins to A1 Ruggles and Larry Smith .
 Soloists for the identical concerts will be Taeko Fujii, soprano, Rosalind Hupp, contralto, Carl Olsen, tenor and Lyle Jewell, bass . Soloists will also sing for identical concerts .
 Admission to either concert is by free tickets, which may be obtained from any member of the Choral Society . Since the capacity of Cary Hall is limited, admission to the two concerts is free .
 Gerald Lauderdale of Nashoba Road, Concord, will accept telephone orders . Gerald Lauderdale will accept phone orders for the holidays .
 Reserved seats for sponsors and patrons will be held only until 8:20m then all seats will be opened to general admission . She announces that since demand for tickets is heavy, reserved seats will only be held until 8.20m .
 Toys and refreshments will be given out and there will be entertainment . Toys will he given out . Entertainment will also be provided .
 Toastmaster will he Walter Morgan, Past Golden Rodent, Dugout 103, N.O.T.R. of Winchester, Winchester, and Mrs. Mrs. Morgan .
 Helen Morgan, Past Golden Cat, Rat Trap 103, N.O.A.C., of Winchester will be chairlady . Helen Morgan will be the chairwoman of the group .
 Wells College students will return to Winchester for an 18-day Christmas holiday . Wells students return to their homes in Winchester on Dec. 31 . Wells College will be students at home for 18 days before Christmas .
 Herbert H Uhlig of 14 Mason Street, and Elizabeth M Alt, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Alt, were married . Mrs Alt is a daughter of Herbert Uhlig and Elizabeth Uhlig . Mr Uhlig was married to Elizabeth Alt .
 Middlesex, as. BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry jUiy6-tf COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex .
 To all persons interested in the estate of MARY AGNES McCORMACK late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of u certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by ROBERT MICHAEL McCORMACK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that he be appointed executor thereof .
 Eaton’s personalized stationery for men and women. John V Harvey, Register. nov23-3t Eaton's . Eaton's personalized stationary for . men and . women. Eaton .
 The estate of LETITIA F HOPPER late of Winchester in said County, deceased . To all prisons interested in the estate of Letitia F. F. P.HOPPER, deceased.
 The executor of the will of said LKTITIA F HOPPER has presented to said Court for allowance iu first and second accounts . She has presented her will to the court for allowance .
 WINCHESTER SAVINGS BANK is located in Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . Ralph W Hatch, Treasurer, is in charge .
 To all persons interested in the estate <d FRANK B SMITH late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by BEATRICE L SMITH of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on h»
 If you object to the citation, you should tile u written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in tho forenoon on the twenty first day of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Esquire was Esquire, First Judge of suid Court, this twenty-seventh day of November 1961. Esquire .
 The prospective homeowner can look to the bank for experienced advice and budget-fitting terms that increase his equity monthly . The bank offers low financing and low financing cost .
 A valuable “extra” is the fact that he also establishes a useful banking connection . A valuable "extra" is the . fact that . he also established a useful bank connection. A valuable .
 Mr O’Donnell completed his work from the Manufacturing Workshop in Everett, Everett .
 He completed his work from the Advanced Marketing Management Workshop, conducted by N U. N. for the first time this year .
 “Herb’* and Marion Ross of Lake view Road, who are in Europe while Mr Ross sets up a European Central Technical Establishment for the United Shoe Machinery Corporation, have been traveling .
 After three weeks in England and Scotland and two weeks in Sweden and Denmark, they are currently in Germany . They will go on to France, Belgium, Holland, Spain, Italy and Austria before returning to Lausanne .
 Herb describes his Switzerland headquarters as a beautiful place with its unobstructed view of the lake and snow-capped mountains in the background . Herb describes the view of his Swiss headquarters as 'beautiful'
 Martha Rosses’ daughter, Martha, is in Europe with her parents attending the American School, Leysin, 5,000 feet up in the Swiss Alps . Martha is enjoying her experience and a brand new ski outfit which she is using continuously .
 Martha will be with her parents for Christmas and the occasion will be a real family reunion with older daughter Nancy coming up from her newspaper work in Paris and son Bjlly going over from this country . Martha will spend the holiday with her family .
 "No one can sell soap, insurance, refrigerators, washing machines, TV sets or automobiles faster than we can sell them," says the author . "We sell everything from soap to cars to cars," says author .
 The constant patter of commercials over TV and radio must hring desired results, or it would not be there . Advertisers must be satisfied with the results of their ads, or they would not have been there .
 “pointed-toe look’s removed the tips of the little toes of a | couple of hundred women,” Johnson says . Johnson: “Pointed-to-toe looks ‘has removed’ of a few hundred women’
 We doubt 1 if any affects more people, assumes more disguises, is capable of a greater variety of complications, or causes more unemployment . Yet, we doubt any of these affects more than 1 million people .
 It resists with an obstinacy equal to that of cancer all attempts to find a cure-all, it says . Moreover, it resists . all attempts, like cancer, to be cured-all .
 There are now on the market “survival kits,’ radiation detectors, civil defense gear, emergency food and water kits, baby machine guns, and the like . One dealer offers life-time guarantee .
 For men 17 to 31 the Navy now offering a better career than that 76 per cent successfully passever before . Army Kids Fit Opportunity In the Navy offers a better job than before .
 Archie O’Connell is retiring as a Patrolman . O'Connell will be the first officer of the force to step down from duty .
 Mit dwellen insiden ein haus by der road, Ich ben watchen der folkers gepassen — Der gooten und baddish, der richers and poorisch, Und also der middestischer classen .
 They excite thought; stimulate sense of beauty, the sense of . pity, the . sense of sympathy, and the sense . of . sympathy, they say . They say .
 If a book helps a little to under stand our fellow-creatures, if it moves to laughter or tears, then it has succeeded . If it awakens conscience and thus directly influences our conduct — if it accomplishes any of these things - then it's succeeded .
 The world of books is the world of man’s thought and effort, joy and purpose and inextinguishable hopes, as they pass in heritage from the past to the present, and as they are born of each moment .
 A borrowed book is hut a cheap pleasure, an unappreciated and unsatisfactory tool, says Simon Cowell . The borrowed books are a cheap, unsatisfactory and often unsatisfiable tool .
 To know the true value of books, you must feel the sweet delight of buying them . To know true value, books must be bought with the delight of reading them .
 You stand there unpretentiously in our home. Tiny fragments of eternity, mutely ranged along an unadorned wall, you stand there . You stand in your home. You stand on an unpretendentiously .
 When a hand frees you, when a heart touches you, you imperceptibly break through the workaday surroundings, and as in a fiery chariot your words lead us upward from narrowness into eternity, have permitted her to do so .
 It is possible that her presence there might have caused a derailment of the locomotive which struck her and a serious wreck, perhaps involving loss of human life . It is also possible that she may have caused the train to derailment .
 A railroad train killed a cow belonging to a Scandinavian homesteader in Minnesota . The cow was killed by a railroad train . The train killed the cow in the area .
 Claim-agent was a plausible and persuasive person, or he would not have been a claim-agent . Now the claim agent is a plausible, persuasive person . The claim agent was not a claim agent, but he was a persuasive person.
 The man was injured in a car accident, but was able to convince the injured party to accept a moderate sum . He then made out as strong a case in rebuttal as possible under the circumstances .
 "We deeply regret that your cow should have met her death on our tracks," says the owner of the cow . The cow was killed by a train accident on the tracks .
 State Director Wilton Vaugh of the Division of Motorboats announced that the system of the State Registry of Motor Vehicles in requiring owners to re-register their numbers three months in advance will be adopted .
 The law provides that boat registrations expire on the owners' birthdays so that the work of registration will be spread over the entire year and not result in last-minute rushes which require temporary help .
 The State Director recalled that many boat owners obtained registration numbers to correspond with their automobile, telephone, house numbers, college or high school or some other numbers which they covet .
 Late-comers will lose right to reduced $3 fee for renewal and be forced to pay $5 for a new number . They will lose their right to the reduced fee for renewing .
 This will make it necessary for them to repaint at least the bows of their boats and brush on the new numbers or they will have to remove the old plastic or other attached numbers and buy now ones . The new numbers will be required to be painted on the bows or the new ones
 Marshall W Symmes will entertain the Christmas Meeting at her home on Yale Street the Committee of Safety Chapter, D.A.R. on December 18th, beginning with dessert at 1:30m.
 The test was part of a tri-ser** vice program to test and implement the President’s Youth Physical Fitness Program . The test is part of the President's Youth Physical Physical Fitness program .
 The Army is now requiring under the President’s program a minimum of 15 minutes of vigorous activity daily for all pupils in its world-wide dependent school system .
 The FISHER Futura HI is the perfect answer to the discriminating music lover with a critical eye as well as ear . Modern 1 FISher Stereo FM-Multiplex • StereoFM-AM Stereo Phonograph in beautiful cabinetry .
 The FISHER Wide-Band Tuner is the world's first wide-band tuner . It has the ability to receive multiplex and standard FM programs with the FISher Wide Band Tuner . The superb reproduction of stereo and monophonic records is a few of the
 Evergreen Hoping PA 9-( k °' ka * And ^ reens ""Convertible” Fountain Pen with 14K Gold Point . A new kind of fountain pen .
 You can load it with a big Super Quink cartridge, and write up to 10,000 words . A clever converter lets you fill the 45 from a regular ink bottle .
 Trim, tapered barrel available in blue, black, green, red, charcoal or deep blue . Available in blue or black, black or charcoal .
 A very thing for #•00 for the ladies . As usual . . . The unusual for those important gifts for your feminine favorites .
 Vernon Street PArkview 9-3070 Page TC THE WINCHESTER STAR, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7.
 New this; month is n paperback edition of the book ’‘Buckskin ami Blanket Days’ by Thomas Henry Tibbies .
 Barris said that her husband used to tell her about his grandfather having spent a winter with a band of Indians when he was a young man . He later in his life having given up his work as a newspaper editor to devote his full time to help get legislation through that would help the
 Mr Barris passed on before the book was published . After selling his grandfather’s nemoirs to Doubleday, Inc., how*vei\ passed on .
 Barris said he would have been very pleased if he could have known that it was to be on best sellers’ lists at two different times . The “Wintering with the Indians’ section of the book was to run serially in the Satura London printed in
 Harris mowed lawns by mowing lawns to gain recognition for the the American Indian as a person with equal rights before the law . Harris said he supported his efforts to get recognition for American Indians .
 A junior at the university, Cadet Inman is one of several juniors to hold officer rank as part of a training program . The program is designed to develop leadership as well as to acquaint juniors with positions they will fill next year .
 ‘Junior week’ is one of three such weeks held at the university during the academic year . The innovation, known as ‘junior week, is held during the university's three academic weeks .
 A 1 lister R MacKay of 9 Lockclund Road; and Parker W Gray, son of Mr and Mrs. Gray, Parker W. Gray; . A 1-lister R. MacKay and a 1-Lister R . MacKay . A lister of
 Upon completion of the course both will be eligible for commissions as 2nd lieutenants in the Air Force Reserve . Upon completion, they will be able to be 2nd Lieutenants .
 Salvation Armv Opens Holiday Campaign from frjwson Senior United States Senator ; from Massachusetts Loverett^Saltonstall officially opened the Salvation Army Christmas Program j with a generous initial contribution .
 Senator pointed out that this special financial assistance is needed during the Christmas season to guarantee toys for youngsters, clothing for the very neediest children, baskets of groceries for underprivileged families and dinners for homeless men .
 Senator Saltonstall noted that over 20,000 individuals were assisted by the Salvation Army last year at this time . The Salvation Army assisted 20,500 individuals last year .
 With their full co-operation, they can help even more this Christmas, he concluded .
 Mail and Phone Orders Filled Call PA 9-4117 in festive foil rolls — Y smart new patterns — gift ribbons and bows — gift cards and tags . Gift cards, tags and tags can be added to your Christmas Gifts newspaper Italian in Rome .
 The paperback edition just released was printed by Bantam Press and contains the full text of the original hook . The paperback version of the book is now being published in paperback .
 In 1906, that was when he had yet another if less eventful twenty-three years to live in a world he helped to make . "In 1906, the world he definitely helped to made," he wrote .
 The natural gift is there but it has not been subjected to the rigors of professional training . It is a ‘primitive’ in the way that the paintings of Grandma Moses are primitive, the painter says .
 "Seldom from the smelting pots of literature comes a bar of pure golden Americana," says the author . The novel is set in New York and London .
 Park Street PA 9-0342 — jecidon j KjreetingA At this Holiday Season we desire to express to you our sincere appreciation of our pleasant relations and to extend to you .
 The Middlesex TR Christmas Seal Association has received a few inquiries from County residents asking if this Association is the same as Somerville Association . The Association is based in Middlesex .
 Until recently the Middlesex TB Association had its office on Broadway in Somerville, Massachusetts . Until recently, it was located on the corner of Broadway .
 Christmas Seal Association is located in approximately the middle of the County . Board of Directors feel the Association’s new offices can offer services to Middlesex cities and towns easier .
 Hood ;md Sons for 25 years was honored yesterday for his long service to the company . Hood was honored for his 25 years of service .
 This year’s figure represents nearly $320,000 more than was raised by the United Fund last year . It is the largest amount ever recorded for the Fund . The United Fund is raising nearly $300,000 .
 John S Howe, president ‘of the Provident Institution for Savings, was named campaign chairman for next year’s campaign . Howe is president ’of the . Provident Institute for Savings . Howe was named chairman of the campaign .
 The new chairman has long been associated with the United Fund campaigns, as well as with agencies sharing in the Fund .
 Large Firms, $4.959,819, 4.7; Commerce and Industry, $1,101,514, 5.3; Public Service, $730,388, 7.9; Advance Gifts, $900,000 less than last year . Metropolitan
 Her prize, a valuable cashmere sweater, was delivered recently from the Chicago offices of Helene Curtis, contest sponsor .
 Knden Dandruff Treatment Shampoo and Suave Hairdressing contest was launched in behalf of two of the firm’s well-known hair care products .
 In each case, the prize was a Bernard Altmann cashmere sweater valued at $25 . no. no.
 Suave-Enden prize sweaters were offered to contestants in a choice of size and five colors, pink, black, blue, white and sand .
 Based on the choices of winners, the favorite sweater color this winter will be sand .
 More than oncthird of the total winners selected sweaters in this shade . More than 100% of the sweaters were selected from the shade .
 Alaska and Hawaii are winners in two new states . Most of the mainland states are also winners in the independent firm .
 Prof. Donald T Rowlingson of 15 Ridge Street, whose work was “Jesus the Religious Ultimate”; . Prof. Dr. Donald A. Rowlingon of . 15 Ridge St., whose work . was ‘Jesus the religious Ultimate’
 Motet Choir of The First Church in Cambridge, Congregational, will give an Advent concert on Tuesday evening, December 12> at 8:00m., at First Church .
 Signe Quale soprano sings solos of the early Baroque solos . Bach, Weekes, Cruger, Schein and Schein chorales for chorus .
 The concert is open to the public without charge, but a collection will be taken to help defray exj penses . The concert will be held in honor of the singer .
 VS from McLaughlins INSULATED 9.95 to 14.95 for Dad, Mom, Big Sister, Big Brother or the Small Fry Skating is Fun .
 Park hurst Xmas Bazaar bazaar is for th<* their Christmas that have prices d budgets, are welcome to pate .
 Parkhurat Christmas Bazaar, after postponement last year, will be held again on Friday, December 8, at 11:16m., in the Hchool auditorium . They, pnr-j >y the fine bake .
 Children to do shopping for gifts geared to child . However, mothers attend and partici] t particularly, will cnjc table .
 David Mitchell came home from Thompson Academy to spend Thanksgiving with his parents, Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Mitchell . David Mitchell is a junior at Thompson Academy .
 Thompson Academy is located on an island in Boston Harbor, and up to five years ago used to be called Farm and Trade School .
 More and more are coming to know of this unique school and the good work it is doing . Many will recall this name, and more and more will come to know about it .
 Students to do farm work in addition to the usual classroom activities of any school .
 Each boy has a two to three hour work period, milking cows, feeding chickens, working on the school’s boat, or doing other odd jobs to help defray his tuition .
 The actual cost of board, room and tuition is $1600, but necessary adjustments are made between the parents and the dean of admissions . The cost of boarding, room, and tuition will be adjusted by parents .
 Many of the pupils at the Academy are boys from broken homes, boys with problems but definitely not problem boys . Many of them are boys who have problems but do not have problems, says the Academy .
 The school takes care of needy youngsters, many from large families, as well as boys with problems . The school is based in London, England, and takes in at least six boys a year .
 The Academy is privately endowed and receives help from various charitable organizations . It is privately funded and receives money from various charities .
 Hanscom Field, Bedford, were the means of the 11th Special Forces getting to the proper place at the proper height . The 11st Special Forces were using the field to get to the correct height .
 This particular exercise was directed by Colonel Dona J Lacouture, Operations Officer of the Wing .
 First Parachute Jump by Reserve Army Troops in History, in New England . Team was flown up to New England especially for this exercise .
 The actual parachute jumps were LEAPING FROM an AIRPLANE in FLiGffIT at parachute exercises of the 11th Special Forces .
 Paratroopers of the lltli Special Forces Group made a proficiency jump at Fort Devens . Winchester Parachutists Make First Special Forces Jump . Winchester was well represented on Sunday, November 26 .
 More than 40 Reserve Army Officers and Enlisted Men made a highly successful parachute jump . Led by the Group Commander, Colonel James R Stewart, Jr., and Plans and Training Officer Major Donald C Van Roosen, .
 A freak gust of wind forced a few troopers to land in low trees surrounding the jump field . No injuries were reported .
 The field exercise envisaged a mass drop of especially trained Special Forces troops into enemy held territory . Guerilla fighters had prepared a landing strip or “Drop Zone” in anticipation of the U.S. troops .
 Members of the 11th Special Forces simulated the guerillas as they “secured” the drop zone from “enemy” forces . They made radio contact with the U.S. troops and prepared ground panels and smoke signals for the jumpers .
 The panel signified all was clear, and the smoke indicated the direction and speed of . the ground wind the parachutists would encounter as they neared the ground, so they could take the proper precautions . The panel also indicated the speed and direction of the wind the parachute would encounter
 TrooperB did not carry full equipment down with them, hut hut, hut, once on the ground, they were required to ‘roll up” their ’chutes and assemble at a predesignated point as if they were going right into a problem .
 The elapsed time from plane exit| to finish roll-up was slightly over 15 minutes . In spite of the few cases where the parachutes had to be pulled out of trees, the elapsed time was slightly more than 15 minutes.
 Many observers from Fort Devens, Newspapers and TV Stations were in attendance to witness the historical event . Many relatives of the jumping paratroopers were also present .
 Colonel Stewart indicated that he hoped this success would encourage former paratroopers to apply to the 11th Special Forces for consideration for specialist positions .
 At the Boston Army Base, Section 4 C West, any Tuesday night, there was a team of personnel designated to interview prospective Reservists with a notion to jump and reap bonuses .
 He said that the unit is especially interested in men qualified in Communications, Demolitions and Medical Services .
 Cambridge School i Reunion St. Mr and Mrs. J. JOSEPHSON REAL ESTATE { WALTER Y JosepHSON INSURANCE 'rim tn*m a?'.** tnm trim trim trim tnm tnm *n**
 The Bayleys* daughter at school is Diane . The Gilhortis’ .laughter, Joyce, Joyce . Diane . Joyce .
 They’re the finest and freshest in the world — made with table butter and dairy cream, fresh fruits and nuts . The smoothest, creamiest chocolate is the smoothest and smoothest chocolate . They're made with fresh fruits, nuts and chocolate .
 The “Merry Christmas” Assortment shown is an all-time favorite . There are many more favorites .
 I'hcse recommendations are being incorjMirated into a hill t <> he tiled with the state legislature by j Senator Ralph C Mahar of ( M ange. I'Hcse Recommendations are being . re-tiled with state legislature .
 Members of the Interim Cotn| inittee wiil act as petitioners tor the hill . The Interim . Cotn | inittees act as petitionsers for the hill.
 A comprehensive review of the quality of the education programs at all levels in Massachusetts would define its strengths and weaknesses and make specific proposals .
 Specific attention would be given to the programs of public elementary schools, public secondary schools and public higher edueducation such as vocational training, libraries and educational television .
 A study of the problems involved in delegating responsibility for policy, control, and administration of public higher education in Massachusetts will define 1.1. B . The study will focus on the problems associated with delegating responsibilities .
 The roles and inter-relationships of public and private institutions of higher education in Massachusetts in Massachusetts are defined by the roles and relationships of institutions .
 The administrative structure which will be most effective for public higher education will be the most effective in the world .
 The responsibility for the making of public educational policy at the state level in Massachusetts is the responsibility of the state . Massachusetts is responsible for making public education policy .
 C A study of current and future financial needs of all public education in Massachusetts . C A report on the future of public education funding in Massachusetts. C C .
 A study of the role, organization, and necessary financial support of the State Department of Education . The study will examine the role of the state department of education in education . The report will be published in 2015 .
 The Interim Committee also voted unanimously on the following recommendations in connection with a Survey Commission . The committee voted unanimously to approve the recommendations .
 A That a bill be filed with the General Court incorporating these recommendations . A That A bill be . filed with . the General . Court incorporating the recommendations . That bill should be filed .
 Survey Commission should consist of fifteen members of the General Court, five educators, and five lay citizens .
 Woburn known at the West Side’s Four Corners . If is a short drive down Cambridge Street l Route 3 (Route 3) past the Star 1JSF Market to the section of Wobrun .
 The Interim Committee believes that the work of the Survey Commission would take more than two years to complete and that the annual expense would approximate $100,000 . The committee says the work would take over two years and cost an annual expense of more than a million .
 Interim Committee hopes Survey Commission will consider advisability of appointing consultants group . Consultants should be composed of the leading officials in public education in Massachusetts .
 Clarence Gay, 58 Westland Avenue held a social tea on Tuesday, November 28, for Mrs. Mrs. Gay . Clarence Gay held the social tea at her home in Westland .
 Also attending were Mr Albert Sutula, principal, and Miss Barbara Connor, senior at Boston College, who is assisting Mrs. Helen .
 Two entertainers from Winchester, Jacqueline Langdon, monologuist and Mary Jane Anderson, harpist, will present their joint program for the women of the Methodist Church .
 Miss Langdon was for years a leading player in radio dramas . Miss Anderson is an accomplished harpist and Miss Langon is a leading radio drama player .
 The feature picture in the programs this Friday night and Saturday morning is State Troopers . The feature pictures will be featured on the programs on Friday and Saturday night .
 The viewer follows the activities of a recruit of the Connecticut State Police to learn the training and equipment necessary to produce a first class cime lighter .
 In another selection poor little Michael isn't happy just being a brother so he experiments with various other identities until Daddy brings home a surprise .
 The spirited drawings and amusing verse of the children's book Magic Michael are faithfully reproduced in the film of the same name . The film is based on the book, Magic Michael .
 Michio, Schoolboy of Japan, is a little-publicized phase of Japanese life in the film Michio . Through the resulting experiment, we learn about cleanliness . Michio is a schoolboy in Japan .
 Harvey’* and others Wines From France Germany Portugal Spain Greece Greece Denmark * Italy etc. Harvey'* and other Wines from France and Portugal .
 Cor. Keenan’s Service Station Tires Tires Batteries Accessories ROAD service station .
 December is the most dangerous traffic month of the year . It is also the period of greatest darkness when the hours from dusk to dawn are longer .
 Driving on Massachusetts highways in December can present man problems resulting from unpredictable road conditions . Driving in Massachusetts can present problems resulting in unpredictable road and weather conditions .
 Blowing snow can also bring about visual hazards, even in daylight hours . Clear windshields are extremely important in snowstorms .
 John A Hartford, chairman respectively of the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co. John A. Hartford, is the winner of the award for the best tea .
 The Hartford Foundation granted $9 million in 1950, primarily for the support of medical research . The foundation was set up in 1950 .
 General research team is making a two-pronged attack on the prohelm of arteriosclerosis . The aim is to tackle the pro-arteriosclerosis pro-cardiac disease .
 It is undertaking a basic study of the mechanisms by which fats are transported in the blood . The study is being carried out by the University of Cambridge .
 Last year, sixty-one traffic deaths were reported on our highways during December . This year's number of December traffic deaths was recorded at least 60 .
 We are striving Exquisitely sheer in perfect proportions fora trim fit . We are trying to be the perfect body shape for a trim trim .
 McLaughlin’s Shoe Store y Open Every Evening until Christmas . $8.95, Sizes 1 1 to 3 IS Men's and Women's, 10.95 .
 The question is. what is the future with four youngsters nature of the transportation sysof his own . Their activ i ties help keep him ' from getting lost in the labora .
 He is about as far from the velop arteriosclerosis early in life general picture of an absent-mindis being done on the basis that e( j researcher as one could imasuch persons may have abnormaligine ties in their internal biochemistry severe enough to be detected by
 If the disease developed faster, the condition may be more marked . The condition may also be marked more clearly if it developed faster .
 In older people the disease may have developed so slowly that the abnormality that brought it on may be too slight to detect . Older people may not be able to detect the abnormalities in older people .
 The combination of laboratory studies and studies on patients is one, Dr. Dr. John Sutter says . Dr. Sutter: Combination of laboratory and patient studies is one of the best things to do .
 The researcher sees the patient, and the effects of the disease on him, in a new video . The patient is a patient who has been diagnosed with the disease . The video shows the patient and his effects on him .
 Frederick T Hatch, chief of the arteriosclerosis unit, is trying to find out why arteries harden and thicken and finally become obstructed . Hatch: "I'm trying to get to understand why arteries are hardening and thinking" Hatch: Arteriosclerosis is a
 Heart attacks, strokes, kidney failure and a broad spectrum of damage . PA 9-0900, PA 901: Heart attacks and strokes are not only a aging. aging. is not only aging. but it is also a . broad spectrum . of damage caused by aging.
 May this be the merriest of Yuletides for you and yours . I | ; | | | . | | \ | pleasure and ;* . . j^y .
 Parker T-Ball Jottcr-Parkcr “Write fine” Pencil . IVbjj this Hoh'dau Time he one of jrcat Joij and Happiness... oody .
 Jotter with exclusive T-Ball textured point assures practically skipproof writing . Textured point-tinted writing .
 One hundred fellowships for study at Cornell and Stanford Universities during the summer of 11*02 are being offered to high school science and mathematics teachers and supervisors .
 Shell Merit Fellowships is designed to help improve instruction in high school chemistry, physics and mathematics . The program is also designed to recognize meritorious teachers in these fields .
 The fellowships are available to high school teachers and supervisors of science and mathematics who have five years* experience and have shown qualities of leadership .
 Musicians, ranging in age from 13 to 18, come from as far away as Fall River and Marblehead to rehearse on Saturdays and perform special Sunday afternoon concerts .
 Newton High School, Needham High School and Quincy High School will hold events in Boston this month . Jordan Hall, Boston, March 4 and 6, will be held on February 4 and 7 .
 A sixth concert will be performed out-of-town in April, with date and place to be announced . A fifth concert is scheduled to be performed in April .
 Under the tutelage of 15 professional musicians, the group began building its repertoire . Each year includes both traditional and contemporary classical compositions, plus some works commissioned especially for the orchestra .
 Winchester members of the orchestra include Neal Baker, son of Dr. and Mrs. Baker, Neal Baker and Neal Baker Jr. The orchestra is based in Winchester .
 James G Baker, 7 Grove Street, Winchester High, cello; John Burrows, son of Mr and Mrs. Burrows . John Burrow is son of John and Mrs Burrows from Winchester High School .
 William A Burrows, 6 Oneida Circle, Winchester Junior High, trumpet; Betty Hauck, daughter of Mrs. Mrs. Hauck. William Burrows. William A. Burrows . Burrows’s trumpet, trumpet, was trumpeted at Winchester High School . Betty
 Virginia H Hauck, 41 Canterbury Road, Winchester High, viola; Paul Johnian, son of Mr. and Mrs. Johnian . Virginia . Hauck was a violist at her Winchester High School . Johnian was a member of the family of John and Virginia Hauck
 Aram Johnian, 19 Hillside Avenue, Winchester High, violin; Joan Wilson, daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Wilson, violinist . Joan Wilson is daughter of the late Dr. Aram Johnan and Dr. Johnian of Winchester High School .
 William Wilson, 8 Oneida Road, Winchester High, violin, violin; and Robert Wilson, son of Dr. and Mrs. Wilson, violin . Robert Wilson is son of William Wilson Jr. Robert Wilson Jr., violinist, violinist and son of Robert Wilson .
 "Convertible" Fountain Pen with 14K Gold Point Holiday Greetings to YOU and YOURS . Just slip in giant size cartridge of Super Quink ink or insert converter in place of cartridge .
 Converter and giant ink cartridge free with pen. and clever workmanship 1 Mount Vernon Street .
 PArkview 9-3400 d«c7-3t ; . Find first a source of production One in Winchester. Find first in Winchester .
 Joslin Joslin is enrolled in the Evening Program at Babson Institute of Business Administration . Joslin says he's enrolled in an evening program at the school .
 The subject matter embraces courses in Accounting, Distribution, Economics, Finance and Production . All of these courses are studied from a managerial point of view .
 Chinese National Art Treasures Exhibition on November 30 at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts . Reception and preview of the exhibition will take place November 30 . George A Marks of Fox among the hostesses .
 His Excellency and Madame Kiang were joined by Perry T Rathbone, director of the Boston Museum, and Mrs. Mrs. Kiang .
 WALLETS for men and women, ELECTRIC SHAVERS, BRUSH AND COMB SETS, MEN’S SETS and iuauy types of CHILDREN’s GIFTS which w • will ^ be happy to gift wrap for you
 Handy of the American Radio Relay Tuesday, the 12th in Chidley Hall I national association of radio amateurs, with luncheon hoinpr served at :00 m. m. Handy . Handy is the president of the National Association of Radio Amateurs .
 The Guild is very fortunate during this holiday season to be able to present as speaker Mrs. Mrs. Dorothy L. L. CART . The Guild will present as a speaker for the holiday season .
 She will discuss the symbols and traditions of Christmas around the world . She will take listeners to the various countries where our own customs originated .
 Miss Yuko Mayashi, the organist of the First Congregational Church and Mrs. Mrs. Mayashi . Also, as a special holiday treat for this meeting, the Guild has the good fortune to he able to present in a musical program .
 Mission Union extends a cordial invitation to all women of the church to share in what is sure to he a delightful and informative program . Mission Union is inviting all women to attend the program .
 The festival setting wi 11 take place around the World Fellowship Christmas tree decollated with international ornaments by young YWCA members in costumes of their native lands .
 Augustus Zanzig, nationally known music educator and song leader, will conduct the audience Christmas Carols .
 Shirley Paukulis will do I her own contemporary interpretation of the meaning of Christmas . Shirley Paullis will present her own interpretation of Christmas in a new book .
 Folk dances, teen-age actors and pre-school dance students will perform in turn around the tree . Folk dances will be performed by teens, actors and students .
 Following the performance and the serving of wassail, the Workshops Annual Christmas Exhibit will open . The Workshops annual Christmas exhibit will open at the end of the evening .
 The show includes displays of all Workshops groups, enameling on copper, jewelry, paint ing, pottery, and weaving . The show will be held at the National Museum of Art .
 The public is invited to the opening of the exhibit on December 10 from 4:30-6:00 and from 0:00 to 5:00 daily, except Sundays, holidays, and December 23 and 30 . Ordinntor, is to band together members of the amateur radio
 Amateur radio stations use self-powered radio transmitting and receiving equipment as needed . Amateur stations use commercial-powered equipment to work from commercial power . Amateur radio station equipment can be used to transmit and receive radio signals from commercial stations .
 Mr Baldwin as ARRL emergency coordinator, will call local meetings of amateurs, establish common operating procedures, and arrange regular drill periods when hams’ personal stations may be mobilized .
 ARRL Emergency Corps liaison planning with local chapter of the American Red Cross and other relief agencies . ARRL has working understanding with national headquarters of the Red Cross .
 Liaison will be established also with local protective services, such as fire and police departments and civil defense communications . Civil defense communications will receive much attention. Liaison is also being established with local .
 Handy says radio amateurs have traditionally had the responsibility of being in constant readiness to offer assistance in time of need . Handy: Radio amateurs traditionally had to be prepared to offer help in emergencies .
 Christmas Evergreen Dance The Congregators of the First Congregational Church will usher in the holiday season with their annual Christmas Dance .
 This fes tive dance will he held in Chidley Hall on Friday, December 15th, 9m. to 1m. The dance will take place at the end of the evening .
 Music for the gala affair will be provided by Norman White’s fine orenestra . Norman White will be providing the music for the event .
 Water sealed heating unit plus integrated automatic heat control in handle permit* quick, easy “under water"" washing . Water sealed heating unit plus new integrated automatic heating control .
 One of the highlights of the meeting of the Executive Board of the Women’s Republican Club . Get them at the Win* mbeam .
 Charles N Sweetser at 20 Cabot Street on November 27, was the announcement that the club membership has increased during the year by 33.8%. The total number of members now being 523.8% .
 Plans for the December meeting with a High School Chorus selectvvere were discussed at length .
 Wilbert E Underwood at 9 Ravenscroft Road on December 13 at 2:30m., promises to be another delightful Christmas party in the tradition of former years . The party will be held at 9.30m.
 Mary Ranton Witham has planned an unusually fine program ed from the Unitarian group as her carol singers . The Unitarian singers will sing at the event .
 The group of singers includes will be interspersed with readings from other artists . The group will sing at the end of each performance .
 The “Christmas Cradle Song” will he sung by Judith Morrill and the group and “Gesu Bambino” by the three Morrill sisters . Judith Morill and the sisters will sing the Christmas Cradle song .
 It will be a memorable program which no club member will want to miss . The program will be an inspiring introduction to the Christmas season . It will also be a great introduction to Christmas .
 Look for the Frypan with the “Cloverleaf Design’s heating element that guarantees perfect heat distribution on entire cooking surface ... for finest results .
 “Clipit’s” the new, better way to clip newspapers and magazines . The new way of clipping newspapers is to clip magazines and newspapers . It's open every night 'T EVERY NITE 'TIL CHRISTMAS'
 Thompson Street l'A V-0330 devT-St & Give the New & the Great in I Christmas Gilts . Thompson Street Street Street .
 This vocal group is an all-time groat night club sensation . Monaural . m .
 Magnavox Spectacular 1+00 sq. in. screen . Pictures half again as large as 23-inch screens . More than twice as big as 19-inch sets .
 Video-matic makes all adjustments automatically to give you the best pictures you have ever seen, day or night. Now, just select your program, just click here to see the best images .
 Chromatic optical filter eliminates glare and reflection that cause eyestrain . Magnavox high fidelity puts the breath of life into every scene . Chromatic . optical filter eliminate glare and . reflection that causes eyerrain .
 Only Magnavox tfU6 stereophonic-high-fidelity . Only Magnvox attains the spectacular dimension of stereophonies and tonal beauty of high fidelity .
 Silver Seal warranty guarantees picture tube for one year, service and all parts for 90 days . Silver Seal Wristagagagraphic wrenchment wristagraphic warranty guaranteed .
 Danish Cosmopolitan has Micromatic record player, four speakers including two 12" bass, powerful stereo amplifiers, library space for fifty records .
 American Contemporary with Micromatic record player, four speakers and powerful stereo amplifiers . American Contemporary record player and four speakers with powerful stereo amplifier .
 The referendum reforms cannot become operative without approval by state legislators . Without such approval by the state legislators, the referendum reforms can't become operative .
 Winchester Rep. larrison C hadwick filed the referendum bill in the Mouse of Representatives on Monday, December 4th, two days before the December 0 deadline . Winchester's Rep. Larrison C. hadwick has filed the bill . The referendum bill was filed in the House of Representatives
 In order to be voted on in the March 5th election, the statute must be passed hy both houses of the Legislature and signed by His Excellency, Governor Volpe before January 8 .
 The referendum question is part of official Town Meeting business, Town Manager says . He said that legally the referendum question was part of the Town Meeting's official business .
 The Winchester Selectmen could reopen the warrant to permit its inclusion in time for action by the voters of Winchester in March . If the enabling statute not passed in time to meet the deadline, the Selectmen may re-open the warrant .
 Representative Harrison Chadwick of 2 1 Kvcrett Avenue held firm this week on his refusal to attend a closed hearing regarding his recent charges on T.V. that organized gambling maintained contacts with Massachusetts legislators . Chadwick again declined to attend closed session bid .
 W.hester legislator again declined invitation to attend a closed hearing before the Mouse Rules Committee to provide further details concerning his allegations .
 The referendum reforms, four in number, were approved by the Town Meeting in April, 1961 and in a referendum hy the Town at large on May 15 . Mr Thompson had maintained FOUR REFORMS .
 Requiring signatures of 3 f r of the Town's registered voters on petitions for referenda . Clarifying and simplifying the language of referenda so as simply to ask approval or disapproval of a specified action of Town Meeting . Requiring a simple majority vote in referenda to approve a
 Representative Chadwick said he anticipated no roadblocks in the way of passage of the legislation . Rep. Chadwick: "I'm sure there will be no obstacles to passage of this legislation"
 When the Legislature convenes, he told the Star, the bill would go to the Committee on Towns, would he aired at a public hearing, and would then be reported out to the House and Senate . If approved, it would be signed into law by the Governor .
 Star photographer William Ryerson shows new Christmas lights in front of the post office, on Mill Pond, on the railroad arches and on the Common .
 These are the first Christinas decorations to be put up in Winchester for a number of years . The decorations were generally well received by Winchester residents .
 Reaction to the new decorations in the Centre this week was mixed, hut generally favorable .
 Winchester residents approve of Christmas Spirit Committee's efforts in planning the decorations . Winchester businessmen and private citizens helped make the decorations possible . Winchester residents also approve of Winchester's generosity of private citizens and businessmen .
 $300 voted for the decorations hy last spring’s regular town meeting . Over $1500 was donated for decorations hy businessmen and private citizens .
 Cash Chitel’s Colonial Perfumers Columbus Ladies’ Club Converse Market. Sophie Bowman Coulter Coulter Bettie Donald. Bettie Trump .
 The group is becoming increasingly popular with audiences because of the extremely varied program which it offers, particularly with the trend toward the popular show tunes and old-time favorites .
 The Whester Jayeees received their Charter last Saturday night, December 9th, during the Charter Night BuffetDance held at the Town 1 1 all. Dillon, Jr., Jr., presented the Jayees their Charter .
 President Bill Bird accepted the Charter from President Dillon, and stated that, the number-one project is to keep as many niemlters active in some phases of Jaycce work at all times .
 Governor John A Volpe and Representative Harrison Chadwick will be speaking at a special allschool assembly at the High School this morning .
 Governor Volpe is speaking to the students on the subject of their civic responsibility present and future . Volpe: "Citizenship is a matter of civic responsibility for the future"
 Mr Chadwick will introduce the Governor and will moderate any discussion which follows the talk Ik* gives . Ik* will be introducing the Governor to the public .
 Gov. Volpe: Students looking forward to assembly with real excitement . Governor: "In view of the national spotthe wake of the recent television exposure of gambling"
 Harry V Gilson, Superintendent of Schools, will host to Governor Volpe at the High School Auditorium . Harry V. Gilson will be host to the Governor . Volpe will be a guest of honor .
 The subject* of citizenship is one being emphasized at the High School this year, according to W Howard Niblock, Principal, whose absence from school today was dictated by the changed date of a National Educational TV meeting in Minneapolis .
 This popular husband and wife team recently completed their second nation-wide tour with Boris Goldovsky Opera Company . They are regular recitalists at Boston’s famed Gardner Museum .
 Mystic Glee Club have selected a pleasing group of numbers which blends nicely with the choral selections . For their appearance, they have chosen a pleasing selection of numbers .
 Master of ceremonies, Jim Quine introduced the many visiting Jaycee Chapters from surrounding towns, and kept the evening’s activities moving quickly with his usual charm and wit .
 Winchester Jaycees were sworn into office by State vice president, Don Peterson of the Burlington Jayeees . After a fine buffet, president Bill Bird and the other officers and directors of the Winchester Jayces were sworn in . State vice-president Don Peterson was the state vice president .
 Ron Mackenzie, Burlington Jaycee president, presented a dinner bell to president Bird . Bird received the dinner bell from the Jaycees' president . Bird is a member of the Burlington Jayccee Jaycencee .
 Burlington Jaycee Chapter extended to Winchester, Winchester, helped them to get started . Winchester Jaycees helped them get started in Burlington .
 President Robert Dillion of Pittsfield, spoke on the importance of the young man serving his community .
 The Jayeees have chapters in 65 other countries in the world . The development of individual members through leadership training is another important purpose of the Jayeeses .
 James Fitzsimmons of them progress during this past Robjnson Circle bas brouKht this ^ eal ‘ I problem forcefully to the attention JAYCEES, continued on page 3 'of the Town of York'
 Winchester Co-operative Bank Donates Baskets To Fight Litter . Board of Directors of Winchester Cooperative Bank voted to donate six litter baskets to Winchester Park .
 Mr Billman said the Bank directors felt this would be a positive and effective way to do their bit toward making the Town cleaner .
 Utility poles are attached to utility poles at just below shoulder height and easily used by pedestrians . They're attached to poles at a height and are easily accessible to pedestrians .
 Bank directors urge Winchester residents to cooperate to the fullest extent possible in the campaign to end local litter . The bank directors at the same time urged all Winchester residents .
 In recent weeks a campaign to end litter has been sparked in a letter dated December 5 . The letter said custom and wisdom dictated a closed hearing on any matter in which the “character, personality, and reputation of the parties” are involved .
 "The lines defining the direction in which this commonwealth will move are now being drawn," says the governor . The lines defining direction in the direction of the commonwealth are being drawn .
 Mr Chadwick told the Speaker that he would he most happy to answer questions to the best of his ability if the Speaker decides to conduct a hearing open to the press and public .
 Winchester representative reported to the Star that he was receiving a comparatively heavy amount of mail on the subject, at least 30 to 40 letters and double that number of telephone calls . Winchester representative said he was getting at least 40 letters, double the number of calls .
 Winchester Centre to undergo major renovation of the Hevey Block . Winchester Centre will be transformed into a bright new look for 1962 . Winchester centre to be modernized in 1962 .
 The entire firstfloor frontage on the Main Street side of the 80-year-old building will he remodelled, from Hevey \s Pharmacy right down to and including the recently vacated quarters of the Winchester Provision Company . Winchester Provision . Company .
 Key items on the remodelling agenda will he the re-division of store areas; and remodelling of the store fronts . Key items to be discussed include re-divisions, re-opening of store fronts and remodeling of store front doors .
 All Main Street store fronts will be recessed nine feet to permit the construction of a garden-terraced ramp . In the remodelling division, all Main St. store fronts have been recessed 9 feet .
 This ramp will serve the dual function of eliminating existing five-step store walk-ups and beautifying the building facade . The ramp will be used to eliminate existing five step store walk ups and beautify the building .
 The lower section of the facade will he finished in white stucco, the store fronts in aluminum, glass and redwood panels . The store fronts will be covered in aluminum and glass panels .
 The interior of the stores will also be remodelled extensively, in accordance with the wishes of individual tenants . The interior will also have been remodelled .
 Hevey’s Pharmacy will he expanded to include the quarters now occupied by the Puffer Insurance Agency . The pharmacy will be expanded into the quarters of Hevey's Pharmacy .
 The Puffer Agency will move into one of three areas in the quarters recently vacated by the Splendid Lunch . The agency will move to one of the three quarters vacated by Splendy Lunch .
 Mr Whittemore is now doing business on Church Street, while the Hobby Shop is on Thompson Street . The Hobby Shop has moved to Thompson Street, which is now Church Street .
 A dramatic reminder of the potential tragedy that rides in every moving car was displayed on the front lawn of the abandoned Wadleigh School this week . F^VCE LIFTING, cont. page 3 .
 Two teenagers were killed and one seriously injured at Symmes Corner in the early morning hours of Thanksgiving Day . Winchester Police Chief Joseph J Derro put on public display the mangled wreckage of the car wreck .
 The Chief made his decision after consulting with the Board of Selectmen, which agrees with him that if in seeing the wreck even one Winchester youngster drives more carefully and thus saves his own and other lives, the exhibit will have been worth while .
 I would be very grateful if every youngster in Winchester could go over to the Wadleigh School and take just one look at this wreck . I would like to see the wreck in Winchester, Winchester .
 Winchester Jaycee deal W illiam Bird* with Jaycce charier. Jr. Jr., presents Winchester Jayciee deal .
 The attorney general, looking neat and fit, opened his talk in Mr Murphy’s lighthearted vein .
 Attorney General says Winchester people do everything in a big way . He praises C’hicf Derro’s cooperation with state law enforcement agencies .
 Another one of your fellow townsmen in his first real crack at politics gets to be Governor. "Another one of his fellow townsman in your first real take at politics. Get to see Governor. He's got to be governor. He'll be governor of Florida .
 After reviewing the functions of his office (he said that criminal matters require the attention of only 5 of his 50 lawyers) ho answered questions from the floor .
 If anyone has information concerning gambling in Boston, the Attorney General said, he should submit it to a grand jury, and observe the legal procedure of indictment, conviction, and sentencing .
 The attorney general opposed what he called “exposure for the sake of exposure,” and said that possessing information concerning crime and withholding it was as had as the crime itself .
 Massachusetts attorney general said he was not able to read what was in other people's minds .
 "By and large, our police officers are dedicated public servants who risk their lives for very little pay," police chief says . Police officers risk lives for little pay and risk lives, he says .
 Winchester Savings Bank is a “beginner’ in more ways than one . Winchester savings bank is a "beginner" in more than one of its branches . Winchester Savings bank has more than 1,000 employees .
 Savings BEC, <i\ in Winchester, Winchester and the first home financing began, too, in 1871 . For here, savings BEC began in Winchester . For more information, visit www.bEC.org .
 Most people have developed the faculty of looking at church art without seeing it, or thinking about it, says Celia Hubbard . The Winchester Art Association held a meeting in Winchester, England .
 Much of it is a relic of a bygone era, and is used in a random, meaningless manner as decoration, out of step with the art and attitudes of the present day . Much of the artwork is a result of a lack of interest in modern art .
 Much of it is very poor work, bad painting, poor statuary, meaningless carving . Much of the work is "very poor work" and "meaningless carving", says author .
 The ail in many churches would give the idea that religion is very dull, sterile, stereotyped, says Dr. David Cameron .
 Miss Hubbard illustrated her talk with colored slides showing how the architecture, including interior decoration of many new European churches, has succeeded in expressing religious feeling with modern materials .
 Religious symbols are used effectively and singly to emphasize their meaning, rather than scattered all over the church . Religious symbols should be used effectively, singly, to emphasize the meaning of religious symbols .
 Glass is used often as whole walls, with artists designing the colors and patterns in a manner most calculated to create a worshipful atmosphere . Glass is often used as a whole wall or as a wall by artists .
 The Botolph Group, of which Miss Hubbard is the director, continuously influences the churches to use better art, especially more contemporary styles .
 Boston gallery makes available beautiful small religious pieces, instead of gaudy, poor ones .
 All pieces are in good taste, whether jewelry or statuary, wood carvings, paintings, or Christmas cards . All pieces should be in the best taste .
 The exhibition in the North Reading Room of the library has surprised most people by its beauty and freshness . The exhibition is being held at the library in London .
 There are silk screen prints by Sister Mary Corita, who teaches at the Immaculate Heart College in Los Angeles .
 After the meeting in the library, all present were invited to the home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . All present invited to visit the house of Mrs Johnson .
 Police say the pole was broken off at the base, and that the front end of the Cadillac was badly damaged . Police say that the pole is broken off .
 Wallace Repair Shop towed the car away and the telephone company was notified of the damage to its pole . Wallace repair shop towed the vehicle away .
 Winchester High School students need financial aid to enter on the first year of training beyond the high school . Mr Berkley pointed out that the primary responsibility of the Scholarship Foundation is to enable, Winchester High . School students needing financial aid are able to enter .
 Winchester students of more advanced standing in college meet situations that threaten their ability to continue . Further aid is extended when students of advanced standing are at risk . Winchester students are more advanced in college, but need more help when they need it .
 All applicatoins for financial need are carefully studied, i tinl within the Scholarship Committee . All confidential records are destroyed at the end of each year .
 The balance of funds of the foundation as of June 30, 1901, was $91,227 . It was founded in 1901 .
 Laurance Owen Fund of approximately $2900 was raised by the high school students through sale of tickets to a rugby match last May . Students raised the money through ticket sales to the match in May .
 High School student council presented a check of $50 in memory of Meredith Cooper, long-time teacher at the school . Friends of Mr Cooper at the time of his death in lieu of flowers, as requested by the Cooper family .
 I Chairman — Neil H Borden Treasurer — Charles W Butler Secretary— Mrs. Butler . Neil Borden is the only member of the Borden family .
 WATERF1ELD OPTICIANS offer a complete OPTICAL SERVICE Physicians* and Hospital Proscriptions Accurately Filled (Hasses Fitted Lenses)
 Mr. Bonnell, Jr., Mr George L Hillman, Mr Frank Grabiec Member of the Scholarship Committee for four years . Mrs Grabiece was also a member of the scholarship committee .
 Rob ert G Ingraham Trustee for six years — Wade L Grindle Publicity Chairman — Philip O’Rourke Publicity chairman . Philip O'Rourke Nominating Committee — Arthur L Johns, chairman, Mrs. Mrs. Ingraham, chairman of Mrs. Johns
 Among those attending the mooting were the general committee of the foundation, the governing body, which is made up of repreen tali v»* of ome twenty-five organization!
 Apple, Squash and Mince Pies, Light and Dark Fruit Cakes and Light & Dark fruit Cakes will be featured next week . Everything you’ll need for your festive table .
 Beauty Parlor — S 25 Doll and accessories; Playmobile — like real car; Dream Kitchen, Man in Space, Cuddly Cathy Doll, Fire Chief Set, State Trooper Set, Trailer Trucks, Racing Cars, Racing cars, Crayola Packs, etc.
 Gold Medal flour sack Muffin Mixes — Date, Orange, Raisin Bran Betty Crocker “kc 2 35* Boston Cream Pie Betty Crockers "kc" "Boston Cream Pie" "Lucky Whip" Lucky Whip 9 oz can 53c Friend's
 Milk 3 14 Vi oz cans 47a Grandmothor's Mincemeat 1 lb 1 2 oz Jar . Nabisco Cookias 1 2oz pkg 39c Nestla's Chocolate Qulk 1 lb can 36a Plllsbury — Date, Banona, Chocolate Nut
 Miss Lexington was Miss Lexington, Sue Nanry of Winchester, who sang several favorites . Jim Quine then introduced her to Miss Lexington .
 This beautiful and talented young lady was another of the high spots of the evening . This beautiful young lady is a talented singer .
 Area formerly occupied by Winchester Provision Co. will be occupied by a new firm called Winchester Meat Co. The Winchester meat company will be located in the Winchester area .
 At present no renovations are planned on the top of the 80-year Christmas Lights Mystic Glee Club .
 The upper affair, with the ‘twist’ as one of n c _ _ _ 1 floors of the building, is now octhe most popular numbers . It is one of the highest-ever numbers in the building .
 The Winchester Jaycees wish to thank everyone who contributed to the Charter Night Buffet-Dance . Winchester Jayccees thank everyone for all their support for the event .
 The next general meeting of the Jaycees will he held January 3, at the Red Cross House at 8:00m. The Jaycee Jaycene Jaycane Jaycine Jayne meeting will be held at 8pm .
 The Junior and Senior girls will have a get together at the Unitarian church December 19 at 7:30 .
 Mr Robert S Davis of Arlington, who purchased the building in April, 1961, plans to renovate the Mt. Davis building .
 Vernon Street entrance to the Masonic Apartments as well as the stairs leading up to the second floor . Vernon Street is located on the corner of the Masonic Apartment .
 The entrance to Hevey’s Pharmacy now on the corner of Mount Vernon and Main Streets will he taken out to make way for a circular corner display window .
 Plans also call for an entrance to the pharmacy off the Main Street ramp and, ultimately, a door on the Mount Vernon Street side .
 This is the first time since 1880 that the building has been remodelled on the outside . The first time it has been done on the inside since 1880 .
 Its owner, Mr Davis, is confident that its renovation will provide a boost to the appearance of the Centre and to local business .
 Winchester architect has drawn up plans for the renovation . Mr Jerome Bailey Foster, Winchester architect, has drawn out plans for a new home . The Winchester home will be transformed into a state of art .
 Leo Garvey Handcraft House Hannon Shoes Hillside Paint & Wallpaper Hevey’s Apothecary Kivvanis Club Loralune, Inc. The club is located in Loraluna .
 The Fortnightly Woman’s Club will sponsor carol singing on the Common on Christmas Eve . Winchester Star Woolworth's Carol Singing On Common will take place at 7 o’clock on December 25 .
 This is the 36th year that The Fortnightly has sponsored this year's carol singing . This is a carol carol sing competition for the first time ever .
 Mary Ranton Witham, wellknown organist and choir director, will again direct . A brass quartet from the High School will provide an accompaniment for the voices .
 If you haven’t participated in a carol sing on the Common, this would be a good year to begin a custom . We predict you will find rewarding enough to continue from year to year .
 Rodgers When the Children Are Asleep Rodgers Hilda Abrevaya, soprano Lee Fowler, tenor Carol Rand, accompanist Carol of the Drum . Rodgers: "How a Rose E'er Blooming Praetorius See That Babe in the Lowly Manger"
 Abigail Ludlam: "We would like to express our sincere thanks to our many friends"
 For the many other expressions including spiritual cards, flowers and messages of condolence, we will always be grateful . For the rest of the world, we thank you for your kindness .
 The Red Barn Shop and Gardens 9 Bedford Street Burlington, Mass. has plenty of tree trimmings and stocking fillers .
 Abigail Ludlam of 78 SalisFourt Street Woburn, who died j bury Street passed away after a December 8 following a short ill four-day sickness at thePond View ness, lived in Winchester .
 Surviving are three sons, John of Dayton, Ohio; Webster and Charles of Woburn; two daughters Mrs. Mrs. Smith . Surviving also include two daughters, Webster and Webster .
 William J Murphy, Jr. and Miss Mary Danehy, have 13 grandchildren and twelve great grandchildren . They also have 12 great grandchildren and 12 great granddaughters . William Murphy Jr. was married to Miss Danehy; she died in March .
 Funeral services were held from the McLaughlin Funeral Home Monday morning at 8:15m. Funerals were held at 8 a.m. Monday morning .
 Tribute To the Late Lillian Saliee will lie incorporated in its minutes and in the town report .
 To all with whom she came in eontuct, pupils, faculty and parents, she was the epitomy of the dedicated teacher . To all, pupils and faculty, teachers, parents and parents . She was a dedicated teacher.
 Her warmth, sympathy and human understanding enabled her to teach equally well every child so fortunate as to be one of her students . Her warmth and sympathy helped her to become a teacher, she said .
 Her modesty and humility could not conceal her consistently superior performance as an educator . Her quality and contributions will be preserved in the memory of those she served, she says . Her modesty could not hide her superior performance .
 Winchester moved to Milton ten years ago from Milton, and was active in the Fortnightly Club . Winchester moved from Milton to Winchester and is now a member of a local club .
 Funeral services were held at the Bennett-Norris Funeral Home on Wednesday, December 13, at 1 :30m. with the Rev. The Rev. Michael Lister . Lister's funeral home was held at 1:30m .
 William Thibeau of 1 Town Way died Sunday, December 10, at the Lawrence Memorial Hospital in Medford following an illness of two weeks . He was hospitalized for two weeks after suffering from an illness .
 Mr Thibeau is survived by three daughters, Sister Marie Claire, S.S.J., Leonette M., and Mrs. Mrs. Fournier . Husband of the late Clara (Fournier) died in hospital in Quebec .
 Funeral services for Mr Thibeau were held from the Gaffey Funeral Home on High Street, Medford, yesterday, December 13, at 8:00 m. A Solemn High Mass at Saint Mary’s Church in Winchester at 9:00m.
 The family of the late Lillian Saliee wish to thank their neighbors and friends for the many beautiful flowers, flowers and other expressions of sympathy extended to them during their recent bereavement .
 Mystic School Faculty, Teachers' Association of Winchester and Mystic Mothers’ Association . They especially appreciate the thoughtfulness of the teachers and mothers .
 William J Dowd Jr. of Portland Maine, who died last week, lived in Winchester until about twenty years ago . Dowd lived there until about 20 years ago and died in 2008 .
 Mr Dowd is survived by his wife, Helene Dowd, seven children, an aunt, Marion Brady of Woburn, and an uncle, Walter McMahon .
 Friends of Miss Lillian Saliee are cordially invited to a program of memorial tribute to her in the Mystic School Auditorium on Tuesday, December 19 .
 Miss Saliee created a Christmas pageant created by her and given every few years for the whole school by her third grade . Last June before her illness she agreed to present for the December meeting of the Mystic School Mothers’ Association a pageant .
 Ruby White has taught that grade and will carry on the program as it was planned, with music by the sixth grade choir and Miss Jean Louden, Supervisor of Music . Ruby White will teach that grade .
 A standing tribute to Miss Saliee will he read by a moth . Instead of the usual business meeting preceding the program, necessary announcements will be printed . Miss Salice’s family, special guests from the School Department will attend .
 Miss Bancroft ginal Commission on Administrawas stricken suddenly while attion and Finance, died Thursday tending a lecture in Malden and forenoon, December 7, at the Win’ passed away .
 Miss Bancroft was educated in Manchester schools and graduated from Bradford Academy . McCormick to the cen of McCormick was educated on a shopping trip .
 That night he had a fall at his moved to Winchester about 40 home, and was taken to the hospiy ear j* ago . She had moved from Winchester to Winchester .
 Miss Bancroft was well loved and respected in Winchester civic circles . She was active in community work right up until the last .
 In 1903 Mr McCormick came back to Boston and became associated with the United Drug Company . He was a bookkeeper and later auditor and treasurer .
 He was detailed by Mr Liggett to arrange for the annual conventions of Rexall dealers in Boston and other large cities . During that time he arranged for the conventions in Boston .
 After a year he was named by Governor Channing Cox to the State’s original Commission on Administration and Finance, serving as comptroller . He served a year in the commission . After that, he was appointed to the original Commission of Administration .
 He remained with the commission for six years . Served under Governor Cox and Governor Fuller .
 Mr McCormick first served the town as a member of the school building committee of 1931 . Very active civically, he first served in 1931 .
 He was named temporary treasurer of the town on May 29, 1936 when the then encumbent, Dr. Dr. George W. Johnson, was elected . Dr. Johnson was elected temporary treasurer in 1936 .
 Harrie Y Nutter, became ill, continuing until November 30, that year . Harrie became ill and died at the age of 60 .
 He served in a similar capacity from August 1, 1941, to March 2, 1942, at which time he was elected treasurer . He continued in office until September 30, 1943, continuing in office .
 He served as a selectman in 1937, was a member of the Insurance Committee and a town meeting member for Precinct 5 . He was also a town council member .
 Mr McCormick was a member of Winchester Country Club, Commonwealth Country Club and Belmont Spring Country Club . He was on the committee that raised the funds to build the last named .
 He was also a member of the Algonquin Club of Boston and of the Clover Club . He died at age 81 .
 For many years she served faithfully and efficiently as secretary of the Winchester Historical Society . Miss Bancroft was an active member of the Willurd Family Association and the Audubon Society .
 She had a lively interest in the fine arts and was a warm supporter of the Boston Arts Festival . She had been a warm fan of the festival .
 Miss Bancroft is survived by two sisters, Miss Ada and Mrs. Mrs. Ada, both of Milford, New Hampshire . Miss Ada is also survived by her sister, Mrs. Ada, who was married to the late Mrs. Edna, who died at age
 Funeral services were held yesterday December 13 from the Ripley Chapel at the First Congregational Church in Ripley . The Rev. Rev. John Wright was a member of the congregation at the church .
 Interment was in the Bancroft family lot at the Pine Grove Cemetery in Milford, New Hampshire . Interment in the family lot was held in the cemetery .
 Edwin Ginn, 65, of 64 Mt. Mt. Mount W. Mt., is the son of late publisher Edwin Gin . He was born in Winchester, Winchester, and served as a Winchester resident . Mr. Ginn was a former resident of Winchester .
 Ginn was the son of the late Edwin Ginn, publisher, publisher . Ginn lived as a boy in Winchester on the old Ginn Estate . He died Tuesday, Dec. at Phillips House of Massachusetts General Hospital .
 His father, head of Ginn & Co., publishers, lived in the big brick mansion type house with its later-added music room . The house was torn down at the time of the Cusack development of the estate .
 Ginn Field, now used as a playground for girls field hockey and Little League baseball was named Ginn . Ginn married Anna Willis Moore of Framingham Center, and they lived in Brookline until they came to Winchester in 1919 .
 At that time, they lived at 6 Everett Avenue, present home of Gilbert Hood . The Hoods lived at that time at present home .
 McCormick survives with two daughters, Miss Annette M McCormick of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and Mrs. Mrs. McCormick . McCormick is survived by her two daughters .
 Family services were held Monday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister . Funerals were held in Ripley, Ripley .
 Burial was in the Moore family lot in Edgell Grove Cemetery, Framingham Center . Funerals were held at the graveside of Moore family members .
 Edwin Ginn, Jr., was born in Marblehead, but lived as a boy in Winchester . Ginn lived in Winchester, Massachusetts, during his youth . He was a member of the family .
 He was educated at Middlesex School and Harvard, from which he graduated in 1918 . He was born in 1926 .
 He was a member of the Hasty Pudding Institute of 1770, of the Fox Club and of the Harvard Musical Clubs . He was also a Harvard Musical Club member . He died in 1770 .
 A 'cellist of more than average ability, he appeared with his mother and aunt in a program of string music for severul years at Christmas at the Church of the Epiphany .
 Mr Ginn worked first for Ginn & Co. in Boston before joining Hayden Stone & Co., a broker . After four years with the publishing house he joined the investment banking firm .
 A solemn requiem Mass was celebrated Friday morning at the Church of the Advent in Boston . The service will be held in honor of the deceased .
 For Mom For Dad 1 McLaughlin s shoe store I Open Every Evening until Christmas Tel.com.com/www.michael.com . For Mom for Dad For Dad .
 Catherine R Langford, 85, passed away Saturday, December 9, at the Massachusetts General Hospital . She was a lifelong resident of Winchester, Massachusetts .
 Miss Langford was born in Winchester, the daughter of the late Thomas and Delia Langford . She was born to a family of late Thomas, Delia and Thomas Langford from Winchester .
 Until her retirement ten years ago she had been associated with the Raytheon Co. in Waltham and with the Massachusetts General Hospital .
 Miss Langford is survived by two brothers, Frank of Winchester and Thomas of Medford . She is also survived by her brother, Frank and Thomas Langford .
 The Winchester Star Established 1880 by Theodore P Wilson, Sr. Interment was in Calvary Cemetery, Page Four .
 A Memo On Gambling l nlil evidence is presented to a grand jury, indictments are secured, and convictions are obtained . The question of organized gambling in Massachusetts will remain the subject of extreme bitterness in Massachusetts .
 Whoever has evidence concerning gambling should lose no opportunity to present it through proper legal channels . In any event, it seems to be that whoever has evidence should be given no opportunity .
 It seems to the Star that once in possession of this evidence state courts and officials should act on it with promptness and firmness . The Star also seems to suggest that once they are in possession they should act upon it .
 We must be extremely careful in this matter involving the reputation of citizens that strict due process of law is observed . We must also be careful to be careful in the case involving a citizen's reputation .
 The legal machinery of the Commonwealth remains the most efficient and fair way to deal with crime . When everything has been said, the legal machinery is the best way to handle crime .
 There is a very important distinction between being right in fact (if you are) and proving that you're right in court . After all. After all, there is a lot of work to do in court to prove that you are right .
 "We must be extremely careful lest this question of organized gambling become a divisive political or even religious issue," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Anyone who truly loves Massachusetts and respects its interests will protect the innocent as forcefully as he exposes the guilty . Anyone who loves Massachusetts will protect its interests, he says, as well .
 The Star is concerned with the suggestion that the exposure of wrong-doing constitutes a betrayal of Massachusetts . The Star also concerned with suggestion that exposing wrong-do would be a betrayal .
 It seems to the Star that the revelation of truth, by its very nature, can “betray” no one but the guilty . The Star seems to believe that truth by its nature, it can ‘betray no one’s guilty .
 No innocent person need fear the full light of publicity on organized gambling in Massachusetts . The state's gambling laws have been criticized for their lack of transparency .
 A genuine l>etrayal would occur, however, if responsible public figures were to suppress evidence they possessed, or to play it down merely because it was not in harmony with the public relations ‘Image” of the State .
 The Image of Massachusetts, after all, can only be as pure as Massachusetts is . Massachusetts is pure as it is .
 All the public relations in the world cannot make figs out of thistles, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Let's get the facts about gambling in Msasachusctts, and take these facts to court . Let’s get the fact about gambling, and go to court.
 We may rejoice over the news that conservatism is having a re-birth in the U.S.A., if it means that Americans will take a more careful look at their traditions . Conserving A Revolution may be a good sign for conservatives in the United States .
 If they do, liberty and justice for all, including Negroes in Northern suburbs and Southern class rooms, will be strengthened throughout the land . If they succeed, they will strengthen liberty and Justice for all .
 Whenever we “conserve” the American tradition we arc conserving a revolution . For whenever we "conserve" the American . tradition we . arc conserved a revolution. For whenever . we . “Conserve’s American tradition, we arc . conserving
 If we get old and stodgy, it will not be because wc pursued this revolution to its logical end . It will be because l>c walked out on it, because we lost the nerve it takes to remain rebels . L>C will l>C because we walked
 As embarrassing as it seems to some Americans, some Americans were not standpatters . Our Founding Fathers were not "standpatters," according to the Founding Fathers . The Founding Fathers, however, were not.
 Unlike much of suburbia today, they did not fear ‘Controversial Subjects’ as the final heresy . Unlike much today, the suburbs did not worry about ‘controversial subjects’
 "They were rebels to a man, and when they rebelled they didn't stop at declaring their own right to freedom and food," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "Even today, in spite of all our errors, rebellious nations still look to us for support," he says . That is why even today, he says, "even today, we still have the support of rebellious nations"
 The Constitution left us the Constitution as a firm legal basis of order, a set of ideals, a point of departure from which every generation could approach its own problems as new occasions required . The Constitution was a strong legal basis for order and ideals, the Founding Fathers left us .
 The past, to them, was not something to escape to, but something to work from . Needless to say, this is not how the self-styled ‘conservatives’ now waving 51 -star flags look at American traditions .
 George III's speeches and editorials sound more like the memoirs of George III than George Washington's . Their editorials, however, sound like George Washington, not George Washington .
 The words are not the words of men responding rationally to the realities of the 20th century . They are certainly not men responding to the reality of the 21st century, they say .
 In the same silly vein, “conservative” high priestess Ayn Rand, whose followers wear 14karat dollar signs, insists that the “Witch Doctor” mysticism of the Sermon on the Mount threatens human liberty . The regulation of child labor constitutes an
 Winchester Cooperative Bank announces it will donate six litter baskets to the Winchester Park Department as a contribution to clearing Winchester of litter . Goldwater was a crackpot conservative, but the laurels for crackpot ‘conservatism go to Arizona’s always amazing Barry Goldwater .
 Use one of the many baskets now being placed about I own to get rid of that candy . The way to help translate this somewhat strained slogan .
 It would be no less an embarrassment to Republicans than to the Republic, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says it would be an embarrassment for Republicans and for the Republic .
 In Goldwater’s blackand white world, social security is defined as a “socialist” plot . While old-age benefits are derided as “un-American” coddling, “handouts” that retard the “spirit
 It is aristocratic and reactionary, not conservative, says Julian Zelizer . It is a barely warmed stew of dogma that was discredited first by the American and later by the French revolutions .
 It indicates a continuing lack of faith in the validity of the validity and endurance of democratic institutions, it says .
 If Goldwater and Buckley had lived in 177(5) they would have supported King George III . They would have joined 53 per cent of colonists who opposed war with the Crown .
 When you get to the point of calling Dwight D Eisenhower a Red, as the Birch crowd has, you’re too silly to listen to . The Birch crowd calls Eisenhower a ‘Red’, but it’s not a Red’.
 We're talking about Americans with tired blood who are losing heart in the never-ending fight to keep freedom alive and up-to-date . We’re talking about people with tired red blood .
 We’re talking about Americans who think that unpleasant ideas can be bombed out of existence, or that the only way to fight totalitarian is to adopt their methods . We're talking about people who think unpleasant ideas are bombed out .
 All of this seems to the Star had thinking, for when we cease to be a republic we cease be worth saving . All of the Star's thoughts come to the end of this week .
 The world outside is hungry and angry and we won’t live happily in it by trying to stifle change or by placing stability before liberty in the choice of allies . We won't live happily with the world outside of it by stifling change or putting stability before freedom .
 "We can influence the world toward our ends, but we cannot dictate what this world will be," says the author . We can influence our ends but we can't dictate what it will be, he says .
 The Star believes that the American Revolutionary tradition remains the world’s supreme revolution of the modern era . The Star has published a book called The Star .
 "We believe that if America remains true to its conviction that every man in the world has a right to he free and to he fed, we can compete with all challengers," the authors said .
 The American Revolution today is only as strong and young as we arc, says historian John Avlon . But the American Revolution is not as strong as it is young, he says .
 Litter certainly not he fair to ask whether he was brought up in a barn, because most barns are cleaner than any corner or gutter in Winchester . Winchester Cent re. re.
 Tom Mooney, center and outstanding lineman, is the first winner of the “Doc Hindes Award” going yearly to the Winchester High School player who through his team spirit and loyalty shall be adjudged in the opinion of the coaching staff to have done most for the season .
 J Churchill Hindes, retired dentist and for many years a loyal supporter of all Winchester High School teams . Winchester High pupils have been in the top three of their recent success .
 A player in his schoolboy days at Vermont Academy, he has maintained an active and intelligent interest in football throughout his lifetime . He has maintained a keen interest in the game throughout his life .
 The award was made Monday evening at a football dinner sponsored by the Varsity Club and held in the cafeteria .
 A delicious barbecue chicken dinner was served to some ninety members of the 19(51) football squad . A delicious catered barbecue chicken was served .
 Bob Benincasa, star halfback on this year’s eleven and president of the Varsity Club, welcomed guests and his teammates . W Howard Niblock, principal of the school, called upon School Principal to say grace .
 Seated at the head table with the toastmaster, former football coach and present hockey coach, Frank Finigan, were Dr. Dr. Finigan . The toastmaster was Dr. John Lister, who is a former hockey coach and coach . Dr. Lister was the toast
 Brink, chairman of the school committee, and President Benincasa. Mr Brink: "I am happy to be here for the first time in my life"
 Head Coach Henry T Knowlton, members of the coaching staff, Frank Provinzano, Jim Phillips, George Watson and George Watson, Niles Nelson and Bob Kessler; Dr. Dr. Henry T knowlton. Head Coach Knowlinton. Head Coaches Henry T
 This year’s team captain, Mike Bellino, is the team physician, Reuben Innis, Guest Speaker Dave Thompson of Tufts, outstanding among college tackles in New England . Doctor Hindes is the guest of honor .
 St. Brink recalled first meeting with Doctor Hindes was at freshman football practice several years ago . She said she had always had faith in his football judgment since the day he picked her son Mike, now captain of the St.Brink team .
 She regretted that the last Bellino has played for Winchester, but told the audience there are several ‘Brinks’ coming along . Coach Knowtlon hopes several "Brinks" coming along, whom she hopes will be playing for Winchester .
 Hindes spoke of the honor he felt at having a Winchester High School trophy named for him . Hindes’ Award is the sort of trophy the trophy the Hindes' Award is. Hindes, in a simple but obviously sincere address, spoke .
 Stardom is not necessary to win the award, though a star player is not ineligible for it . Stardom does not mean a player is eligible for the award .
 He asked the winner of the trophy to look upon it as a way of life, as good 25 years from now as now . The winner will be able to win the trophy 25 years after now .
 Any one, he said, living their ilfe with loyalty, team spirit and sincere effort, can not help but succeed . Any one who lives with loyalty and team spirit can succeed, he added .
 Hindes was given an ovation and announced the first winner of the trophy as Tom Mooney . Mooney was given a standing ovation at the end of the match .
 Mooney presented the trophy with its replica replica for the winner to Mooney . Mooney was taken completely by surprise as he was presented with the trophy .
 Dave Thompson spoke of the connection between sports and studies . Thompson said the boy who participates in sports and learns to budget his time often does much better scholastically than one who has no tiring outside interest . Thompson: 'A boy who has a lot of outside interest does better sch
 He said the football player is quite ready to sit down with the books and not seek further diversion .
 He said the only time his studies give him any concern is at the time when he has no other athletic activity . He said only concern is when he does not have any other sports activity .
 Winchester's record of four wins, fourlosses, and a tie is not too successful on Winchester’s standard . Gilson told the 19(51) squad that its record is nevertheless a good one . Winchester has won four games, losing four and losing one .
 Winchester lost to Woburn in the Thanksgiving defeat . Winchester had played its best game in that defeat, Winchester coach says .
 Niblock humorously asked to be excused from speaking, saying that the football team had to listen to him at assemblies throughout the year and that he felt they could forego any remarks from him .
 Coach Knowlton rounded out his 21st year at the helm of Winchester fotball this year . He paid tribute to the loyalty of his assistant coaches, including Coaches Phillips and Provinzano .
 The excellence of their coaching makes my work so much easier, he said, when these junior high candidates come out for the varsity, he added .
 Coach Knowlton presented varsity insignias to this year’s lettermen, and ealled upon Coach Nelson to do the same for the junior varsity . Coach Nelson also presented the same insignia to the Junior varsity team .
 This year’s captain, Mike Bellino, announced his successor as Jim Menuc-ci, offensive guard and defensive line-backer . Menucci replaces Bellino as the captain of this year's team . This year's captain is offensive guard/line-backer on this
 He sustained a hand injury in the Melrose game, and was used sparingly against Belmont and Wakefield . He sustained the hand injury against Melrose and Belmont .
 Manager Innis then named the 19(52 managers as Dave Eaton and John Giger . Giger was the first manager of the world's most famous artworks .
 In passing it should be said that Coach Finigan ably filled the toastmaster’s role and that much of the credit for the successful evening was due to his efforts . In passing, Finigan should also be said to be a coach .
 Christmas Greens Sale and luncheon held last Wednesday, December 6 . Winchester Home and Garden Club sponsored the event . Winchester event will be remembered by all who attended .
 The Baptist Church hall was resplendendendent with the lovely Christmas decorations . The warmth and enthusiasm with which everything was admired was a compliment to the combined talents of the club members .
 Edward Devlin, and their committee, were beautifully served on tables attractively decorated with red and green centerpieces . The event was held in New York City .
 Dr. SOROKIN looks at the differences between the United States and the U.S.R., writes Dr. WILSON SULLIVAN . Among the apparently irreconcilable differences, he says, is the difference between U.N.R. and U
 The tract is startling because it is objective, documented, courageous, and ruthlessly honest . It is an objective and documented document that is brutally honest and objective .
 It is hopeful because it defines a similarity between Russia and America which, once accepted by Moscow and Washington, could provide a reliable, because realistic basis for peace .
 Sorokin’s thesis is that despite ritualistic namecalling and cold war military policies, the differences between the U.S. and the United States.R. are less deep than they seem . Sorokin: The differences between . the . United States and . the United .
 Despite the official ideologies of both countries, practical experience and cold war requirements have forced actual, if officially ‘unrecognizable, changes in both societies . That is to say, despite official ideologies, despite the official ideology, both societies have changed .
 Sorokin shows that both America and Russia have developed economically in directions contrary to their formal ideologies . Sorokin: Both countries have developed in opposite directions in economic terms .
 We have become a highly collective “corporation economy,” characterized by an increasing degree of impersonal regimentation . Actually, we have become an increasingly impersonal economy, writes David Gergen . Gergen: We have a very collective 'corporations economy'
 Sorokin reminds us, none of the directors owns more than 5 per cent of corporate property . Sorokin says they serve more as managers than as owners. Sorokin: 'They serve as managers rather than owners'
 Federal government now controls the largest sector of the economy, Sorokin says . Sorokin: Given increasing military contracts and impetus toward centralized planning to fight two world wars, the Federal government is now controlling the largest economy .
 The government’s control of our allegedly “private” economy makes it decisive . This, plus the proper humanitarian concern for social security and aid to the old, sick, and poor, makes the government's control of the economy decisive .
 Sorokin says it is more properly described as a ‘familistic’ mixed economy . Sorokin: The economy is more like a family-friendly mixed economy. Sorokin said .
 Sorokin points out, also contradicts in practical fact the major dogmas of its ideology . Sorokin: "The ideology of the U.S. government is a contradiction to its ideology" Sorokin says. Sorokin also points out that this contradicts its ideology.
 Russia has moved from its early vision of a classless state and total regimentation to a socio-economic form more like our own . Russia, he says, is moving from its vision of the classless society to a more like ours . Russia is now more like a nation more like
 The Soviet economy today is managed by an economic elite, comparable to ours in number and function . The major difference is their responsibility to the government rather than to shareholders .
 Moscow can afford to permit a larger private sector in its economy . More powerful now, now, and less threatened by civil revolt, Moscow is more powerful than ever .
 Moscow’s recent excursions into such ‘bourgeois’ devices as installment buying support this idea . Moscow has been experimenting with installment-buying devices .
 He believes that the practical requirements of coexistence are narrowing their differences . But he also believes that they are narrowing the differences .
 These narrowing differences, he says, also characterize all fields of thought, e.g. The narrowing differences are also seen in other fields, such as science .
 In the natural sciences, in which East and West scientists increasingly share methods and insights; In the social sciences, we find that bhe Soviets, by opposing our prevailing relativism, are actually cast into a more classical, conservative role .
 Even in religion, Soviet leaders are less totalitarian than they were, even in religion . They oppose Freudianism, and even Frommism for example, as grossly materialistic over-simplifications . Even in religious matters, they are not totalitarian .
 Sorokin says that they actually subsidize the 50-million-member Russian Orthodox church . Sorokin: The church subsidizes the 50 million members of the church .
 Russia’s officially espoused dialectical materialism, and despite our own formal espousal of idealism . All this, of course, is despite Russia's officially espousing dialectial materialism and despite its own formal .
 Sorokin believes the United States and U.S.R. increasingly share each other’s good and bad characteristics . Sorokin says the U.K. and the R.S.-R. share both their good and good characteristics .
 It means that, excluding irrational or stupid commitments to nuclear war, each society may grow into a third type of society serving human needs better than either does now . More hopefully, he adds, it means that each society will grow into an alternative to the current one .
 Kenneth A Rae of 74 Sylvester Avenue announces the en gagement of her daughter Judith Evelyn to A-2C Francis H Butler, son of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Butler .
 T.awtvnce Dallin of i>s, when Miss Patricia M Ficoci42 Salisbury Street and Chatham. j e llo. daughter of Mr and Mrs. T. Tawnce . T.T.awnce of I>s when Miss
 Winchester Teachers* Association recently held its annual daughter. Auj announce the engagement of their | gustine A Flcociello of 71 Swani If hrfhtn .
 Miss Rae is a graduate of Winchester High School, class of 1958 . She is the daughter of the late Kenneth A Rae .
 Fire and Crash Rescue Firefighting Academy in Denver, Colorado . Currently stationed at Hanscom Field, Bedford, Bedford .
 Miss Dallin is the granddaughter of the late sculptor, Cyrus E Dallsin, of Arlington, and also Mrs. Mrs. Dallsins .
 Ralph U Sawyer and the late Mr Sawyer were long time residents of Winchester, Winchester . Ralph U. Sawyer and Mrs Sawyer were both deceased . Mr Sawyer was a long time resident of Winchester .
 A Summer wedding is planned for a Summer wedding in Winchester, Pennsylvania . The couple will be married in July .
 The 2 o'clock ceremony was performed at the Blessed Sacrament Chapel by the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister performed the ceremony .
 The bride wore a waltz length gown of white satin and Chantilly lace made by her aunt .
 Her veil caught to a crown of pearls, and she carried white orchids and stephanotis . Her veil was caught to an orchid-shaped crown .
 Dorothy Ann Buddemeier of Baumholder, Germany, was matron of honor . Miss Barbara A Ficociello of Winchester was honorary maid of honor. Miss Barbara Ann Ficotiello was honorary Maid of Honor . Miss Dorothy Ann Buddemeier was mat
 William Gibbons was best man with Eugene M Dalton of Burlington, brother of the bridegroom, honorary best man . Eugene Dalton was brother of bride's sister . The bride's father was a member of the Burlington family .
 Dalton graduated from Boston College High School in 1955 . Dalton is serving with the Army in Europe .
 Miss rum,„ ( , Grate j tiful V.ns.m-Owen School, la the Mrs ' olu, BaUoy ' V:u I.HIun ""V Gr “va1leae. daughter of Mr and 1 <•
 Mr Roger Kenneth Kenneth Hoad was married to Sttlva1 nament ; and ill um jnuted most ofaon ot the late Mr and Mrs. Alb,, t C“ avulle.se of JO LedL 8ti( . allv adov
 Don1 tore P Curavicllo. dr., of West i (V, lively with a large floodlight. dr. Dr. Curvicllo, of West I (V) dr., is lively with large floodlights. Don1 has a large light bulb attached to
 I holilay season, uncle of the bride officiated at th ceremony &t which the Papu Blessing was bestowed on the newlyweds .
 Among other posts to be filled at this election will be two vacancies on the Board of Selectmen .
 As of the moment no future candidates for the post of Selectman have made their intentions known . No future candidates have yet to announce their intentions .
 Collector's postage stamps and albums now on sale at the Star office on all price levels . Collector’s postage stamps, albums now available at all prices .
 An excellent way to give youngsters a sense of geography and history and a constructive hobby . It's a great way to learn about geography, history and history .
 The altar was decorated with white gladioli, snapdragons, carnations and chrysanthemums . John W Ellison, rector of the church, officiated at the ceremony .
 Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore an embroidered white satin gown . The bride wore a portrait neckline, long pointed sleeves and bellshaped skirt .
 The bride’s train was of Watteau chapel length of matching embroidered satin lined with white taffeta . The bride's train was embroidered embroidered in a matching satin line .
 She wore a pillbox headdress of matching embroidered satin, and a ballerina-length veil of white illusion .
 She carried a cascade bouquet with a white orchid centerpiece, white carnations and stephanotis with ivy sprigs .
 Her gown was of red taffeta, with fitted bodice, scoop neckline, and short sleeve.s .s.s.
 It was of street length, with flared skirt and shirred back panels trimmed with self-material roses . It was also of street .
 She wore a circlet headdress of red tulle petals and pearls and a red face veil .
 She carried a Colonial bouquet of Mamie Eisenhower carnations outlined with variegat ed holly and trimmed with red satin ribbon streamers . The ceremony was held in Washington, DC .
 Bridesmaids were Miss Marilyn Casella of Medford, and Misses Madelyu Mouradian and Janice Fernald, both of Winchester . The bridesmaid's were Miss Casella and Miss Fernald of Medwell .
 They wore green taffeta gowns and headdresses matching that of the matron of honor . The matrons of honor were also in taffetta .
 Mr Richard H Brice of Swansea was best man . The couple carried colonial bouquets of red carnations .
 Mr John T MacLellan, brother of the bride, was the bridegroom . Douglas B Mullen and Donald P Ouelette of Boston; and Mr Richard L Haynes of Way land . Donald C Worthen and Robert E Wortshen, brothers of the
 The bride’s mother wore a streetlength fitted dress of gold brocade with a gathered left-side panel and a matching hat trimmed with gold rose . The bride's mother also wore a matching gold rose-trimmed dress .
 H Louise Worthen of Melrose wore a street-length afternoon dress of Alice-blue lace with a matching ribbon hat .
 Her corsage was of white miniature carnations and pink sweetheart roses . After the wedding ceremony a reception was held in Hadley Ball, New Hampshire .
 For her going-away suit, the bride wore a Chanel jacket of magenta and turquoise plaid with black frog closings .
 Her hat was a black velvet band trimmed with black velvet rose and u black face veil . She wore the hat was trimmed in black velvet and trimmed with a rose rose .
 The bride graduated from Winchester High School in I960 and is employed by the John Hancock Insurance Co. The bride is a graduate of Winchester high school . She is also employed by John Hancock insurance Co.
 The bridegroom graduated from the Joseph Case High School in Swansea in 1954 . He is employed by the Euldo Bros. in Swansea, Wales .
 The student is attending Bentley School of Accounting and Finance in Boston, Massachusetts . She is a member of the Boston-based accounting firm Bentley Co. Co. of Boston .
 John and Susan are majoring in Education and Susan in the Division of Continuing Education . John is major in Education at the University of Columbia University . Susan is majored in Continuing Education and John is a major in the Education Division at Columbia .
 Given in marriage by her father the bride wore a gown of pure white silk faille with laced front outlined in scalloped edging from the waistline to the cathedral train .
 The bride wore a silk handmade mantilla sent to her from Barcelona, Spain . The mantilla was sent from Barcelona and was sent to the bride .
 She carried mother-of-pearl hand painted missal outlined with white eucharis lilies and red roses bound with green satin .
 She wore a gown of cardinal red peau-de-de soie with princess front, bouffant back, and self rose ending in slight train . She wore the gown of a . gown of . cardinal red . peau de soie .
 She carried a casual spray of large spider finger mums and roses with rhinestone lilies of the valley bound with green satin .
 She wore a bouffant gown of cardinal red peau-de-soie in ballerina length, and a rhinestone tiara hold ing her chapel veil .
 Bridesmaids were Miss Marie Tirella and Rita Messina, cousins of the bride, and Dorothy Batehel der, and Loraine Guarino, niece of bridegroom, and Julie Gravallese niece of the groom .
 The bridesmaids were dressed the same as the maid of honor and carried large spider finger mums with rhinestones lilies of the valley .
 Ushers were Albert J and Ronald M Gravallese. brothers of the bride, Michael J Tirella cousin of bride; and Charles Falzone, brother-in-law of bridegroom. Ushers are Albert J. and Ronald .
 The bride’s motnev wore an ensemble of electric blue peau-desoie designed and made by Marie of Boston, with matching accessories .
 She carried two eucharis lilies with holly leaves on a white French beaded bag . She was accompanied by a pair of euchari lilies .
 Following the ceremony a re-ception was held at Sidney Hill Country Club in Newton, Newton . A buffet was held for the bride at the bride’s home after the ceremony .
 Newlyweds planned to spend seven days in the Poconos and two weeks cruising in the West Indies . Therafter, the newlyweds left on a wedding trip in which they planned to be seven days .
 The bridegroom attended Medford Schools, Newman Preparatory School and the Wagner School of Art . He is vice president of Sulvy’s Sportswear Co. in Boston .
 He is a member of the Basketball Writers' Association of America, the Football Writers' association of America and the New England Turfwriters' Association .
 Delicious refreshments consisting of ice cream, petits fours, and coffee were served . Food was served at the event .
 McCall Junior High ninth-grade vocal ensemble under the excellent direction of Mrs. Mrs. McCall . For this festive occasion the McCall Jr. High's 9th grade vocal ensemble performed under the supervision of Mrs McCall.
 Sopranos — Lynn Keppler, Deborah Nelson, Jean Hutchings, Carol Nash, Carla Ilutzenlaub Altos . Tenors — William Gustin, Barry Weeks, Hugh Fisher, Peter Harvey Basses . Portei* Mul ford, Walter Harwood
 The group of teachers in charge included the Misses Patricia O Doherty, Paula Y Caffey, Ann E Dolan, Betty M Gardner, Betty E Gardner, and Nerissa E Purrington .
 The association gratefully thanks the program committee for this deligfhful and social time . It was a social time for the association .
 Saturday Winches1 u-r police n«mM to a report neckt cheat and hi injurieS( ac . °‘ a "" “ “ ccWent al th * inte ™ ect,on I online to the polite report .
 Mr Mun . ay , laimed no in . lay, o . von venue, aite i '■ juries, police say . Tamos Mur; end> Mr Mun; end >
 Adams Terrace Restaurant is the brand new name for Carroll's Restaurant on Winchester Terrace which is under new management . The restaurant is open all day at the time of day .
 The waitresses heretofore associated with the restaurant will remain, but the policy of food service, Mr Adams says, will change .
 From now on, food will be cooked right on the premises and the restaurant will remain open from 7:30m. to £:00m. The restaurant will be closed from 7.30m .
 Mr Adams has served the Government for four years as a dietitian . Mr Adams brings considerable exxperience to his new Winchester restaurant .
 Adams Terrace Restaurant will be more than pleased with the new atmosphere and higher quality food which will be served at the new restaurant . Adams is confident that Winchester people will be happy with the move .
 Mr Adams tells the Star that Grand Opening plans are already formulated . Mr Adams says plans for the Grand Opening are already in place .
 The restaurant is operating a full schedule even as the changes are being introduced . In the meantime, the restaurant is still operating as normal .
 Mr Adams has the good wishes of Winchester residents and merchants as he begins management of his new restaurant . Mr Adams was in collision with a 1960 Lincoln Convertible driven by Mrs. Adams .
 The Lincoln struck a directional sign on the corner of Fletcher and Wildwood Streets, knocking it down . Police report the Lincoln lurched across the street striking the sign .
 The Lincoln came to a stop when it hit the traffic island between Willow and Wildwood Streets . The Lincoln was hit by a traffic island .
 "Toys For Tots" is extended until Wednesday, December 20th . The collection of new and good toys for unfortunate children has been extended .
 A diamond-set Omega is an unforgettable gift for a lifetime or proud possession . O OMEGA 14K GOLD WATCH is a diamond-setting Omega .
 "Omega Omega" is the world-famous Omega Omega Omega . The Omega Collection is a collection of artfully-illustrated artworks .
 Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION’s FUNDS SAFEGUARD the nr«t egg of your Aoeial, fraternal or church organization hy opening an Account in the Winchester Cooperative Hank. For your SHOPPING CON
 Your elub*n funds will earn a nice profit, he fully insured and readily available . Elub*,n funds are available to buy and sell .
 Winchester Co-operative Bank 19 CHURCH STREET Let's Co-operate and Keep Winchester Streets Clean Newsy Paragraphs Newsy Newsy
 Chevrolet pickup truck reported stolen from the side of Neno’s Market Monday morning was recovered later on in the lot behind the White Spot at Four Corners .
 The following Winchester girls have been accepted at Mt. Mt. Olympus . When you plan to replace your present car with a new > Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car please call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 or at Mirak Chevrolet Arlington, Mission 3-
 Fitzgerald Fuel Co., PArkview 9-3000.tf Maternity Sweaters, all types. For Fuel Oil, Phone Fitzgerald Fuel Company. For more information, call Fitzgerald fuel Co. Fitzgerald.com .
 John A Volpe was named honorary President of the Massachusetts Girl Scouts at the organizations recent annual meeting at Cedar Hill, Waltham . Volpe is a member of the organization .
 Bennington, a unit of the First Fleet, took part in recent exercises off Southern California . Bennington is one of several units of First Fleet taking part in the exercises .
 Mr Thomas Raphael of 5 Oneida Road was honored Monday at the Arthur D Little Co. in Cambridge for his work in developing pulp pellets .
 The Little Co. holds semi-annual luncheons to give recognition to inventors on its consulting staff .
 Jameson of Robinson Park was awarded a letter for participation in freshman track last spring . Springfield College awards were held December 1 at Springfield College .
 Loring P Gleason of 7 Worthen Road visited Sarasota Jungle Gardens November 5 during their recent vacation on Florida’s Lower West Coast .
 George B Field of Maxwell Road has returned home after an early-winter visit with friends in Florida . Field has returned to Maxwell Road after a visit to Florida with friends .
 Mr George A Goolkasian attended the Annual Alumni Banquet of Phi Delta Chi fraternity of the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy at the Parker House December 5 .
 Winchester firemen responded about 3:20 to a report of a brush fire on the High School grounds and had the fire under control promptly . Winchester High School was home to students and staff .
 Collect* Club Art Group will moot at the Boston MuHcum of Fine Arts in the Huntington Avenue lobby at 10:15m. December 15, Friday, Friday .
 Congregations’ Evergreen Dance with Norman White’s Orchestra at First Congregational Church . Norman White's Orchestra will perform at the event .
 Richard V Murphy of Myrtle Terrace, announce the birth of their first child, David Harris Murphy, on Dee Dee at the Winchester Hospital, Winchester .
 Peter Farnsworth of Seattle, Washington announce the birth of their fourth child, third son, Donald William . Donald William was born on November 28 . Farnsworth is the Farnsworth family's fourth child .
 Mr and Mrs. French of Winchester and Mr John Collier of Tyngsboro . Mr French and Mr Collier were married at the time of the marriage .
 Michael Francis was born November 30 at the Choate Memorial Hospital . William P Holland of 74 Arlington Road Woburn wish to announce the birth of their fifth j child .
 Wallace F Caldwell of Manhattan, Kansas announce the birth of their second child, first daughter, Anne Marie . Anne Marie Caldwell was born December 4 .
 Christmas Cantata And Pageant At Second Church This Sunday night . “The Story I of Bethlehem” by William R Spruce will be presented at the 1 1 Second Congregational Church, j The Chancel Choir under the dir, ection .
 The parts of Mary and Joseph will be played by Miss Nancy Clark and Mr Stanley Cruwys respectively .
 Everyone is invited to attend this service of Christmas music and pageantry . The service will be held in front of the crowd at the end of the evening .
 The program 1 1 might help those who attend to j I celebrate the real meaning of the advent season . It is the desire of the participants that this program 11 might help .
 The ‘Holiday Hop’ will be held on Friday, December 29, from 9 to 1, at St. Mary’s Hospital in New Jersey .
 As always, the Christmas dance promises to be a very enjoyable evening . John O’Grady, Helen and Charles McLaughlin will be at the dance .
 In order to facilitate arrangements for refreshments, please plan now to attend and make reservations early .
 For the high schooler, faculty o-r student, stationery imprinted with the Winchester Sachem in red . For the staff, faculty and faculty members, faculty stationery will be imprinted in red. For high schoolers, faculty members will be stationery .
 Dee., 19, 19, and 20 Minute Steaks 99c lb. Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday Special, Dee. 19c and 20c Steaks . C FAMOUS ASSORTED COOKIES P k 829e, 829c P k S29e P k
 The prayers of this family go with you . -Letters have also come to the Winchester legislator from Florida .
 New Jersey, Vermont and New York are among other states to join Massachusetts . The state's largest city, Boston, is one of the largest in Massachusetts .
 I have received your letter of December 4 in which you conditionally accept my invitation to appear before the House Committee on Ruleu and explain the statements attributed to you in the public press in connection with your recent appearance on a C.B.S. telecast . I have also received
 The Rules Committee of either branch or the joint Rules Commit tee of the General Court, in matters of this nature are held privately in executive session .
 The House Committee on Rules is duty to demand that the member making such allegations explain his position in full and produce evidence he may have, if any, to support his charges .
 The House Committee on Rules must then determine what action it should recommend in its report to the full membership of the House .
 You’ll find our wide selection of modern formals perfect for the occasion . They’re designed for comfort as well as elegance . You'll find a wide selection .
 President Obama says he will hold executive session hearings in executive session . He says the wisdom of such sessions cannot be denied .
 All members of the House, including yourself, have a right to be protected against unwarranted and unjustified remarks and innuendoes, the House Speaker says .
 I'm sure you will agree with me upon reflection that this course of action is in the best interests of all concerned . From your yearjf of service in the House and your knowledge of the legislative process, I am sure you . will agree . with me, I hope .
 You may, of course, avail yourself of the opportunity to be represented by such legal counsel as you desire . You may also avail yourself .
 arrangements will be made for a stenographic report to be taken of the entire hearing .
 "I want to accord you every courtesy in the conduct of the hearing," he writes . "Such safeguards, together with the presence of members of your party on the Committee and in attendance at the hearing, should certainly assuage any doubts, if such existed"
 I have no desire to preside over a kangaroo court, or for that matter a Roman circus for the benefit of the press . I'm not sure if I would preside at such a court, but I would rather be a court for the press rather than a court .
 I can find no compelling reason for altering our traditional policy and holding a public hearing at this time . I can't find a compelling reason to hold such a hearing, he says .
 I have invited you to appear to explain in full the statements attributed to you originally in the Boston Traveler of Friday, December 1st . While I do not as yet have a complete transcript of your remarks, I have respectfully invited you .
 "In all matters of this kind, the public is properly aroused and indignant," says President Obama . "I'm sure the public will be properly aroused," he says .
 Legislation is not necessary in the past, nor does it now justify what can only be regarded as the unwise and precipitous course of legislative action which you have suggested . But this fact does not justify what has been described as 'unwise' and ' precipitous'
 Ample opportunity will exist if you can substantiate your serious charges concerning your fellow legislators, to bring your position to the attention of the public .
 If, at a later point, a public hearing appears warranted on the basis of your testimony at the hearing, such a hearing will, of course, be conducted . A public hearing will be conducted. If such a case appears warranted, it will be held .
 I have no alternative but to extend to you once again an invitation to appear before the House Committee on Rules in the Speaker’s Office on Monday, December 11 .
 From our famous collection of magnificent rings . . . featuring the finest in diamonds at remarkably moderate prices .
 Prices Include Tax $350 . Member American Gent Society nso ft Jewelers Inc. American Gent society nsoft Jewelers .
 I greatly appreciate your detailed letter of December 5. 1 regret to say, however, I still do not find your reason for a closed hearing convincing . I still find your case for a private hearing convincing. I regret that I still don't think you should have a hearing in public .
 In my opinion, the interrogations you propose to conduct will serve the public best if they are held in the open . The interrogations should be held in an 'open' environment, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I must decline your invitation to appear before the Rules Committee on December 11 . Since you have ruled otherwise, I must turn down the invitation .
 Should you decide later to have an open hearing, I will be most happy to come before the Committee and answer questions to the best of my ability, he said .
 The attorney general defended the position taken by Richard Cardinal Cushing on the matter . Richard Cushing has been accused of sexual misconduct .
 Cardinal calls T.V. crime documentary a “betrayal” of the city . In a speech last week he made a general statement of confidence in the Boston police force .
 Mr McCormack said that he felt the Cardinal’s remarks had been misconstrued .
 Cardinal Cushing was not saying that we should permit gambling, but only that people do gamble, he said . He said he was concerned that people gamble, not that people should be allowed to .
 McCormack said police should be punished even more severely than regular citizens . McCormack agreed that it did not condoning such action on the part of police .
 Attorney General said he had made definite plans concerning his political future, but declined to comment on them . The attorney general said that he had plans for political future .
 He also said that, party politics aside, he and Governor Volpe enjoyed amicable relations for which each was criticised by both Democrats and Republicans . Mr Volpe said he and Gov. Volpe were both criticised for their actions .
 When the attorney general had completed his talk he was given a standing round of applause and was presented with the traditional Rotary letter opener .
 Florence Crittenton Christmas Meeting held on Friday, December 8 . Winchester Circle of the Florence Grittenton League was held at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Crittenten .
 Meyer's home was attractively decorated for the season and provided a perfect setting for the meeting . Meyer’s home was attractingively decorated with the season's best food and drink .
 Woodford Wilcox reported on the successful sewing meeting held in November . The meeting was held at the end of November . Wilcox reports the meeting was successful .
 Henry Marchionette, service representative, gave a fine report of the various activities’ at Crittenton Hastings House . Henry spoke at the end of the speech .
 Co-chairmen of the Bazaar gave a report of the success of the pre-sale held at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Watson .
 Lester Gustin on November 15 as well as a full report of the sale in at the John Hancock Building on November 29 . Gustin will give a report on the sale of the building on November 30 .
 Fred Cardin, Ways and Means Chairman announced that her plans call for a dessert and bridge party to be held in the spring .
 Monbleau gave a very entertaining account of a recent trip to the Scandanavian countries . He stresses particularly the hospitality of these countries . Monbleaux gave an entertaining account .
 Hospitality as a topic fitted into the Christmas atmosphere of the meeting . Hospitality was a topic of discussion at the meeting in a festive atmosphere .
 A beautiful tea followed the program and a beautiful tea was prepared and served by Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth .
 The Winchester Star offers a $4.00 coupon coupon code . MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. MAIL this Coupon to the WSU Star .
 Theresa Balclosed with Benediction, lacci, Georgette Berbuhe, Sally . The social which followed im'ause .
 Mary Harrington, Prefect, largaret Hoffman, Eleanor Leverextended a warm welcome to all no, Mary Lewis, Grace Creamer* the guests .
 Two door prizes were won by Margaret Hoffman and Elenor Woodbrldge . Margaret Hoffman won the two door prizes .
 Delicious refreshments were served by chairman, Peg Grotty, co-chairman Eleanor Repucci and their committee .
 Mary's of Winchester and j Saint Mary’s of Hull remained in | a tie for the top berth in the CYO Hockey League . The two teams fought to a 2-2 draw last Sunday j at McHugh Forum .
 Mary’s of Hull wasted no time in grabbing a 1-0 lead when a centering puss was slid into the Winchester net at 67 seconds of the first frame . Winchester had a goal of 67 seconds from the start of the game .
 The remainder of the period was scoreless and featured by close checking on the part of both clubs . Both teams scored in the first half .
 Mary’s of Winchester took command of the second period and I allowed the opposition only two shots on goal . Jim Moran and Dick Norberg repeatedly bombardj ed the Hull net only to be frustratrat| ed by the spectacular goaltending of Runny Cararra .
 Hull take a 2-0 lead in the first half of the second half . Hull score an early goal to take the lead . Hull continue to score in the final minute of the game .
 With slightly more than two minutes remaining in the contest, Dave Hession found the mark after a scramble in front of the Hull cage . Winchester closed the gap to 2-1 with two minutes left to play .
 Winchester January’ltb marks the opening of Winches tor’s 1902 College Freshman face Coach Isidore 1 . Lit lino's boys here til March 24th when the State Team Championships will he ceptions .
 Winchester’s team was undefeated until the midpoint of the season when it lost some key men due to injuries . Winchester's team lost some of its key players due to injury during the season . Winchester was undefeated in the season until mid-season .
 Winchester was beaten only by a small margin by three teams that it had previously beaten . Winchester placed fifth at the State meet at Minnechuugh Regional .
 Only three of last year’s key men were lost through graduation . Many new sophomores were gained, some of whom have already made varsity .
 Springfield College Freshmen, 7:30 January 12, January 19, at Newton North, 3:30 . February 3 — Wakefield, February 10 — Framingham, 1:00 February 16 — Minnechaug Regional, February 23 . March 3 — at Wellesley, 7
 Melrose Wallops Wallops Winchester Crawford Memorial Church Basketball sextet mexpe serve basis . Meets with only a few exhis year, for the first time, an admission admission . Winchester . Crawford Memorial Memorial Church is located in Winchester .
 Chester defenseman out in front and rebounded by Winchester goalie . Winchester goalie. Chester defenseman. Winchester defenseman out of front . Winchester defenseman . Winchester goalkeeper. Winchester goalkeeper . Winchester defender .
 The Sachems picked up slightly in the second period as they made seven shots to the eight of Melrose . Melrose scored three goals in little more than a minute from 4:39 to 5:57 of the period .
 Paul Ryan kept Winchester from being shutout on a pretty goal as he drove by the strong Melrose defense to hit the strings with a quick shot . Paul Ryan scored the goal in the first half of the game .
 Randy Kazazian, Carl Bertolucci Skitchy Fiore had and Master praise for the growth and progress of the Lodge’s Scout Troop . The hustle was the hustle of the boys .
 When first chartered two years ago there were five members and this number has grown to forty . Forty-five members of the group have been chartered since 2011 .
 The members of the Lodge agreed to purchase proper neckerchiefs for the Scouts . They also agreed to make Bruce Garvey as happy as possible while at the Winchester Hospital .
 "We of the Sons of Italy wish him a very rapid recovery. Although Bruce is in a cast, his spirits are high," says the Italian club .
 The Lodge members also were whole-heartedly in favor of remembering the families of deceased members of the S.O.I. by sending them Christmas plants . The Lodge also sent Christmas plants to the deceased members' families .
 Venerable Frank “Boss” Dattilo presented beautiful sweaters to the members of the championship Sons of Italy softball team .
 Dressmakers Sizes 34 46 from 3.98 to 29.98 . Y GARLAND • BANFF DARLENE • BROUNIE # OLYMPIC Roth (Aussie unci Dressmakers)
 Winchester's St. Mary’s Pucksters defeated the team that has paid off for Winchester in the past 3-2 win . Winchester's win over the team was just not enough for the Winchester Puckster .
 Melrose were just a superior team on Saturday afternoon . Each of their goals was the victim of some poor defensive play .
 St. Mary’s hockey team staved off a last period surge by defending champions, St. Louis-St. Mary's . Defending champions, the defending champions of the U.S. hockey team, were defeated by St.Mary's last-minute surge .
 C.Y.O. hockey season begins with 3-2 victory over St. Anne's of Readville . C. Y.O.'S. hockey team wins season opener at St. Mary's .
 St. Mary’s team grabbed a 1-0 lead when Frank Manzie passed to Jim Moran . Moran had no trouble in beating the Readville goalie . Moran scored a goal for the Mary's team .
 Mary’s captain got his second goal, taking a pass from “Pepper” Cunningham and sliding the disc neatly under the falling Readville net minder .
 “Pepper’ Cunningham lifted the puck over the prostrate goal tender in the final frame of the game . The St.S. Blues won the game 2-1 at home on Saturday night .
 The Noonan School Chapter of the Community School Association of Winchester held its winter meeting on December 5 . The meeting was held in Medford, Medford . With four minutes to go, Mary's Mary’s had a 3-0 lead .
 President of the Association introduced the guest speaker of the evening, Mrs. Mrs. Collins . John F Collins, President of . the Association, President . of the . Association . introduced the . guest speaker . Mrs Collins .
 Mary's coach, John Falla, returned his first unit to the ice . Some solid defensive work by Dennis Gritfiin and Jackie Kean, plus some brilliant back-checking by Jim Moran was able to contain the opposition .
 Winchester Elementary Schools have two Adjustment Counsellors to help children adjust to school . Winchester Elementary School has two such AdjustmentCounsellors .
 Keville gave a most informative talk on children’s problems in School adjustment and the methods used in Winchester to solve them . Keville talked about children's problems in school adjustment .
 Falla expects that the addition of Dick Norberg at right wing will give his squad greater balance and depth for the games coming up . Falla: "I think the addition will give us greater balance"
 Norberg was forced out of the Readville contest due to illness . Norberg, a former W H S. varsity player, was forced to leave the game due to an illness .
 Pa pea-mate, Sheaffer’s, Parker, Ester brook, and Script o pens and fillers available at the Star office .
 We have been advisers to the leading skiers of the East for a generation — let us assist you in the selection of correct ski equipment and clothing . OSBORN ROMAGORA Established in 1930 .
 MELROSE and Brookfield, Our policy is to sell only the latest quality equipment at reasonable prices . We sell everything at a reasonable price .
 Since the first ball was rolled in the league, California has been in the driver’s seat, and only one week remains before the end of the first half . California has won the league in the past two seasons .
 Bowling 1 for this team are Frank DiMambro, Jim Faietta, Frank Dattilo, Mario Buzzotta, Angelo Amico, Rudy Fiore, and Richie Giacalone . Bowling 1 is Frank DiDambro .
 In the last outing the league leaders split 2-2 with runner-up Notre Dame, and the two remain in their respective positions . The two teams remain in the top two spots in the league .
 The rest of the teams remain in the same positions in the standings as a week ago . Army climbed up one notch one notch from twelfth to eleventh while Bates is found one place lower to twelfth position .
 Bates lost four points to Penn the last time out with the help of Gerry Cerulli and Louie Del Solio . Bates lost 4 points in the last round to Penn last week .
 Holy Cross left the stop for 1 PAY AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION service on all CHRYSLER BUILT CARS ROCHFORD MOTORS, Inc. In the match between Holy Cross and Army, the former left the STOP FOR 1 PAYAUTOMatIC
 A 3-1 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles . The game was played in the first half .
 Ilokie Procopio is still in his prime although his team dropped four points to Yale . The team's loss to Yale is the latest in a series of upsets against the likes of Yale University .
 Richie Bucci was a good man for Yale to have around too with his 9cores of 1 18108-102 . Bucci played for Yale in the 1990s .
 California vs Army, Holy cross vs Notre Dame, Yale vs Harvard vs Harvard and Alabama vs Boston College . Important matches being rolled as you read the column are important matches as you write .
 Two attendance prizes were drawn last week and the winners were Bill Maggio and Dan Gattineri . The winners of the two attendance prizes will receive $1,000 each .
 Mat. Mat. at 1:30 TARZAN’s HIDDEN JUNGLE and the Bowery Boys in BOWERY BATTALION Starts WED., DEC. 20th .
 Winchester, Mast. Mast. 43 Church Street, Winchester, is located at 43rd Church Street . Mast. Church Street is located on the edge of Winchester's historic Mast.
 C.C.A.’s. clubs, car pools and busses used to get them to Wakefield and Malden Y.M. clubs . C.A.'s. club and car pools were used to transport the children .
 Harry Mugford, a Winchester 14-year-old, broke the Malden Y.M.C.A. pool record with a time of 36. sec. for the 60-yard Butterfly .
 You need a MOTO-MOWER 20"" DELUXE POWER PROPELLE SNOW THROWER Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3V4 HP. Breeze .
 An adjustable slip clutch protect? . 1 against chain breakage or IL \ impeller damage. 1 . 1 .
 O’Grady, 11, is a local girl on the Wakefield 160yard freestyle team which recently beat Newton . Wakefield beat Newton in the 160 yard freestyle competition .
 Ellen Kirkpatrick, a local butterfly, placed second in her 40-yard event, and also tied second in diving . She also tied for second place in diving and third place .
 Winchester 12-year-old swam with Wakefield Racerettes to defeat Newton . Emily Mugford swam for the Wakefield racerettes .
 She placed second in the 80-yard individual medley and swam breatstroke for the 160-yard medley team which won . She also swam for the team that won the 160/160/160 medley .
 Wakefield’s competitive groups are Russell Wild, Peter Wild, John O’Grady, Paul McLaughlin, Martha Rooney, Kathleen Sullivan and Marie Mainberger . Wakefield also training with Wakefield's competitive groups .
 “Frosty’s” Rivinius, “Geff” and “Ted” Bannister are among the Wakefield pool instructors . “Teddy” von Rosenvinge is a member of Wakefield's pool staff .
 Great numbers of children denied this training by the absence of a heated pool in our town . No doubt, many others are seeking use of nearby pools to develop in this fine sport .
 Youth Committee will have some solution in their report at the next Town Meeting . Let us hope the Youth Committee has some solution to the problem .
 Work relief programs have no real purpose and serve no significant function, says Senator Hartke . The welfare case volume can be decreased by a sufficiency of jobs without discrimination, says Hilliard .
 Winchester High School Musical Or ganizations and “Curtain and Cue” will present their annual program . Admission is only fifty cents . The evening of holiday entertainment starts at 8:00m.
 First performing will be the Mixed Glee Club, followed by “Christmas Story,” a play in one act . First performing is the Mixed . Glee . Club, "Christmas Story," will perform on December 25 .
 The play features Jon Abbott, Diane Watson, Judy McKinley, Tom Bates, Maida Uhlig, and James Reid . The play is directed by John McLaughlin and Mimi Barnes .
 After intermission, the Orchestra, the Double Sextet, the Brass Quartet, and the Mixed Glee Club will perform . The Orchestra will perform after intermission .
 The program will be closed with familiar carols by the Glee Clubs and the audience . The show will be concluded with familiar Christmas carols .
 Members of the Jades team were radiantly happy and quite relaxed in bowling last week . I Bowling League .
 Fine bowling, girls, namely, Captain Ann Caggiano, Gloria Monterisi, Mae Rotondi, Vi Bruno and Bette Cammarata .
 Four team aimed for the second place position, but the Rubies continued their winning streak . The Rubies now have a confident enough lead for second place in the world .
 Captain Rose DcTeso, Virginia Macinanti, Jennie Amico, Anita Dolloff and Mary Fiorelli are among the writers of the new book .
 Terry leads the league of 50 bowlers in individual averages . He holds the record high-three string of 290 . Terry holds a record high of three consecutive matches for the league .
 The children of all departments of the Church School are invited to attend this annual event . The event is an annual event held by the Church Church School .
 The Winchester Children’s Theatre will present a presentation by the Winchester Children's Theatre . The main attraction of the evening will be a presentation of the Winchester children's Theatre under the direction .
 Sachems Looking Forward To a Good Season with nearly 65 boys out for basketball this season . Sachem looking forward to a good season with 65 boys .
 The Sachems are looking forward to next week’s opener vs Woburn . After making the final cut just last week, the Sachem are looking ahead to the season opener .
 After scrimmages with Gloucester, Medford, Watertown, Malden Catholic, and Winthrop, things look to shape up pretty good .
 Len Tim pone, Jim Devnney, Richard Bond, Mike Bellino and John Peckhain will start at the forward positions . Richard Bond will be Richard Bond at center and Mike Bellinino at guard positions . Len Timpone will play for the rest of the season
 John Lane, Charlie Tofuri, Bob Donlon, Bob Watson, and Bob Watson will back up the side . A strong bench backing up these boys will be made up of John Lane .
 The Jayvees look like they are a strong bet to take the Middlesex title . The Jayves are currently fourth in the Premier League .
 Their starting five will probably be Chuck Anderson and Bill Branley at the forward positions . Their starting line-up will be likely to be Anderson and Branley .
 Bob Foley, Roger Schipellite, Ron Keane and Mike O’Dair share the guard positions . Bob Foley at center, and Ron Keane at center of the guards positions .
 Backing them up will be some good looking sophomores such as Pete Fahey, Vic Papadinis, Dick Faieta, Bob Branley, Buddy Rotondi and many others . Backing the team is some of the best-looking players in history .
 The Sachems have looked good in scrimmages, losing only to a good Medford team . The team is looking good in their scrimmings .
 They are looking forward to winning the Middlesex title and they have a pretty good chance . They are hoping to win the title in Middlesex .
 The Sachems are also looking forward to their opener next Tuesday with Woburn . They face the Welsh side in their first game of the season .
 The Sachems are looking forward to opening the season with a win . Although the Tanners have their starting team back, they are looking to win their first game .
 The Sachems are trying to get a game with Peabody who is in the Essex County League . They have an open date December 26, and are hoping for a game against Peabby .
 Winchester’s skaters return to the ice wars with a game against arch-foe Belmont in a Middlesex League encounter at three o’clock at the Lynn Sports Center on Saturday . Next Saturday, Winchester's skaters will play Sachems at Lynn .
 Belmont re-bounded from a 7-0 loss to Melrose and is looking for the Sachem scalp this weekend . Belmont is looking to bounce back from the loss to the Melrose loss .
 The sophomore starter was injured in last Saturday's debacle with Melrose . He was back in the starting lineup for the first time since his injury .
 Attendance at the games continues to increase with three hundred more fans attending last Saturday than the week before . Three hundred more people attended last Saturday's games .
 Fifteen hundred people were in the Arena last Saturday . More than 100 people are expected this weekend .
 Sachems ’61-’62 Hoop Roster includes Mike Bellino, John Peckham, Richard Bond, John Lane, Charlie Tofuri, Tom Callahan, George Neumann, Robert Donlon, Dave Money, Richard Casanova . Sachem �
 Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Christmus if this holiday is to be a happy occasion in accordance with the American tradition .
 Parker Brothers Trademark for Its Detective Game Equipment . Adults, teenagers — all want it. Adults, teens, teenagers .
 Mr Jay Finn, former manager of Winchester Theatre, will be opening up a new real estate and insurance broker shop on or about the first of the year . First Congregational Senior Chior Jay Finn Plans New Insurance Office .
 Mr Finn will do business chiefly through the Boyd, Dalton, and C hurch agency in Boston, which has been doing business since 18(15)
 In his new office Mr Finn will write policies for all kinds of insurance, including life, casualty, fire and auto insurance .
 He will be occupying the quarters to be vacated at the first of the year by J Arthur Deering . Deering will be taking over the quarters vacated by Deering at the start of 2015 .
 Mr Deering will be moving into the office formerly occupied by the W Allan Wilde Agency . He is married to the former Sally Elizabeth Sherburne and has one boy, Bradford J who is 2 and one half years old .
 The Star asked Jay whether his new business would have any “motto,’s any special trade slogan . Jay says he has no plans to have a slogan for his new company .
 I’ll try to give the best personal service I can, and that I will always be candid as to what 1 think would be the best policy for a customer to buy. Let’s just say that I won’t try to be candid about what I think
 Cantata At the First Baptist Church . The celebration of Christ's birth always brings with it the renewal of man’s spirit, a renewal of joy .
 The story of this revelation is old but ever new, for it is relieved each year by those who have faith in it and who, in the faith, look forward to Easter as the fulfillment of time and life .
 The senior choir will present Healey Willan’s “The Mystery of Bethlehem” A fresh interpretation of this ancient text through the medium of music . The choir will perform a fresh interpretation .
 This contemporary cantata, written for chorus and soloists, will be sung at morning worship, Sunday, December 17, at 10:45 .
 The soloists will be Hazel F O’Donnell, soprano; and David Ashton, bari tone . Hazel F. O'Donnell will sing solo soloists; David Ashton will sing baritone; Hazel O‘Donnell, soprano .
 In addition to the cantata, the offertory anthem will be “Behold, I Bring You Glad Tidings” by Maurice Greene . The cantata will be performed by the choir .
 The classic simplicity of this early anthem is emphasized by a soprano-alto duet which will be sung by Hazel O’Donnell and Nalora Steele . Hazel O'Donnell will sing the classic simplicity .
 The Introit for the service will be “Gloria In Excelsis” by Martin Shaw . The Intimated for the . service will . be ‘Glorian In Excelis’ by Martin . Shaw .
 Christmas Vespers A Beautiful Service . Keep your typewriter in place with an Unda-Wunda typewriter pad .
 The Literature Group of the Fortnightly met on Wednesday, December (J) at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . The group met on December 31, 2013 .
 Marion Littlefield extended a word of greeting to the members, especially the new guests . Mrs. Littlefield then turned the meeting over to Mrs. Marion . Littlefield .
 Barnard presented a most interesting paper on the poetry of the Civil War Period . She illustrated her talk with examples of old books published during this time .
 The combined Senior Choirs under the direction of Mr Robert A White provided the inspiration for the Christmas Vespers .
 Dwight D. Cart, D.D., read from the Scripture, and his closing words “Praise ye the Lord” from the 150th Psalm were the affirmation of the purpose of the service .
 Yuko Hayashi, Church Organist, played the Prelude and Postlude and accompanied the choir with a mastery of the unique problems of the organ in this church .
 Robert H Anderson of 8 Winslow Road, Winchester, guest harpist, played beautifully a selection of Christmas Carols and provided a lovely accompaniment .
 Eschewing accompaniment for much of the service and singing in unison, that most difficult way of all, for considerable portions, the singers were most effective . The singers sang in unison for the first time .
 The phrasing quality and the voice control indicated that Mr White has carefully disciplined this choir . Mr White's carefully disciplined choir, he said .
 His communication with members and through the members to the audience is articulate indeed . He said: "His communication with . members and . through the . members of the audience was articulate indeed."
 “A Ceremony of Carols” was the musical high point of the service . “O Magnum Mysterium” and “Ye Watchers and Ye Holy Ones” were also lovely .
 Following the service all were invited to a social coffee hour in j Chidley Hall by the Friendship I Guild of the Women’s Association .
 Phil is a junior at Harvard College and because of his contacts with college thinking his talks at Forum always have special interest . Phil is also a senior at Harvard University . Phil says he has a lot of contacts with colleges thinking his talk at Forum will always be relevant .
 Larry Archibald and Charles Irwin will be chaplains . Bill Palmer and Peter Sewall will be deacons and Neal Baker and Bruce Carpenter will be ushers . Charles Irwin and Bill Palmer will serve as deacons .
 Forum Dramatics Committee will present their Christmas play ‘Reindeer on the Roof’ by Mildred Hark and Noel McQueen . Forum Dramatic Committee will perform their play at 7:00m. in Chidley Hall .
 The student directors of the play are Dianne Watson and May Mumma . James Hollinshead as dramatics adviser the student director is Dianne Watson . The play is set to be shown at the end of the year .
 The cast includes Dick Starkweather, Margie Purvis, Reed Lowry, Sue Keppler, Nancy Hollinshead, Christine Cooper, Steve Emery, Roberta Kirkpatrick, Marcia .
 The play is being presented for Forum members, their parents and friends . It will be followed by a social hour in Chidley Fireside arrangements for which are being made .
 Ruth Beckley and her decorations committee are at work to make the Mistletoe Dance on December 27 a colorful affair . The event will take place on December 26 .
 Winchester Unitarian Choir under the direction of Mary Ran ton ton Witham continues its series of pre-service programs this Sunday December 17 . Unitarian Christmas Music will be performed at Winchester's Unitarian Church .
 The soloists are Estelle McNeely, soprano; Margaret Worcester, contralto; William Jeffery, tenor; Sidney C Blanchard, Jr. baritone. Estelle . McNeely is the soloist .
 This musical offering with special lighting ef | feels is an annual event in The Church of the Open Bible now located in Burlington .
 Last year it attracted so many that late comers were unable to get into the old structure in Wob urn . Last year there were so many visitors to the site that it was impossible to get in .
 The program consists of ap propriate Bible readings inter spersed with musical numbers and illustrated with color slides . The program includes Bible readings and musical numbers .
 This unique program portrays in Scripture, pictures and song the inspiring story of Jesus from, Man ger to Throne .
 The special lighting effects also reflect the various moods and Gospel themes throughout the service .
 In addition to the familiar Christmas carols, the songsters will sing numbers which vividly portray the many events and teachings in the minis try of Jesus .
 The Sa viour’s birth, boyhood, parables miracles, trial, crucifixion, resurrection and ascension are all in eluded in this stirring program . The public is cordially invited to attend .
 Antique Study Group will meet in the Rich Room of the library at 7:80 on December 19 .
 Real Estate — Mortgages Insurance PA rk view 9-1492 augl 2 -tf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEWELRY HEALTH
 The large rooms downstairs, including the deluxe kitchen and library, just radiate charm . The deluxe kitchens and library are ideal for gracious entertaining . The dining dining room is located in the heart of the dining room .
 JOHN B MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED” Homeowner’s PACKAGE POLICY More Coverage at Less Cost 1 Mt. Wolff, PA 9-0172 Mr. Gilley, Manager James % Tvefref .
 Y'crnon Street PA 9-3400 novl0-tf For Rent . On l lie shore of edge of edge Pond in . im liester Center .
 Each apartment has a living room, dining room, kitehen, two bedrooms, and hath, plus a full basement for hobbies or play area .
 One-and-a-half baths, garage, kitchen with countertop stove and many lniilt, ins not found in the average home . Garage, kitchen, garage and many other features not found on average .
 Fireplaced living room, dining room, lavatory, good kitchen, and glass-in porch . Glassed in porch . Fireplated living room .
 Three bedrooms, ceramic-tile-tile, basement play room, storage room, and one-car garage for just $21,500 .
 Attractive pre-war Cape offers large living room, dining room, modern electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor .
 Unusual four-bedrqom-, 2 L* -bath home with den in secluded wooded area 'near Washington School' Four-bedroom, two-bath home has den with den .
 Long, rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shingle English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline . One of ROYAL BARRY WILLS’ FINEST .
 Large reception hall with graceful curved stairway, step-down 17x28 baywindowed fireplaced/ living room, panelled den, panelling den, 20-foot fireplaced dining room, all-electric built-in kitchen, jalousied porch, powder room,
 First-floor sun room, three nice bedrooms on second floor, garage, and pleasant lot all add up to a very nice buy at this price .
 Woburn auglO-tf CARPENTERS Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters & Gutters, Painting, Plastering & Masonry .
 ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 . Well-seasoned Oak & Maple .
 Metal Furnace* Removed, Iron, Rags, also Rubbish Removal. Metal Furnaces* Removed from Iron, Iron and Rags. Also removed from Iron Furnace.
 Free ESTIMATES WE 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augl2-tf WALTER J JOHNSON PAINTING Interior and Exterior PAPERING PA 9-6014 nov9-tf James P Barry WINCHESTER Painter &
 Station W Miron, aero blue, w. tiren, radio and heater, trailer hitch, well cared for . Call 0 Liver 8-3298. nov30-4t .
 Complete net World Rook EncycliJpcdin in now nearly unused condition at half price . Complete net world-renowned encyclopedic in now almost unused condition . At half price.
 Late 1961 Chevrolet Sports Impnlit.-door, jewel blue, white wall tires, immaculate condition . For SALE — a late 1961 Chevrolet Sport Impn lit.-door . Jewel blue and jewel blue .
 'ail MI 2*1642. one owner, private party, ('ail MI' is a private party)
 New 1961 famous make, equipped to zig-zug, buttonhole, darn and monogram, $2.1.1 . $2 . $1.2 .
 Australian ski boots, aize ID, $30, worth $70; racing poles, $10; cross country racing boots, size 11 . For SAI.E.E: Australian ski booties, Australian ski poles, Australian cross country ski boots .
 Lionel engines, cars, trnck and equipment, chimp chimp . Come and take your pick. Lionel engines and cars, from Lionel engines to chimp engines .
 Large collection of HO scale trains, Varney. EX 6-6970. feb5-tf FOR SALK . For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 .
 VVill # sell in whole or part for half of original price, (’ail PA 93808.99) for half the original price . Sell in part or part at half price for half price .
 Five-room upurtmont in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments . $190 up . Five-bedroom apartment in newly-completed apartment complex .
 -Old coins and gold coins, private collector will pay 10* , over catalogue . - - - old coins, gold and old gold coins . - Private collector will buy 10* over catalogue. - - Old coins and . gold coins for private collector .
 Old coins, private collector will pay $12 per hundred for Indian head pennies, ulso tup price for other coins . Private collector will buy old coins for $12 .
 Full-time position for person with some bookkeeping and clerical experience to work on billings, collections, and student accounts . Call PA 9-3340.
 WANTED — Woman for baby sitting and light housework . Baby sitting needed . Woman for light house work .
 RUBBISH REMOVED REMOVAL REMOVals REMOVal REMOVALS OF RUBbish PLOUGHING SNOW ALSO COW MANURE FOR SALE . Call WE 3-0409 dec7-4t School of Music Tuning — Recond
 WElls 31947. aug7-tf HELP — For the Problem Drinker I There There ia a way out. There is a way to get around the problem .
 All makes including Japunese manufacture, 35 years of prompt, courteous service . 35 years in service . All makes and made in Japan .
 All plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made at tariff rutes by calling your Authorized Travel Agent .
 Let us know your travel pluns and we will be happy to work out with you. Let us tell us what you want to do with your travel .
 For the finest, most dependable TV • RADIO K-FI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 A GALAMB0S TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing. For the best TV repair job, call the repairman at 9-
 Nancy Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester. Winchester, PA 9-5758, or write Nancy K Boyle . Nancy Boyle is looking for antiques .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist Church was the scene of a festive purty on Monday afternoon, December 11, beginning at 1m.
 It combined the celebration of the Eightieth Anniversary of the founding of the club and Presidents’ Day . The club is celebrating the anniversary of its founding and Presidents' Day .
 About thirty presidents and guests from other women’s clubs in the Eighth District were invited to the event .
 Charles D Shepard, president of the Massachusetts State Federation of Women’s Clubs, and Mrs. Mrs. Shepard, were honored at the ceremony .
 The walls of the hall were decorated and the walls were decorated . The club color, yellow, was noticeable on the long table where the pourers were Mrs. Mrs. .
 Henry Hildreth of Westford, a past president of both the Fortnightly and the State Federation, and Mrs. Henry . Mrs. Mrs. Hildthreth, a former president, was also a member of the State .
 Edward R Grosvenor, a past president of Fortnightly, now lives in New Hampshire . He is a former member of the magazine's New Hampshire-based group . He says he is proud to be a member of a national magazine .
 A beautiful birthday cake of four tiers graced the center of the table . The birthday cake was a birthday cake that included four tiers .
 After a reception for the guests, dainty ices were served followed by the ceremony of the cutting of the cake by Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Smith .
 A large vase of white carnations was on the piano in memory of past presidents who have passed away . White carnations were placed in the piano to honor the late president .
 After the invocation by Miss Mary L Hodge und the usual preliminaries, each visitor responded to her name, stood, and spoke briefly . Each visitor responds to each other's name, standing and speaking briefly .
 Members urged to join in singing carols Christmas eve at 7m. on the Common .
 A highlight of the afternoon was the reading of a splendid paper on the history of the Fortnightly prepared by Mrs. Mrs. Smith . Mrs Smith read the paper, which was a splendid piece of paper .
 Many different projects undertaken by the committess initiated over the years . A worthy list of accomplishments for the betterment of the community, schools, and other causes .
 Today this desire to promote good endeavors is still contributing generously to our town’s welfare . Today it still contributes generously to the community, according to the mayor .
 Miss Phyllis Howes, soprano, and Mr Bob Phillips, her accompanist at small electric organ . Herbert D Thompson, program chairman, next introduced two musical artists .
 Miss Howes delighted the audience with many current selections and a group of 1920 songs . Looking very attractive in a holly red dress and equally so in a beaded gown of the 1920s .
 First Baptist Church plans to take church families on a Christmas tour around the world on December 17 . Superintendents and teach ers have been planning with the children .
 This is an opportunity for not only the adults but the children to experience the way in which the whole world celebrates the birth of Christ . This is a chance for the adults and the children . The Paul Butterworth Family In the Social Hall will be shown .
 Postmaster Thomas J Gilgun said today that every postal employee is digging in harder than ever to insure delivery of all Christmas cards and gift packages before Christmas Day . Apply at WOBURN SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL WE 3-2181 Mail Early For Christmas, 1961 .
 The flood of outgoing Christmas cards and gifts is about equal to the torrents of incoming mail that are getting larger every day .
 A delay of a few hours at this critical time may mean disappointing your friends and loved ones on Christmas Day . A delay could mean disappointing friends or loved ones . A few hours of Christmas Day is critical time for many .
 Post Office windows will be open from 7:30m. to 6m., for your convenience . Post office windows will also be open at 7.30pm to 6 p.m. Post offices will be closed from 730m to 6pm .
 Don't forget to put your name and address on all Christmas card envelopes and package labels . Don’t forget to include the address and the name of the recipient .
 Postmaster urges that you divide your mailings into various groups, with those for most distant places going first . Tying in with the National Improved Mail Service program, the Postmaster says you should mail early in the day .
 Postmaster especially requests that you get your out-of-state packages into the Post Office immediately . Do everything possible to mail all of your Christmas gifts for local delivery by December 16 and your Christmas cards to nearby points by at least a week before Christmas .
 He suggests that you use Air Mail for every Christmas card and gift package going to distant places .
 Postmaster’s important reminders about Christmas mail . Here are a few of the Postmaster's important reminders .
 Be sure to include full name and address, postal zone numbers, and your return address, written or printed clearly on every card and package . Include full name, address and postal zone number .
 Parcels containing delicate gifts must be marked “Fragile’s” Food stuffs are marked ‘Perishable’ if they’re subject to spoilage .
 To all person* interested in the estate of LKTITIA F HOPPER late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all . interested in this estate, please contact the deceased .
 The executor of the will of said LETITIA F HOPPER has presented to wu«l Court for allowance its first und . second accounts .
 John V Harvey, Register. Dec. dec7 -8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS . Mitldlesox, ss. of Massachusetts, was a pioneer of the state .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to lie the last will of said deceased by GRACE NICKERSON BANGS of Providence in the State of Rhode Island praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her
 LILLIAN S ALICE late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of Lillian S. Alice, deceased, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of u certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARY LINNANE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex . The petition was presented by Mary Linnene of Winchester .
 1061. Witness: John C Leggat, First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of December 1061 .
 Butterworth Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Stre.-t PA 9-0342 . Opposite Parking Lot and Embassy Laundry .
 To all persons interested in the estate of THOMAS F FALLON late of Winchester in suid County, deceased, deceased. To all . interest in this estate, please contact us at the funeral home of Thomas Fallon .
 A petition has been presented to the Court, praying that MAE I FALLON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex, or some other suitable person, be appointed administratrix of .said entute .
 Middlesex, sk. John V Harvey, register. decl4-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS. Middlesex . Middlesex sk.
 FRANK B SMITH late of Winchester in snid County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of FRANK SMITH, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by BEATRICE L SMITH of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving u surety on her bond
 If you want to object, you should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on the twentyfirst day of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-aevonth day of November 1961 .
 John V Harvey, Register.n.nvfl0-8t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . Middlesex is the capital of the state .
 James P. HOPKINS late of Winchester in snid County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES P HOPkins, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to the Court, praying that THOMAS W HOPKINS of Boston in the County of Suffolk be appointed administrator of said estate, without giving u surety on his bond . A petition was presented to said Court, . praying that Thomas W
 If you want to object to the citation, you should appear before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyeighth ilay of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, Find Judge of said Court, this fifth day of December 1961 .
 Boston Muss. Muss., upon payment of $&.. which entitles him to receive h set of plans upon presentation of proper receipt to Blue Print Room 740. Boston Muss., .
 Payment shall be made with cash, bunk check, certified check or money order drawn to the order of Massachusetts Di*partment of Public Works, amount refundable to formal bidders .
 Plans on display at Department’s District office in Arlington . Complete information at above address .
 Right reserved reserved to waive any informality in or reject any or all proposals . Right reserved in or not to reject proposals .
 An uward will not be made to a Contractor who is not equipped to undertake and complete the work . Contractor is not able to undertake the work and will be unable to complete it .
 Winchester Duplicate Bridge Club meets "The Untouchables" The Untouchable is the duplicate bridge version of the classic classic . Winchester Duplicates Bridge Club is a weekly meeting of the club .
 Darrell A “Eliot Ness’ Root, who present their show with regularity along about 10:00 on Wednesday evening- came through again on December 0th at the K of C Hall . Darrell A "Eliott Ness” Root is a member of the
 Miggs and Darrell finished way out front more than five points ahead of the rest of the field . Both sections played 21 boards for a 03 point average .
 Georgie Gan-ge and Sandra Slone, 75% and 75% of Kay McConnell and Barbara Sawyer, 70% Mr and Mrs. Charles Watson, 03 EastWest, 03 West .
 Section B North-South Nancy Atkinson and Edward Sullivan, 70-70 . Geraldine Lawrence and Betty Yeomans, 74 . Mr and Mrs. Lawrence . Betty Yomans were 74 . Guy Mingolelli, 69-69% of the population .
 George Kimball, 07% FJsther Davis and Eleanor Sweet, 00% Blair Hawley and Ralph Atkinson, 04 East-West Mr. and Mrs. Atkinson . Mr. Kimball was elected to lead the West Coast .
 Darrell Hoot, 82, Ted Atkinson and Gerald Barrett, 74% Molly Fitzgerald and Gertrude Cox, 69% Mr and Mrs. Cox . Ted Atkinson, 74, Gerald Barrett and Molly Fitzgerald, 74-74, respectively, were the most popular couple .
 Ed and Nancy got to a fine slam contract on today's boani-of-the-week . It was missed at a number of other tables .
 Howard Clausen, of Norwich Glee Club, and Cynthia Knox, of Vermont College Chorus, sing the score of Handel's oratorio, “The Messiah, with Jon Borowicz, director of the Vermont Philharmonic, .
 Third annual rendition of Christmas music at Norwich Armory . Orchestra and 1 HI elioral voiees prepared for performance in third annual rendition .
 You have little idea of the texture of South’s spade suit and no information as to the location of the king of clubs . You can't know where South was located .
 East was confident of his counterpunch redouble, based on the inferences of the auction, and having no fear of East’s probable aceking of hearts .
 The Club’s open house Christmas party is December 20th at the K of C Hall, starting with a social our from 7:00 to 8:00 a.m. Don’t forget the club's Christmas party will be held on December 20 .
 Post 97 of the American Legion has made an excellent start for its Community Programs in the coming year . Legion Makes A Head Start For 1962 with a membership of two hundred and two signed up for 1962 as of December 10, 1961 . Legion makes a head start for 1962 .
 Commander Appleton pointed out that the paid up members of the forty -two -year-old Post for ’62 represented an increase of 32 per cent over its advance enrollment of last year . The paid-up members represent an increase over 32 per per cent .
 Post 97 has received many new memberships and reinstatements since the Berlin crisis and South Asian troubles . Legion has never ceased to preach eternal preparedness for the U.S.
 Winchester Post’s annual contributions to the Scholarship Fund, Boy Scout Annual Camp Fund, Boys State at Amherst, Junior Chamber of Commerce, Junior Legion Baseball, March of Dimes and many other community activities . Winchester Post also contributes to Boy Scout annual Camp Fund and Boy Scout
 Alan Macdonald, James Reid, Richard Soucck, Elena Magno, I ’Anne Grant, and Judith Yore. The full interview will be aired at 8.30pm on Monday on BBC One .
 Winchester Toastmistress Club held a dessert Christmas party at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth of the club . The Christmas party was the highlight of the meeting .
 Mary Ann Quitnhy, of 30 Golden Avenue Medford, died Dec. 31 at 8:00 a.m. last Monday, Dec. 30 . Quitnhhy was a mother-of-one who was also a grandmother . She is survived by her husband and two
 Mrs. Pat Pyne, Winchester, was Toastmistress and introduced the three .main speakers . Mrs. Pyne introduced the .main speaker, Mrs. Barbara Pyne .
 Mrs Phyllis Thorensen, Malden, covered the subject of interest to all wo men, “Beauty is Self-Discipline Topics relating to Christmas from Bells, Angels, Trees, Orna ments to mistletoe, were passed out .
 Toastmistress Club's primary function is to train its members to give extemporaneous and prepared speeches with poise and confidence . Toastmistress club is based in the U.S. and Canada .
 An important phase of its w'ork is the job of the evaluator who must offer constructive criticism that will benefit the speakers and others who participate in the meeting . An important part of the evaluation process is the evaluation of a meeting .
 Violet Bruno, from Winchester, submitted her application to join the club . Violet Bruno is a member of the Winchester-based club .
 Cub Scouts Visit Hanscomb Field nor C^uichcr — fearn WJinc to rj£)ino, % •ee a^etiverii s^nylimec A L L WE l Is 3-0932 .
 A representative selection of life-size bird prints of 19th-century origin . Sp 4 6800 J .
 Historical Eigures, Authors, including will of Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany . Price . s from $30 to $35 0 tfn'r bird prints from $2 to $7.50 .
 Famous winter scenes, clipper ships, river boats, mountain and country scene's, historical scenes, historical. famous winter scenes .
 Prices front *10 to S 2000 W e also have a small hut choice selection of oil paintings, bronze statues and other works of art .
 Cubmaster Sam Putnam and Pack Committee Co-Chairmen Paul Donahue and Joe Maspero were in charge of the field trip . Cubmaster Putnam, Pack Committee co-chairman Sam Putman and pack committee Co-chairmen led the trip .
 From comments and conversations there was no doubt that the hoys had a good time . From comments, conversations there were no doubt they had a fun time .
 You don't try to outwit the sergeant, particularly Sergeant John O’Malley, who conducted the tour. You don’t try to . outwit him, especially Sergeant John . O'Malley, says .
 Servicemen have their own church, recreation hall, theater, supermarket, library, school, little league hallfield . The base exchange, library and school are also included in the community .
 About 20 of the hoys were ready and willing to join the Air Force should finish school first . About 20 were ready to join but must finish school .
 It shows the keys to he played for each of the Major, Minor, Minor Harmonic and Minor Melodic Scales . The keys to each of these scales are listed in a scale of six .
 I he Scale Chart relates the key of wind instrument scores to the piano score key ior all E-flat, B- flat, F anti Bass-clef instruments . 1 he Seale Chart also shows the basic chords or triads (tonic, sub-dominant anti
 It correlates tin* 88 piano keys with their equivalent musical notes . It shows the frequency relationship between the tones of all of the piano keys related by equal temperament . The study was created by the University of New York .
 Clear instruction* for its use are printed on the front of the Scale Chart . Clear instructions* for the use of the scale chart are printed in the front .
 It i* 4 inches by 8 ,{ j inches; til til a durable low-gloss material, making it easy to read, and conies in a protective envelope . It is made of a durable, lightweight, durable material .
 The Safari Club is a member of this year's Safari Club . It's really unbe1 llevablo at $299 .
 As a matter of fact no one did any hunting at all, for either big or little game . "No hunting was done for either large or small game," says author of the book .
 Even the fact that Charlie Murphy took along his rifle and ammunition for it couldn’t lure the nimrods out of doors .
 A select group of sportsmen embark on a hunting safari in New Hampshire at this time of year . The Krnest B Dades in Guilford, New Hampshire, is a popular summer home . The track is set at Blue Waters, the hospitable and attractive summer home
 Among those who have participated in past safaris at Dade's are Nick Fitzgerald, A1 Elliott, Charlie Murphy and "Ab" Bradlee .
 All with the exception of Mr Bradlee, took advantage of Dade hospitality this year, leaving town for Guilford last week Tuesday .
 For one reason or another Mr Bradlee decided against being a member of this year's Safari .
 The Star is loath to believe it was because of any fear of the big game likely to be encountered . The reason was not made public but it was not for fear of big game .
 With hunting ruled out the party passed the time indoors in a variety of card games, crooked and not so crooked .
 The boys were all back in town for Rotary on Thursday, and all were speaking to each other . All were speaking at Rotary in New Jersey .
 Choir and Men’s Choir will present a varied program of Christmas music . Choir: "Christmas Oratorio" will feature selections from “Christmas oratorio” by St. Louis Cathedral Choir . Men's Choir to present a variety of Christmas
 Open the flash compartment, and the “autoshift"" shutter is automatically set for flash . Close it, and you’re ready for outdoor shots .
 If you are giving her some of the missing pieces in her China, Silver or GIuhs to complete her set, you are sure to find it at Swanson’s . Weatherly by Lenox Place Setting $19.95 Chanson $23.95
 STERLING SILVER Gorhuui, Heirloom, International, International and Heed uud Burton StiefL Towle, Wallace . GLASS Fostoria, Tilliu, Bryee CHINA Lenox.
 Just bring this ad to I I I Page Fourteen . Just bring the ad to .
 The Christmas program to be might have become something less admirable, lint in any of the Town’s seven elementary schools its tine old traditions bold linn .
 Public Library' will feature a color j film of The Littlest Angel . You will hear the sound of young voices rehearsing carols .
 This charming fantasy will he an enjoyable introduction to the holiday season . The film is based on the book, "Holiday Vacation"
 A film on the writing of “Silent Night” will be shown on Friday night . A filmstrips from the Library collection will also be shown at the Children’s program on Saturday .
 The first one in the new year will be on January 5 and ft, pleasant scent of paste* for paper decorations of Santa and reindeer, and angel On the walls thei >ing on high .
 The A.B.C.C/s gain new spirit in the presence of boy sopranos, paper wreaths, the child-made gift for mother or table favors for the Red Cross .
 The elementary schools start almost every day at 8:45 with class or group carolling in the halls, sometimes with the assistance of Ted Janner, music supervisor, on the viola . Janner is the music supervisor of the elementary schools .
 Throughout all the schools there are special programs planned for the next week . Special programs are planned for students across the country .
 “Christinas at WHS.” is tomorrow r night at 8m. for as many as the auditorium will accommodate . At the high school, the audience will be able to listen to the play .
 The special aura of the 90 scarlet robed voices of the mixed Glee Clubs as they process singing into the softly lighted hall is unforgettable to those who have seen it .
 At this grade level excellence of performance has due emphasis; but there is still a feeling of the spontaneous spirit of the season about the program . At the school's highest school, the students are expected to perform well .
 Visit our sales room before Christmas before Christmas . Use this photo to test your knowledge of items you need to buy .
 Add four ounces of Imported Ruin and 4 ounces of Five Star Brandy to each quart of prepared egg nog from your local dairy . Add 4 ounces . Imported . Ruin and 5 ounces of Brandy .
 'X mas Story,” presented by Curtain Sixth Grade has just finished a and Cue Cue. MODERATION IN THE ENJOYMENT.' -X mas mas Story .
 The program concludes with the mixed Glee Clubs again, joined by the audience in carol singing . The audience sings carol songs .
 The music is all under the direction of Wendell S Withington, director of music; the play in charge of John F Mclin of the English Department . The play is set to be directed by John F
 Washington Elementary Schools Washington School has the meaning of gift giving as its theme for Christmas presentation this year . Washington Elementary School has a theme for its Christmas presentation .
 First Grade Choir sings old favorite, “Why the Chimes Rang,” with the First grade Choir accompanying . It opened the program season Tuesday .
 Sixth Grades will enact through dialogue, tableaux and choral singing, “There Was One Who Gave a Lamb’s” to illustrate the spirit of giving from the heart .
 A special memorial meaning will infuse the pageant at Mystic this year at 2:00 m. next Tuesday, when ‘The Story Beautiful’ performed by the late Lillian Salice’s class in 1950 will be repeated in honor of this much loved teacher .
 It will be presented for the school and parents by Ruby White's Third Grade with the Choir from Margaret Millican and Gladys Wood’s Sixth Grades in support . The Choir will perform at the school .
 Also Tuesday afternoon at the Wyman School, 2:15, there will be a Christmas Assembly .
 Parkhurst School will hold a simple, in-school emphasis, on Wednesday afternoon, December 20 . Parkhurst is the first school in the area to hold the event .
 Grades I, II and III will present a short program to tti& upper grades . The upper grades will return the gesture on Thursday afternoon .
 Grade I will take part in “A Living Christmas Tree;” Grade II, the “Birth of Christ,” a tableau; Grade III a short play, “The Little Star” with four songs included . Grade III will also feature a play,
 On Thursday, Grade IV will give Christmas legends, “The First Christmas in Verse and Song;” Grade V the Legend of the Christmas Tree;’s ‘The Legend of a Christmas Tree’ and Grade VI will close the program with a short version of Dick
 Lincoln School pupils will present Christmas scenes to families and friends on December 20 . Scenes will unfold in front of a huge set of a Cathedral Square which has been prepared by the children .
 London’s Big Ben chimes on tape will play a small part in this sequence . Big Ben's chimes will be played on tape at the end of the sequence .
 Dorothy M Hammond’s unit on Dickens and will present a version of the ‘Christmas Carol’ to the other two Sixth Grades . The sixth grade will take part in a Christmas Carol version .
 Mr Janner’s string group is expected to perform in the halls in addition to class carol Jers, including kindergarten . Margaret C Donovan's Grade 5 is working on a special choral reading for the last week of school .
 First three grades depict Christmas as observed in Holland, Germany and Sweden . The first three grades will depict Christmas in Holland .
 Grade Two will give a Chinese Christmas celebration which it has prepured with the consultation of one of its China born parents . Grade Two pupils will celebrate Chinese Christmas with one of their parents .
 The Fourth Grade will take the audience to England, the Fifth to Mexico for its festivities; and the Sixth will render an Italian observance of the day . The Fifth Grade will render a Spanish observance, the Fourth Grade to England .
 All of these will have appropriate musical accompaniment by the children . All of the children will be accompanied by musical accompaniments .
 Behind the scones at all the schools is a largo extra effort by all the teachers . The scones are at all schools across the country .
 Jeanne Loudon, music supervisor of elementary singing groups is omnipresent at this season . Loudon's music supervisor is the guiding genius of many programs .
 Ted Janner instructs the strings which often open the programs at the schools . Ted's strings are used to open programs at schools across the country .
 "With Jeanne as accompanist, he himself contributes a special continuity at many programs with his beautiful viola playing in intermission"
 Natalie Bellows has been giving to the first three grades through oTit the system a special musical meaning to Christmas in song . Bellows is giving the students a musical meaning for Christmas .
 Virginia Diegelman (formerly Miss French) and Gail Murray, her assistant have advised, and been down on their knees in paint helping with much of the individual and cooperative art work which permeates the schools .
 The UNITARIAN PLAYERS' production of "The Pleasure of His Company" December 1 and 2 in Metcalf Hall .
 Cecil Prest, Norma Wood, Cary Callahan, Tony Currigan, Harry Wood, John Sullivan . Cecil Prest was the president of the United States' first congressional delegation to Washington, DC, D.C.
 McCall will combine the multiple talents of many of its depart ments to present its annual Christmas Assembly to parents and friends on December 21 .
 Dance Club under teacher Judith Sadowski will give interpretation to special Christmas music sung by the Girls’ Glee Club .
 Costumes are being made by the Home Economics classes, Suzanne Duncome, teacher; and speaking parts will be under the direction of teachers Mary C Regan, Velma Thompson and Marie Dugan . Speaking parts will also be directed by the teachers Mary .
 Frances Houghton’s art classes have been illustrating Christmas carols some of which will be made into background slides by the Photography Club .
 The Boys’ Glee Club and the Ninth Grade Mixed Chorus will perform music at the school . These will be used as illustrations for music to be performed by the boys’ glee club .
 All singing groups work under the direction of supervisor Eleanor Thistlethwaite . All of the singing groups are singing under the supervision of supervisor .
 The Brass Quartet, under Wendell Withington, will contribute to the program . Helping with the arangements which will make these many parts into one program .
 Lynch Junior High will celebrate its first Christmas on next Thursday also . Lynch Jr. High will be celebrating its first ever Christmas on December 25 .
 The “Story of Christmas” will be presented at 1:30 that afternoon in many interpretations under the general direction visor . There will be many interpretations of the Christmas story .
 At Lynch too there will he a Ninth Grade Christmas Dance tomorrow evening to which McCall Ninth Grade is invited . At Lynch, there will also be a ninth grade Christmas Dance .
 Helena Hatchell’s art students have done Christmas representations in many media including the simple and effective decorating of the trees put up in the court yards .
 The Home Economics Classes under Elizabeth Lowry are gay with home preparations . They have prepared food packets for shut-ins and have been preparing food packets .
 Mu Chapter of Delta Kappa Gamma met at the Winchester Country Club to enjoy a delicious dinner of tenderloin tips .
 After a business meeting, there was a musical program conducted by Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The musical program was conducted by Smith .
 Eleanor Thistlethwaite is supervisor of music in Winchester Junior High Schools . She is also supervisor for music supervisor in the Winchester schools .
 McCall Junior High ninth-grade vocal ensemble rendered porgrani by McCall Jr. High . Porgrani was rendered by the McCall .
 Sopranos — Lynn Keppler, Deborah Nelson, Jean Hutchings, Carol Nash, and Carla Hutzenlaub Altos . Tenors — Barry Weeks, Hugh Fisher, and Peter Harvey Basses — Porter Mill ford, Walter Harwood, Lee Sullivan, Louis
 Autobridge is the game that lets you play bridge any time by yourself and have world champions as partners . Players Present ‘The Pleasure of His Company’""
 An exceptionally talented and attractive cast presented this gay and sophisticated play by Samuel Taylor in Metcalf Hall last week .
 U#e raised curtain revealed a beautiful living room set of a home in San Francisco, with a picture window at the back through which one was certain one could see the Golden Gate Bridge .
 This play requires the deft touch of a competent director . Jacqueline Sibley guided her cast with a sure hand to a finished, polished production .
 The Chinese house-boy, Toy, played by Harry Wood, is the Chinese house boy . The show is set to be shown in London on Sunday .
 At the moment he was engaged in opening the wedding gifts which were arriving for the daughter of the house, this being a privilege accorded to him as a loyal family retainer . This being the privilege .
 Mr Wood was delightful in his role; at one moment suggesting the inscrutable Oriental mind with knowledge far beyond that of ordinary people .
 John Sullivan handled his role of the grandfather very well . Sullivan was a crusty old recluse from down the Peninsula who appears only as a matter of form for the wedding, but truly loving his family and wanting above all .
 He it is who sides with her in the momentous decision she makes at the play’s end, and Mr Sullivan showed the two facets of the character skillfully and believably .
 Gary Callahan did a fine job as Roger, the young man who is to marry the daughter of the family . Callahan played Roger in the role .
 One really suffered with him as he tried to keep his girl, and his integrity too . His portrayal of the honest and somewhat unromantic fiance was sensitive .
 The scene in which he ‘tells off’s off the play-boy father of the girl was especially well done . The scene was especially good .
 He was relaxed and charming at all times, and a joy to watch as he manipulated people and situations to further his own cause . He was a joy of watching him manipulate people to further their own cause.
 An accomplished actor was made completely real and sympathetic by this very accomplished actor . One hopes to see more of him in future productions of this play .
 His daughter in the play, the pretty Jessica, was also a pleasure to watch . His daughter, who plays Jessica, also starred in the show .
 As done by Norma Wood, she was gay and happy in her marriage plans, and so pleased to have her long absent father return . When she decides to go with him for a year’s cruise, it is well understood that she will return to marry her nice young man
 Norma has talent and a good stage presence; a young lady who should be seen more often on the stage . Norma is a talented young lady and should be more often seen on stage, says Norma .
 The two other leading players were Billy Ann Maley as the mother, and Cecil Prest as the step-father . Cecil Prest played the stepfather to Billy Ann and Cecil Maley in the film .
 This is a well-matched pair, both gifted with a sixth sense of the theatre . This is the first time the pair have appeared together in a theatre together .
 "They were fun to watch and to listen to, as they reacted to conversation or action from the other actors," she says . "It was a great experience," she adds .
 Maley is lovely to see, her costumes were beautiful, and she moves with grace and assurance . Maley's costume was beautiful and she moved with grace, assurance .
 She handled the difficult role of a happily marnervous apprehension as to what effect his presence will have upon her household . The actress handled the role of being a happily-happened mother .
 Mr Prest offered another of his fine portrayals as Jim, kind, patient and understanding .
 Fhe makes his characters so real and his acting seems so natural that it is a joy to see him . Fhe says he is a 'joy' to see his characters .
 Color coordination was especially noted, as in one scene where the candles in the wall sconces matched the shade of blue in the dress worn by Miss Wood .
 This week’s picture is of the house at Symmes Corner, until recently the home of Mr and Mrs. Marshall Symmedes .
 Originally the house that stood there was built in 1715 by Ebenezer Brooks . The house was built on the site of a house built in the 17th century . It is now owned by a family of four .
 John Brooks’ niece married a French Huguenot, John Le Bosque, who served with distinction as a captain in the revolutionary war, and the John Brooks house came down to them .
 Marshall Symmes acquired the property from the Lc Bosques, including the house and land extending to what is now the South Reservoir . He paid $10,000 for the property, which is now home to what's known as the Reservoir, in 2008 .
 Not having the money, he gave his note for the property and it was not until after the Civil War that he was able to pay off the obligation . After the war, he finally paid off the debt .
 His family lived on what they raised on the farm, buying only flour, salt and sugar . Meanwhile, his family dressed in homespun and lived on the family's homespun .
 Samuel Symmes, a later widely known and universally esteemed citizen, was horn in the old LeBosque house . His brothers, Walter and Frederick, and his sister Anna were also in the house .
 In 1881 Marshall Symmes, finding the old dwelling in poor condition structurally, tore it down and built the house that stands near the location of the old house at a cost of $5,000 . The house was built in 1881 at the expense of a $5
 A part of the old building was moved to the rear of the new dwelling and used as a farm house . The old building has been moved back to the farm house in the village .
 For many years a stone cap covered the well of the old Le Bosque house in the yard of the newer structure . The cap was placed on the well at the site of the new house . The well was covered in the old house's yard .
 Marshall Symmes lived in the new house until he died, and at that time the property went to Samuel and Lawrence . The new house was built in 1926 .
 Samuel or “Sam” as he was known far and near, bought Lawrence’s interest, and the place then went to his son, Russell . Russell, who went there to live in the 40s, brought up his family there and only recently disposed of the place
 A lot of history stems from the old house and its predecessor, the Le Bosque house . The house was built in the 1930s and is now owned by a new owner .
 Marshall Symmes used to graze his sheep in what is now Rangeley . During a terrific snow storm with the snow reaching a depth of 10 feet in spots, he had to go to the animals’ assistance .
 For hospital patients, shut-ins, vacationists, or any one ried woman whose first husband rej w ^° ca rds. For . hospital patients or shut-iners, . vacationists . or any . one . woman's first husband .
 McLaughlin’s Shoe Store |j Open Every Evening until Christmas S5 Tel. I % Sk *. Sk *. * i I . Open Every evening until Christmas .
 A call for a pioneering regional program to improve the education of school administrators in New England was made last Friday by delegates attending the New England Conference on School Administration in Brookline, Mass.
 The plan offers New England an opportunity to lead the nation in the improvement of school administration and the strengthening of the schools . Finis PL Engleman, former commissioner of education in Connecticut in Connecticut, said the plan offers an opportunity for New England to lead .
 The plan calls for the creation of a permanent regional council of representatives from colleges, state departments of education, school committees, and administrative associations to coordinate and strengthen their programs .
 It will sponsor additional workshops, institutes, and conferences to increase ‘in-service’ educational opportunities of practicing school superintendents and principals . It will seek financial aid to recruit qualified young men into school administration .
 The regional council would operate under the auspices of the New England Board of Higher Education . The board was created by six New states in 1955 to improve and coordinate higher education in the region .
 The education faculties of five New England univrsities grant professional certificates and doctor’s degrees in school administration have agreed on means to assure the training of sufficient numbers of New England school administrators .
 Children’s Theatre School presented three plays at Winchester High School Auditorium . Winchester school children were in for a treat last Friday and Saturday Dec. 1 and 2 .
 The rising of the curtain brought a hush which remained as the capacity crowd of youngsters sat enthralled during the performance . The fact that the treat was appreciated was very much in evidence .
 There was plenty of action for the boys, sweet fairies and elves for the girls . There was a real live black kitten and dazzling costumes and beautiful lighting effects .
 The scenery itself was enough to keep the attention of any imaginative child, painted as it was by the actors .
 In “Heidi,” for instance, the scenes in the hut of the Almuncle (Michael Fiori) were enjoyed for their authenticity . In ‘Heidi’, ‘I’m not just a movie, but a movie of the same
 Real hay was seen in the loft where Heidi (Mary Wadsworth) climbed each night to sleep . "Heidi" was seen with real hay in her loft where she slept .
 Heidi’s playmate, Goat-Peter (Brian MacDonald) captured the hearts of the children in the audience as he expertly handled live goats wheih were imported to lend further atmosphere to the play .
 The beautiful sweeping plumes on Dete’s hat as she swept in to the cozy little hut personified her battle colors as she brusquely prepared to drag Heidi off to a more ordered life in town .
 The acting was perfectly natural and there never was a hint of tenseness as the performers enacted very accurately the well-loved classic .
 Small boys and girls dressed in colorful Swiss peasant costumes danced and yodeled catchylittle tunes between the scenes and even asked the audience to join in, too .
 "A Midsummer Night’s Dream" is a play by Shakespeare . The play is set in New York and London .
 Queen Titania was lovely, graceful and unperturbed as plots were conjured up around her and her colorfully-clad fairies .
 First and Second Fairies (Rebecca Brackett and Kristen Beard) floated on wings of brightly-hued silk among the other little fairies . The fairies floated among other fairies in the colorful silk .
 Teasing, mischievous “Puck” (Geoffrey Brackett) was an imp personified as he darted from regal King Oberon to confer with his fun-bent fellow elves .
 The lighting in this play was truly lovely and kept the illusion of moonlight and shadows throughout . The lighting kept the mysterious illusion of the dark throughout .
 Robinson Crusoe, Ron Marcy, Friday, Henry Dietrich, Capt. Friday and Capt. Henry . The Crusoe and Friday played together in the early 1900s . The team was led by Captain Friday and Captain Friday .
 Songstress CONNIE FRANCIS “Never on Sunday” and Other Themes MGM 3965 . Connie’s Favorite F'olk Songs MGM 3969 .
 Crusoe led them to safety and shelter in his cave, converted from Heidi’s loft bed . Crusoe handled the bad chaps with the none-too-gentle help of Friday, who was obviously enjoying a personal revenge .
 This action was just the thing the audience had hoped to see and it is safe to guess that each youngster envied the actors their ability to portray the characters with such enjoyment .
 Robinson Crusoe was a first-class beachcomber in his beard and ragged clothes and bare feet, with a cutlass at his side . He was a beachcombing in ragged clothing, with bare feet and a ragged beard .
 For realism this little play could not be beaten and the children loved it. For realism it could not have been beaten . For realism, the children love it.
 The cannibals and mutineers ran down the aisles to the stage, giving the little ones in the audience a really big thrill . Excitement was at fever pitch .
 Veronica Sanderson played expertly the happy little tunes for Heidi, the lovely, haunting melody for Midsummer Night's Dream and Robinson Crusoe .
 McCall Junior High School Vocal Ensemble, under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. McCall, is the leader of the school's largest ensemble .
 Marilyn Brown, Ja net Covino, Rita Gramzow, Linda Knight, Carole Nash, Elaine Sullivan, Janis Carucci, Janet Hogan, Virginia Williams, Hugh Fisher, Barry Weeks, Louis Briaco, Lee Sullivan, Lee Howard, Walter Howard, David Weaver .
 Winchester High School's Stage and Lighting Crew did a really outstanding job in creating just the right effects for each play . Mr Morse, of the Winchester High school, and his Stage and lighting Crew, Stephen Memishian, Brian Hurd and Michael .
 Maida Uhlig, Jacqueline Cartier, Elizabeth Bowes, Ruth Anno Hutchinson, Janice Yagjian, Elizabeth Thibeault . Kathleen Lopez, Marilyn Long, Joanne Hess, Nancy O’Neil, Kathleen Ganchi.
 Samoiloff on Production for the past five years and who is well loved by all the children did an outstanding job as usual . The children were delighted with the success of the show, which was held in New York City .
 Gay little fairies and impish elves danced their way into the hearts of the excited capacity audience . The Winchester High School Auditorium held a capacity audience on December 1 .
 The three plays presented by the Children’s Theatre School and directed by Mrs. Mrs. J. Smith . Mrs. Smith directed the three plays .
 Robinson Crusoe and his cverfaithful “Friday” seemed to be enjoying themselves immensely as they planned revenge on the mutineers in the ageless Defoe classic . The film is based on the novel by the same name, which was released in 2009 .
 Several volunteer ushers helped to keep the splendid order which prevailed at the performance . Volunteers also helped keep the peace at the end of the show .
 Beth Dutting, Debbie Bassett, Mary Power, Martha Broadhurst, Virginia Page, Ann Butler and Robin Byford are among the writers of this week's edition .
 Charles Raffi, Theatre Chairman for the Winchester Community School Association wishes to take this opportunity to thank Mrs. Charles for her support at the Winchester School .
 Wendell Irving, Ushers and Tickets, the Winchester Police Department for sending Police Officer Robert Elliott to be in attendance, all the local merchants who displayed posters in their windows and all those local merchants . The Winchester Historical Society presented its annual presentation at the Winchester Museum .
 The Division’s annual Quarter Century Club meeting was held at Grace & Co., Cambridge, Cambridge, at the Division's annual quarter century club meeting .
 Stowe, a past president of the Club received a 36 year pin from Bradley Dewey Sr., co-founder of the company . Stowe received the pin from a 36-year pin from Dewey .
 Stephen B Neiley of 22 Fletcher Street was elected vice president of the Club for the coming year . Stephen Neiley was also elected vice-president of the club for the next year .
 George W Blackwood of 29 Wedgemere Avenue, Dewey and Almy president, presented watches and club pins to 13 Boston area employees inducted into the club .
 4700 people now employed by the three Grace divisions stemming from the original Dewey and Almy Chemical Company . In the intervening 25 years, the company has grown tenfold, to 4700 .
 Governor John A Volpc will address the group attending its third annual “Operation Holiday” on December 18 at the Maridor Restaurant in Framingham . The U.S. Army Recruiting Main Station at Boston Army Base announced recently that Governor Volpc .
 The Governor will he be the main speaker at a luncheon given in honor of a group of one hundred young men and women from Eastern Massachusetts enlisting that day in the Army . The governor will be speaking at the event .
 The enlistees will he given the Oath of Enlistment at a special ceremony at one o’clock in the afternoon . The oath of enlistment will be given to enlistees at the ceremony .
 The luncheon will follow the enlistment ceremony and will conclude with the address by the Governor . The ceremony will be followed by a luncheon .
 Beautiful, Fresh-Cut Christmas Trees From New Hampshire . The best — REASONABLE — ReASONABLE Peter Derby PA 9-2880 .
 I case of Chicken Pox 4 cuses of Dog Hites l cast* of Strep Throat Michael D Saraco A gent. A gent . A case of chicken Pox . 4 cases of chicken pox .
 In The Stoneworks, by John Ciardi and The Lardner Report, by Rex . The Life of Samuel Johnson by John Hawkins . Memo to JFK to JFK, by National Broadcasting Company, Inc. In The Sixties and Seventies .
 These Were The Sioux, by Mari Sandoz The Treasures of Time, by Leo Deuel, ed. Mexico, by William Weber Johnson The Patriot Chiefs, by Alvin M Josephy The Story of America’s Musical Theater, by David Ewen .
 ITCH-AID is COOLING, COLORLESS, STAINLESS, IN STANT DRYING . It is co-signed by Winchester UNITARIAN Church .
 Carlton Helgerson is the pastor of the CRAWFORD MEMORIAL METHODIST CHURCH in Winchester, Mass. He is also a pastor at the Crawford Memorial Church .
 Each Sunday at 4:00m “God Sent His Son” will again lie presented by the three choirs, sextet, quartet and soloists . Scripture readings, pictures and lighting effects will be presented .
 36 Church Street W. inchcwld PArkview 9-3000 BMU-2-tf Rev. Rev. David Johnson is a former minister of honor in New York City . Phone or come in .
 The Senior M.Y.F. will have a Progressive Supper starting at the home of Judy Dirrfee, 48 Cnbot Street . Judy Dirfee is a longtime friend of the senior citizens of New York City .
 Our teams will play the first games of the season at Vinson-0 wen School Gym . The first games will be held at Vinsins-0 School Gym.
 Finance Committee's report on the Canvass . Finance Committee report on Canvasses . Finance committee to meet on Thursday .
 The Church in the Highlands is a second national church in the United States . The church is located on Washington Street at Kenwin Road . The Church is located in the Highland Park area .
 The Junior and Senior High Pilgrim Fellowship groups will go ""Christmas Caroling"" and have a party at the home of Mr and Mrs. Mr. and Mrs . The Senior and Junior and Junior High Pilgrim groups will have a Christmas Caroling party .
 Winchester Council.0, K of C., is holding its annual Christmas party, on Sunday, December 17, at 2.30pm . The Winchester Council will be holding its Christmas party at 2pm .
 All members with children under 12 years of age are cordially invited to attend . The event will be held at the end of the month .
 Santa will give out candy and toys to all the children . Santa will also give out toys and candy to everyone .
 Many parents who hope to see their children attend college some day are not fully aware of the financial problem ahead . Many parents are unaware of the problem ahead.
 According to a recent survey of typical colleges and universities, average annual costs today total some .$1,500— and costs are rising . According to the survey, typical college costs are about $1,000 per year .
 Families in the most comfortable position are those who have carried out long-term savings programs . Families in most comfortable positions are those carrying out long term savings programs, experts say .
 Banks provide the savings account service that has been the key to college, and other education, for millions of Americans . Banks are responsible for saving money for college, college education and beyond .
 The election of U Thant as UN Secretary General constitutes a revolution which may mark a very important turniing point in history . For the first time in modern history world hegemony has been removed from the Western Hemisphere and shifted to Asia .
 World leadership has now for the first time been entrusted, not to a Christian, hut to a Buddhist hut . This revolution, he says, is not only geographical and to a certain extent ethnic, hut also religious, in that world leadership .
 Final meeting of the Chester Visiting Nurses Associascreening testing machine for the  1961 was held in the Rich schools in Winchester . Winchester Public Li^ anf ^ wafl voted that money he brary on Friday December 8 .
 Mrs. Thomas Purtlc proj Nursingfor W.V.N.A., demonstratsided. j ed the one now in use and she exit was announced that Mrs. Purtl was to leave the hospital .
 The V.V.N.A. is hoping to open her lovely home for the that the School Committee will Annual meeting which is to be bnd money enough in their budget held at 2:00 p,m. on January 19, | to purchase one more, that is
 Anthony Marahella of \\ inehester; and his maternal greatgreat-grandmother; . His maternal great-great-Grandmother. Anthony Mara hella of . Inehester, he was born in 1926 . He was born with a daughter and a son .
 The picture was snapped November 25 at the home of Fire Captain and Mrs. Fire Captain . The fire captain and his wife took the picture .
 Winchester boosters of W.G.B.H. educational television station will be delighted to know that the Twentieth Century Fund has given .$125,000 toward the construction of new studios for the firerazed station .
 The new gift brings the total amount of money raised by W.G.B.H. to $550,000 . The gift is the latest in a long line of donations to raise money for the charity .
 Spontaneous projects to aid the stricken station have been organized in just about every community within range of its signal .
 The gift is the first contribution of $100,000 or more to WGBH's Rebuilding Campaign . The gift supplies much needed help in our Rebuilding campaign, said the General Manager .
 The burned studios had been rented by WGBH from M.I.T. which will build for its own purposes on the old site . iThe burned studios were rented by M.T., which will be on the site of its own . i
 Mr Heckseher ’s letter said the grant would be paid by the Twentieth Century Fund after hearing from WGBH that the new studio was ready to begin .
 Khrushchev's U.N. speeches, Presidential press conferences, all are there in their entirety . United Nations speeches, . Presidential press . conferences, latest Khrush . pronouncements, all of them are in the entirety .
 In three days’ time he invested 32 hours at it; finally got bogged down in the advertising section . He eventually gave up the ghost .
 Through some difficulty, transportation it frequently fails to arrive, usually on stormy days . The ship often arrives but it often arrives in the morning .
 The yelp of an addict at not finding his cherished publication can be heard around the Square . The addict jumped in his car and raided some nearby — and more fortunate — community .
 The printers' strike of several years ago brought out Times addicts en masse at 7:30 Sunday mornings, all lined up and raring to go . The printer's strike brought out addicts on a Sunday morning rush .
 The New York Times and the Washington Post have been in the news for more than a decade .
 Most of us are willing to face the music if we can only call the tune . SQUIBS: Most people are willing . Most people want to face music if they can only sing the song .
 Acquire every diamond in the U.S. and your collection could fill a bin eight feet square . Acquire all the diamonds in the United States .
 The National Hot Dog and Sausage Institute reports that 11,000,000,.000 frankfurters were consumed in 1960, an average of 62 for each American . The institute reports that the average frankfurter was 62 per American .
 The political leader known as “Mr Democrat” and the Republican were both victims of cancer . ‘Mr Republican’ and Mr Democrat’ both died from cancer .
 A permanent set of teeth consists of -8 canines, 8 cuspids, 8 molars, 2 molars and 2 cuspidors . Permanent teeth consist of 8 teeth, 8 canines and -8 cuspids .
 The favorite instrument of the ancient Arabians was known as the eunuch . Ancient Arabians were known to have used the instrument as an instrument of torture .
 Citizens of the United States may be either male or female upon reaching the age of twenty-one, if of good moral character . Citizens of U.S. can be either a male or a female at age of 20, if they are of good character .
 An I-G inspection (InspectionGeneral) is conducted with all reserve units in the United States once every year . I-Gs inspects reserve units every year with the U.S. Army Reserve Force .
 It comprises an active duty army officer, usually a major or above, inspecting reserve companies . An active duty officer is an inspector of reserve companies.
 Not only are the men thoroughly inspected on their military knowledge, but also the facilities and equipment are carefully scrutinzied . The men are inspected on military knowledge and equipment .
 This year's inspection was especially exhaustive due to the tension arising from the Berlin flare-up and the Communist agitation in South-East Asia .
 It has been located in Winchester for six years with headqaarters now in the new Sons of Italy Hall building on Swanton Street .
 The unit meets every Wednesday night for two hours . The offic ers meet Monday nights also for administrative drills .
 The men who make up the unit come from Winchester, Woburn Lexington, Arlington, Stoneham Medford, Wilmington, and Reading Winchester . Winchester men in the unit are Lt. Lt. John Lister, a member of the unit .
 Sp-5 Francis W Lovertere; Sp-4 Daniel F Blanchard; Sp 4 Daniel D Burt Sp- 4 Daniel F Burt . Sp-3 Daniel D. Burt, 4 Daniel Burt and 4 Ernest E Reardon, Jr. James J Do
 The State Advisory Council of the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination today wired Governor Volpe and Lt. Gov. Mahoney .
 Governor McLaughlin expressed his approval on the reappointment and confirmation of Mrs. McLaughlin . Mrs McLaughlin has been confirmed by the Governor .
 All members have served for several years and have been deeply concerned and actively involved in good group relationship within the Commonwealth . All members of the Commonwealth have served in the past several years .
 We Carry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . FREE DELIVERATION ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 "Convertible” Fountain Pen with 14-K Gold Point . W45 m ft ft ft. ft ft . ft , ft. 'ft 1 ft 1 ft % ft W % ft Sk i & i Sk i f m 3* s m ""Convertedible�
 As usual... the unusual for those important gifts for your feminine favorites . A verything for for boys Mighty Mac” Jackets .
 We have Gift Certificates * i * •J that will solve any j* i shopping problem * 6 Mt. Indian Madras and | i * Batik Sport Coats | % Regulars, Longs , Extra Longs jf l * >s & i .
 VERNON STREET — PA 9-0685 ridtmas uitomerS Kitchenware — Gifts Small Appliances . Daily from 8m. to 5:30m.
 Joan F Benson, Bernard H Bloom, Sidney J Bromander, Ray K Brown, Charles F Buckingham, John P Burke and Charles F. Buckingham . Joan F. Benson, Sidney H Bloom and Ray K. Bromander are all deceased .
 George F Pneetti Francis B Parsons Yirgilio Pereira Arthur PL Rand Royce H Rnndlett George D Riehburg Ronald IL Rfchhuig Mrs. George F. B Parsons . Arthur PL . Rand .
 Dana M Cotton for putting on the supper for our volunteer and the Boston staff . Dana Cotton was a volunteer and Boston staff member for the event .
 Our Red Cross volunteers again kept things running smoothly . Ralph Putney: "Our Red Cross Volunteers again kept everything running smoothly"
 Robert E Fay Motor Service GenHd Y Hills Sherman Russell Canteen and Supper Committee . Mrs. Fay was awarded a $1,000 allowance for a car .
 John B Wills High School Red Cross’s ‘Brown for Tots’ campaign second week of toy lay .
 S Ma rim* Corps Reserve and Shell Oil Company hope to achieve the completion of distribution by December 24 . The Shell Oil company opened the drive on November 25 .
 Shell Oil Company allows the use of its service stations as collection points for the toys . The Shell oil company allows the collection points to be collected at service stations .
 S Marine Corps Reserve picks up the toys from the service stations and takes them to The Salvation Army Men’s (’enter) where they are sorted and distributed by personnel of th'e center .
 The three agencies, which seem widely separated in their purposes, work closely and harmoniously in an effort to make a merry Christmas for children .
 New and good used toys urgently wanted for distribution to needy children . New and used toys are urgently wanted .
 The general public is urged to take such toys to thennearest Shell service station to make some child happy at Christmas .
 Jjib.vm Christmas I Cards . We have a large variety from which to make your selection .
 Even though they cannot pro home for Christmas, they are not forgotten . Even though it cannot be seen, they will not be forgotten .
 Music and gifts take some of the joy of the season into the most cheerless of hospital wards and prison cells . Through these visits, music and gifts can be found in a prison cell or hospital .
 Major Norman E Sampson, leader of the League of Mercy in Massachusetts, is one of those away from home for whom the season will be merrier .
 The annual Christmas dance of the Congregators of the First Congregational Church will be held in Chidley Ilall Friday .
 A State Uexiglatnr for M year and a member of the House Transportation Committee, Chadwick has proposed that a five member law enforcement commission be formed to investigate crime in this state .
 Northeastern’s Young Repuhli1 can Club is a member of the Na tional Federation of Young Repubvit lican Clubs and the Massachusetts Council of Young Republican Clubs . Northeastern University is a host of Young Republicans .
 51 employees chosen from among among Raytheon’s 43,000 for the course . They were part of the 51 employees selected from among the 43,00 employees chosen .
 The 38week course was planned by the company’s Industrial Relations Division in conjunction with Harbridge House, Inc. of Boston, management consultants . The course is designed by the firm's Industrial Relations division .
 The curriculum included the most advanced techniques of management taught by specialists in the field . The curriculum was designed to teach students how to manage their businesses .
 Alvin, Simon & Theodore with David Seville 3170/7170 The Brave Chipmunks; Japanese Banana; Stuck in Arabia ; Rudolph the Rednosed Reindeer and 8 others . WeIIs 3-9781 Every Day AROUND THE WORLD WITH THE CHIP
 McLaughlins & INSULATED 9.95 to 14.95 . For Dad, Mom, Big Sister, Big Brother or the Small Fry Skating is Fun. For Dad or Mom, Mom or Big Brother, it's fun .
 The WINCHESTER STAR, 1961 High School Honor Roll, celebrates the start of the Christmas season . The high school honor roll was created for students in 1961 .
 Thomas Kuhn, Jane Littleton, Susan McClennan, Janice Rae Florence Reardon, Gregory Rinehart, Jennifer Rochow and William Zovickian Af/rj. Knight .
 "Open Every Nite ’Til Christmas" is open every night ’till Christmas .
 Gaily wrapped gifts for the Sisters Pantry Shelf will be put under the Christmas tree . Carols will be sung and refreshments will be served .
 The final meeting in the ‘Mornings’ series sponsored by the Win Chester Wellesley Club was held in Hadley Hail, Church of the Epiphany, on Thursday, November 80 .
 It was a tribute to Mr Davis that immediately upon his appearance, the shouting and the tumult of the coffee hour died and the entire audience became hushed in eager anticipation .
 Charles T Main, 2nd, president of the Wellesley Club, remarked upon the enormous following which Mr Davis has in this community .
 In his speech Mr Davis emphasized especially the importance of attitudes in these critical times .
 He urged us to examine our attitudes and search diligently for wisdom in our thinking and in our doing .
 The determining factor in the present struggle depends upon what we do and we must be ever mindful that the Russians profit by our mistakes . We must also be mindful that Russia profit from our mistakes. The Russian President Vladimir Putin is not interested in what he says .
 Mr Davis said that we as Americans, find ourselves in an unprecedented state of uncertainty and insecurity which is causing an emotional stir among our people . Mr Davis: We as Americans are in a state of insecurity and insecurity .
 There is a great deal of doubt among civilians as to what should be done . There is also doubt among civilian who want to know what to do .
 There are extremists on both sides and perhaps they cannot be too much blamed because the pressures are so strong . Perhaps they can't be too greatly blamed because of the pressures so strong, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 It is Mr Davis's belief that w< cannot afford to take a soft stand at the present time .
 He urges that we listen more to the smaller countries and find out what they are thinking and then act in such a way that they will want to come with us rather than with the communists .
 We cannot force them, and here again our attitudes will play so important a part, we cannot force ourselves to do so . We will not be able to change our attitudes, and that attitude will play a part .
 There was an interesting question period following the lecture . Many people remained afterward to talk with Mr Davis .
 This series of morning lectures has been under the chairmanship of Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Jones .
 Christmas is just around the corner and children are going to sleep dreaming of the jeweled lights and sparkling ornaments . Christmas is a great time for children to play with their family and friends .
 Maybe they are the people who lost their homes from fires started in Christmas trees . Maybe they're the people whose homes were destroyed in the Christmas tree fires .
 Middlesex TB Association says it's a safe tree . Middlesex tuberculosis Association says tree is safe for TB patients .
 Buy new and safer equipment if you need it . J0SEPHS0N REAL ESTATE WALTER Y J0 SEPHS 0N INSURANCE .
 Wait until nearly Christmas before buying your tree, especially if outside temperatures are above freezing . Wait until almost Christmas to buy your tree .
 Shake the tree before you buy it . If needles fall off, better check twice on how fresh it is . Check the tree's needles off before buying .
 Store the tree outside; don’t set it up until just before Christmas Eve . Store it outside until Christmas Eve.
 When you set up the tree, make sure it won’t fall over, possibly causing a short circuit . Make sure the tree won't fall over or fall over .
 Check the bulbs when you’re finished, and move any that touch the needles . Move any of the bulbs that touch your needles .
 I m 1 m Season’s Greetings If* time again to call your attention to our wide variety of quulity liquors and fine wines, also to the fact that we are located in an area handy to most people in this community .
 It is a short drive down Cambridge Street past the Star Murket to the section of Woburn known at the West Side’s Four Corners . The West Side is known for its West Side's West Side .
 Pierce Julius Kayer Cambas Mogen David Parma is the latest in a long-running series of films to be released . Parma was the first film to be shot in New York City .
 Wines From France Germany Portugal Spain Greece Greece • Denmark Italy • etc. Harray’s and others Cl Wines from France, Portugal, Spain, Denmark, Italy and Germany .
 PRE-MIXED COCKTAILS KEPT CftlLLED FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE AMPLE PARKING % M Colonial Package Store. Pre--MIxed CockTAILS are sold at Colonial Package .
 Reardon’s Ernest E Auto Service Service Service Station Reardon MOBIL Tires Batteries Tirea Tubes Light Repairs .
 PArkview 9-9886 feTift ** T* W* W * Turner’s Gulf Kiley’�s Sunoco Service Service Service Station Esso Station .
 Third annual ‘Operation Holiday’ will he held at The Madder Restaurant in Framingham on the afternoon of December 18th .
 The operation is just a little something special for the boys who want to enlist but would like to spend the holidays at home . The operation was organized by the National Guard .
 The Army has made arrangements for those who qualify for enlistment to attend a luncheon as guests of the people and merchants of Eastern Massachusetts . Those who qualify will be sworn in at a special mass enlistment ceremony, he said .
 Finished in Mahogany Stereo Dual Channel Amplifier 12” Speakers and 2 Tweeters ipe Dork AM-FM Radio $1495 NOW $1270 Exquisite Nylon Stockings by IR-Callum Exquisitely sheer in perf e c t
 Anyone interested in more information regarding this unique opportunity may receive it by contacting Sgt. Sgt. John Sutter . Anyone with information should contact Sgt. Sutter via email him at [email@mailonline.co.uk .
 Ski Club Seeks Charter Members . “Clipit’s the new, better way to clip newspapers and magazines . Ski Club is seeking charter members .
 May this be the merriest of 13 Church Street Yuletides for you and yours .
 Mau tins Holiday Tine lie one oJ^rcatjoij and Happiness.. oody Motor Auto Bodies and RADIATOR REPAIRING . Parker T-Balt Joltcr-Parker 4§ Write fine ** Pencil .
 1061 Girl Scouts from Troop 9 f Presented Program . Pamvlrt Jt*an Smith daughter of Mr and Mrs. Smith .
 Stanton B Smith of 42 Thorn bo rry Road accepted by Vassar College for admission in September, 1962 .
 Girl Scout Troop 9 presented the evening program for the monthly meeting of the Friendship Guild in Chid ley Hall, First Congregational Church . Under this plan, students are accepted on the basis of six, rather than the customary eight, semesters of secondary school work .
 Two years ago, the Guild sponsored Troop 9 in order that the girls might enjoy the privilege of holding their weekly meetings in Chidley Hall . The Guild sponsored the girls in order to give them the opportunity to hold weekly meetings .
 Since that time, they h*»ve wished to show their appreciation to the Guild in some special way . Since then, they have wished to thank the Guild .
 Each of the troop’s three patrols took the responsibility for some part of the evening . The troop's program was the result of many weeks of planning, with each of the patrols taking the responsibility .
 Mothers of the scouts were invited as special guests, as was Mrs. lames Stewart, president of the Winchester Council of Girl Scouts . The event was held in Winchester, Winchester .
 The program opened with a flag ceremony, followed by the investiture of a new Girl Scout . A candle lighting ceremony and a court of awards were also held .
 Members and guests were then invited to join in Fireside, a fire was lited, refreshments served, and all enjoyed the girls* singing of many favorite Girl Scout songs .
 Much interest was also shown in a fine table display which included several examples of campcraft skills . Much interest also was shown in the fine table displays .
 Flag bearei*s: Reth Dotting and Martha Broadhilrst, Color Guards: Joyce Kell, Virginia Page, Ann Butler, Barbara Gibson. Color Sgt. Mary Power: Mary Power, Mary Power. Flag bearers: Mary Powers, Martha Power, Virginia
 Debbie Bassett, Kathy Lucey, Jill Horton, Nancy Bonrtink, Kathy Dillon, Cathy Harvey, Susan Duntona, Barbara Gibson, Loranne Gray, Paula Lanigan and Julie Shiang are among the ten laws .
 Nancy Bennink, PVayer Badge: Martha Broadhurst, Campcraft badge . Ann Butler, Cook and Campcraft badges; Nancy Colony, Camp Craft badge; Susan Dantona, CampCraft badge; Beth Dutting, Cook & Child Care badges . Barbara Gibson, Horsewoman
 Nancy Bennink, Ann Butler, Roberta Byford, Kathy Dillon, Beth Dutting, Barbara Gibson, Patricia Lanigan and Paulit Lanigan are among the writers of the book .
 Winchester National Bank's Annual Meeting will be held in its banking rooms at 7 Church Street, Winchester, Massachusetts at 4:00m. on Tuesday, January 1G, 1962 .
 William D Sullivan, Cashier SEASON'S GREETINGS Herbert T Wadsworth Realtor dec7-3t Holiday Greetings to YOU and YOURS . John B MERCURIO INSURANCE and Real Estate Tel.
 Just slip in giant size cartridge of Super Quink ink or insert converter in place of cartridge and it fills from ink bottle . PArkview 9-3400 to seek a choice aift .
 See our big selection of PERFUMES, TOILET WATERS, BATH POWDERS, SETS, CHOCOLATES, WALLETS for MEN AND WOMEN, ELECTRIC SHAVERS, BRUSH AND COMB SETS and many types
 Harry V Gilson, superintendent, participated in a New England Regional Conference on School Administration held in Brookline, Massachusetts . Gilson attended the conference .
 High School Principal W Howard Nibloek spoke in Boston last Saturday and journeyed to Minneapolis this week in his capacity as chairman of the Committee on Extension and Improvement of Educational TV in New England . The committee functions under the New England A sociation of Colleges and Secondary Schools .
 In Boston he spoke for the Committee at the annual meeting of the parent association held at the Statler Hotel .
 On December 14th he will go to Minnesota to represent New England at a National conference on Educational TV sponsored by the U.S. Office of Education .
 Henry K Fitts was there Thanksgiving week end for National Convention of Teachers of English . English Department head was in Philadelphia to celebrate the National Convention .
 Mr Fitts is this year initiating at the High School the first course there on Advanced Placement English . He is starting at the . High School this year .
 Assistant principal Thomas A Morse was at the Eastern Slopes Inn on November 24 and 25 . Morse is also an instructor in Speech . Morse was also an assistant principal in Speech and a speech instructor .
 North Conway attended the twenty-first New England Speech Association along with more than one hundred other college and school representatives . North Conway, where he attended the 20-first N.E. Speech Association .
 Massachusetts Department of Education held a meeting at Medford High School on the current extension, expansion and improvement of modern language programs in the schools .
 A follow-up program in the form of a Teachers’ Workshop has been planned for an after school time this week at which Mme.me. will speak .
 Genicot will be joined by as many of the eleven modern language teachers in the Winchester system who are free to go . The Winchester system has 11 modern language language teachers .
 George L Croft of Johnson Road was among the returning veterans for the Pearl Harbor attack memorial services . Croft was among those returning veterans at the memorial service .
 Croft was on the platform of the Arizona for the flag raising and memorial exercises . He was the guest of Admiral John H Sides, Command er-Chief of the Pacific Fleet .
 Mr Croft was a guest of the Hilton Hotel during his visit to Oahu and the other islands in this group .
 Sales have increased tremendously over the five years the game has been on the market . Sales of the game have increased over the past five years .
 More than 50 ways of singlepack solitaire have been played on this board . Play a game of solitaireitaireitaire and otheritaireitaire game . Check out our weekly Newsquiz .
 There are games designed for children, which help develop patience and character . There are also games for children to develop skills and patience .
 One out of three persons play solitaire, the one most played and the most accepted card game today . Solitaire is the most popular card game in the world and most accepted .
 Cards won't slide or shift and interrupted games can be resumed without loss of the original layout . Cards won’t shift or slide and can't be slid or shift .
 Measuring only 12 x 14 in. in., it takes up little space when not in use, is completely portable and very durable, being made for lasting service .
 It is a really wonderful gift for hospital patients, invalids, travelers, persons on vacation or for those who like games at home . The gift is a great gift for people who like to play at home.
 A representative of “Solo-Play” Productions, Andrew Hewitt, will be at the Star Office Thursday, Dec., from 1 to 5 p.m. to demonstrate this fascinating game . The Star Office will be open to the public on Dec. 31 .
 Water sealed heating unit plus integrated automatic heat control in handle permits quick, easy ""under water"" washing . Water sealed heating unit plus new integrated automatic heating system .
 Winchester Appliance Co. Co. designed the Frypan with the ""Cloverleaf Design” heating element that guarantees perfect h‘eat distribution on entire cooking surface ... for finest results .
 CARE's Annual Food Crusade Underway . Christmas mails are gay with parcel post packages . CARE's annual food crusade is underway .
 More precious than china or glass, too fragile to withstand daily despair, are the lives and hopes f people facing heartbreak across the world . The lives of people are more precious than glass or china .
 Care packages bring food and tools to nourish the hungry, give them the vigor and means to help themselves . These, too, are protected in packages, care packages . These packages are sent out to the hungry and the hungry .
 Care's annual Food Crusade appeal is now underway . For its feeding programs, care's annual food drive is underway . Care's Food Crusade is underway for its annual fundraising appeal .
 It seeks to deliver 5,000,000 packages, in the names of Americans who donate $1 per package . The packages will be delivered in the name of those donating $1 each .
 The gifts will reach distressed families and groups in 17 countries of Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Middle East . The gifts are intended to help distressed families, groups and individuals .
 Every dollar package you send means that hungry people will eat their fill knowing that people far away in the United States responded to their need as friend to friend .
 Anchors machine firmly, reduces noise, lesI sens fatigue and increases speed . Anchors machines firmly, reducing noise, reducing fatigue and increasing speed your holiday accuracy .
 Magnavox Spectacular J+00 sq. in. screen with fully automatic operation . Pictures half again as large as 23-inch screens . More than twice as big as 19-inch sets .
 Only Magnavox attains the spectacular dimension of stereophonies and tonal beauty of high fidelity . The advanced acoustical system projects sound from sides as well as cabinet front to surround you with the beauty of music .
 American Contemporary.-inch big-picture TV with front-mounted 8-inch oval speaker . Front-mounted speaker is 8-in-8 inch oval speaker on TV .
 Magnavox Micromatic record player comes with no wear on either record or Diamond Stylus . Screen sizes diagonal measure* v in mahogany .
 American Contemporary with MU cromatic record player, four speakers and powerful stereo amplifiers . American Contemporary record player and four speakers . MU record player with four speakers, powerful stereo amplifier . American contemporary record player .
 Magnavox is the finest . . yet costs no more than others . sold directly to us . Sold directly to you . saving you the cost of middleman distribution .
 Harrison Chadwick of Winchester called for an end to “sensational handwringing” in regard to his allegations on a nationally televised Ixjokie film that Bay State ganibJers maintain connections with certain legislators .
 Mr Chadwick made his comments in a visit to the Star on Tuesday morning this week .
 Mr Chadwick took sharp issue with House Speaker John F Thompson . Mr Thompson said his charges that some legislators had contacts with bookies had ‘cast a cloud of suspicion’ over all .
 Mr Chad said he considered it a “fiftyfifty chance” that he would be asked to tell his story to the entire House of Representatives . The House convenes on Wednesday, January 3 .
 Mr Chadwick might be summoned before the entire House to explain his charges concerning organized gambling in Massachusetts, he said .
 Reports circulating on Beacon Hill that Democratic leadership of the House may invite Rep. Rep. Tom Coburn . Coburn is a member of the Republican caucus .
 Winchester High School held a student assembly to honor two of the town’s most respected citizens and two of its most dedicated servants . Help Town C ivic pride came alive at Winchester High on Thursday .
 Each, in turn, demonstrated a deep respect for the other, which gave an added dimension of drama to their appearances in the midst of the present state crisis .
 Former Winchester High School basketball star returned to his home last Sunday after being hospitalized last October 25 . John A Farrell have started a benefit fund for the former Winchester basketball star .
 Officer Farrell entered the hospital at that time and during the nearly two months that he was a patient there he was under constant surgical, medical and nursing cafe . Officer Farrell was a constant patient at the hospital .
 His hills are staggering, and they will continue to increase since he will be for some time in need of constant medical care . He will be in the hospital for a long time .
 “I am proud to serve with Harrison Chpdwick” said the Governor in return . “Proud to serve’s with Harrison,” replied the Governor .
 Governor said it is high time to take things out into the open and examine them rather than let them get worse . Later, again in reference to the bookie scandals, he said it was time to examine the bookies scandal .
 Mr Volpe pointed up to the students their own future responsibility in voting, and told them that tyranny can come to us if we do not stay informed .
 He outlined action they could take in political contests passing out leaflets, baby sitting imd driving and baby sitting . He urged them to start doing on their own town level of politics .
 ‘They couldn’t do any worse job than the men have done,” said the Governor to markedly female applause .
 The Governor emphasized the importance in politics of a strong religious commitment . The Governor said it is important in politics to be religious .
 Governor and Mr Chadwick were joined by Superintendent Harry V Gilson and Assistant Principal Thomas V Morse for the High School, as well as the Governor’s military aide, Col. Col. Michael Chadwick .
 Governor Volpe arrived at the Senior High School in the big black S-l limousine now so familiar to townspeople . Volpe arrives at the school in a big black limo now familiar to residents .
 He received a rousing welcome in the hall from more than nine hundred students . Many bunched at the classroom windows after his talk to watch his departure from Manchester Field for a Governor’s Council meeting .
 Chief Derro attended the Massachusetts Rally for Highway Safety, held in the Chamber of the House of Representatives at the State House in Boston .
 The rally was jointly sponsored by Governor John A Volpe and by the Massachusetts Highway Safety Committee .
 Located on the northeast corner of Swanton Street and Loring Avenue, the land is owned by Abraham Lerner . It comprises 67,000 square feet .
 Building Commissioner refused to grant original request for a building permit because of Zoning restrictions . Building Commissioner William B MacDonald refused the original request . The Lerner land is located in three zones .
 The propriety of granting a permit for a nursing home on the land stemmed from the Zoning Law’s forbidding the location of the nursing home in either the general residence or light industrial districts . Zoning law prohibits the . location of a nursing . home in a general residence
 A public hearing was held by the Board of Appeal on Tuesday, Nov. 14, at which arguments were heard for and against the proposed erection of the nursing home .
 Attorney John S Morgan, Jr. of Winchester represented Mr Carver . Frank Sibyle, administrative head of the organization which will conduct the nursing home, spoke in favor .
 Residents of the affected district recorded at the hearing . Mr William Duran of 17 Loring Avenue, whose home adjoins the proposed site of the nursing home, and Miss Anne O’Melia of 18 Loring Ave .
 Mr Duran stated he was not opposed to the proposed home, provided there was to he sufficient parking space provided . The proposed home would be located in a parking lot .
 Miss O’Melia favored the proposed nursing home and stated that the other neighbors were in favor of it . Miss O'Melia also said that the neighbors were also in favor .
 State Board Rules Disability Service Induced . Fireman Henry C Heitz, Jr., for permanent disability incurred in line of duty during April of 1960 . State Board awarded Heitz a pension .
 The case had been under consideration following Firelighter Ileitz’s request for a pension at that time . The case was under consideration after the former firefighter requested a pension .
 Firelighter Heitz contended that h^ became ill while engaged in painting his room at the Central Fire Station on order of his superior officer . Heitz claimed that he became ill .
 He was taken to Winchester Hospital where his disability was diagnosed as a cerebral hemorrhage . He was later diagnosed with a cerebral hemorrhage .
 "There was at no time any question of his complete disability or his inability to further perform his duties as a firefighter," firefighter says .
 A medical panel, comprising a physician named by the town, another by the state, and a third by Firefighter Heitz, supported this opinion . The Winchester Retirement Board questioned the decision . The board said the disability was service in duced .
 A much beloved Winchester tradition will be observed on Sunday, Christmas Eve at . o’clock on Winchester Common, when residents, young and old, gather to sing carols in honor of the birth of the Christ .
 This public testimonial to the supreme event of the Christian calendar will be sponsored this season by the Fortnightly Club for the With year .
 The Fortnightly is hopeful that this year’s turnout will he the greatest ever . This is an old tradition which has proved inspiring and uplifting to anyone who has observed it .
 Have the children bring their hells as the program always ends with a Christmas song especially for them . The children always bring their own hells to the program .
 Frank McCullough, Chairman of Music for the Fortnightly, will supply everyone with carol books . Come and add your voice to the voices of your fellowtownspeople .
 It is urged that families come together and sing as one, beginning their Christmas Eve with what all carol singers know to be a genuine sense of good neighborliness .
 “This is bow Christmas was started. P^verybody. rr What Christmas Means To Me ” ‘
 This was Christmas in the eves of two public school secondgraders this week . This was a sacred historic event and a time of good cheer for the students .
 Through their still unclouded eves one can look at Christmas again as it was meant to be . And through their still . unclouding eves, one can still look at . Christmas as it is meant to . be .
 Christmas night my mother plays the piano and we sing the Christmas carols . Christmas night is when my parents play the piano, we sing carols, she says .
 The initiation coincided with the Lodge, 14 15, B.lbO.E., Sunday, December 10, . d’he degree was conferred by the officers official home-coming of District Deputy Francis A Lappan, Governor Volpe’s personal secretary .
 Four Winchester men were initiated in Lodge 1445 . Besides the Governor, four Winchester men have been initiated .
 They were John Masterson, Warren Bolivar, Domenic Capone and Joseph Bonasera . The gangsters were also known for their involvement in the crime .
 A large delegation of Winchester Elks attended the initiation headed by Exalted Ruler Nicholas Di Zio . A large Delegation of Elks was also present at the initiation .
 Past Exalted Ruler John Fenton of Lawrence, with a suite of 50 past district deputies, headed a large group of distinguished Elks at the ceremonial . The total attendance approached 1200 .
 Congressman Bradford Morse and State Senator John Harrington were also initiated into the Elks at Lowell . Congressman Morse was elected to Lowell Lodge . Senator Harrington is also a member of the Lowell Elks .
 After the initiation the Elks adjourned to the Lowell Elks Home where a collation was served and a social* hour was enjoyed . The Elks then went to a home in Lowell, Massachusetts, to celebrate .
 Vice President Gertrude Horn presented President Nellie Bolivar with a money gift from the members of the auxiliary . The auxiliary was presented with the money gift .
 After singing Christmas carols the party returned to the Post Home . Son of Mr and Mrs. Paul F. F. AMICO was the first person to attend .
 After graduation from Boston College Law School in I960 attorney Amico was admitted to the Massachusetts Bar in November of that year . Amico is now a successful attorney in Massachusetts .
 Marshall W Symrues was hostess for the meeting of the Committee of Safety Chapter D.A.R. at her home 48 Yale Street .
 Roderick L Bullen real estate agency moved into its spanking new colonial quarters in the new Waterfield building this week . D.A.R.R., continued on page 8 .
 The office, decorated in the colonial mode, measures approximately fifteen by forty feet . The office measures approximately 15 by 40 feet .
 Its walls are decorated in Williamsburg blue, while the chair rail and baseboard are done in light pine .
 Maple furniture predominates, nicely accenting a neutral broadloom rug . Maple furniture is accentuated by a neutral, broad-cloth rug .
 Hand-turned colonial signs inform the public that this is the Bullen Agency, which occupies the highly desirable first-floor building corner of the building near the ailroad depot .
 In the old Waterfield Building, which was razed by fire last May, the Winslow less, now doing business on Mt. Mt. More than a decade ago, the office area was occupied by Winslow Less .
 Bullen Agency is admirably equipped to serve Winchester and surrounding towns . In terms of professional experience and breadth of service, the agency is well-equipped to serve .
 The agency provides appraisals and helps people buy and sell real estate . The agency also helps in the arrangement of finance and the placement of mortgages .
 The agency is owned by Mr Roderick L Bullen of Yale Street, who has had considerable experience in real estate .
 Assisting Mr Bullen are Horace H Ford of 8 Pocahontas Drive, who is also a director of the Winchester Trust Co. Assisting him is Horace Ford, who has been in charge of the trust .
 Kathryn Sullivan Davis, former owner of the agency which Mr Bullen purchased last May; Mrs. Davis, Mrs. Sullivan Davis and Mrs. Bullen are pictured together for the first time together .
 Bullen is receiving the congratulations of the community on its smart new quarters . The Bullen agency is receiving its best wishes for continued success in 2015 .
 President William J Speers, Jr., Jr., Vice-President Trustees Paul F Avery Shailer Avery Clinton W Bennett James W Blackham Austin Broadhurst . Trustees include Dr. William J Blackham and Dr. James W Broadhurst, Jr. Trustees of the Trust
 Treasurer Nellie L Ralph, Assistant Treasurer Edward V French, Ralph W Hatch Waldon B Horsey Charles T Main, 2nd Charles L Moore Herman F Pike William J Speers, Jr. William L. Speers Jr. was elected as treasurer .
 Heard in opposition were former Selectman James A Cullen, who owns 12 acres Sk adjoining the lot in question, and ^ Mr Michael D Saraco, who opcrates a salvage company on this land .
 Museum of Science Completes Ten Years at Science Park . Museum is dedicated to people who find in it stimulation, challenge, and enjoyment . Museum's most important thing about a museum is people — young and old — find stimulation .
 Buildings aren’t half as important as people, but they have to come first . Buildings are half as much as people .
 Review of the first ten years at Science Dark looks at the Museum of Science in Boston . Review: The museum's policy and the problem of the museum's lack of transparency .
 More people than any other science museum its size anywhere in the world . Ever since the revolutionary Museum opened its doors a decade ago it has attracted people .
 Boston’s Museum of Science had close to 3,000,000 visitors in its first 10 years . Museum's halls far beyond their planned capacity, forcing the building of its major central unit far ahead of the original development plan .
 In one short decade Boston has seen the Museum achieve more than half its overall plant goal . The Museum's plant goal has been achieved by more than 50 percent .
 Already finished and in business are its East Wing, Planetarium (New England’s first major theatre of the skies), and Auditorium .
 Central Building will double present exhibit and program space, as well as provide a visitors’ restaurant, enlarged library, and offices . Central Building is the seven-story Central Building which will double showrooms, and provide visitors' restaurant .
 By herculean effort, the Museum’s dedicated leaders have raised close $9,000,000 to date . The Museum is raising funds to raise funds for the Museum .
 Their immediate need is to wind up the Central Building Campaign and open up this much-needed area to the public, is $700,000 . The need for $700k to wind-up the campaign and open the area to a wait- ing public .
 It will send thousands of curious, knowledge-seeking youngsters out into the world better able to understand and appreciate its wonders, achievements and needs .
 Send your contribution to the Museum of Science, Science Park, Boston 14.14. Send your story to the museum of science, the Science Park Museum .
 Arlington and Winchester Sachems will play an alumni group on Friday night . Second team game called for 7 p.m. at the gym .
 Rod Gay is getting together the alumni group . The alumni group will be chosen from the squads of the past two seasons . Members of the squad will be selected from past two teams .
 Alumni games are always interesting, as they give the fans a chance to see the stars of former years in action . Alumni matches will be interesting to see some of the stars in action for the first time .
 Winchester plays Lexington here Friday night, December 29, and at Concord Tuesday, January 2 . Winchester also plays Lexington in the Middlesex League . Winchester plays Concord in the next two games .
 I objected to erection of a nursing home at the proposed site because a part of the land affected is located in the general residence and light industrial districts, such use being forbidden by the Zoning By-Laws . I parking facilities and also objected to the erection of the proposed nursing home
 Objectors say the operation of Mr Saraco’s salvage business would create noise and smoke which would result in complaints by the nursing home against the operation . The objectors stated that the use of land in the light industrial district could seriously affect the . use of adjacent land .
 They say heavy traffic and trucking on Swanton Street rendered the proposed site undesirable for purposes of a nursing home . They also contend that heavy traffic on the street rendered the site undesirable .
 The Board of Appeal recognized €* the problem posed hv the location of the proposed lot in three zones with the necessity of getting permission to erect the nursing home under the provisions of the Zoning By-law applicable to each .
 A small portion of the land on Loring Avenue some 5,000 sq. ft., behind the part of the lot in the industrial district, is located in the general residence district . The land is located behind a portion of Loring Ave.
 The Board of Appeal may authorize the use of land in general residence for any purpose permitted in a single residence district . Under the Zoning By-law the board of appeal may authorize use of . land in . general residence .
 With permission of the Board land in the single residence district can be used for a convalescent or nursing home . Land in the district can also be used in convalescing or nursing homes .
 The Zoning By-laws permit the use of land in the industrial district for any purpose which may be permitted in single residence, general residence and business districts . The industrial district is located in industrial district .
 Board of Appeal found that if the use of land for a nursing home is permitted in either a general residence or single residence district, such use is permitted also in an industrial district . As a result, the Board of Appeals found that such use was also permitted in industrial districts .
 This reduced the Board to consideration of the land in the light industrial district . The Board was reduced to consideration by consideration of land in light industrial area .
 The Board therefor felt that if the Board permits the proposed use for a nursing home of a portion of the land in question located in the general residence district, the proposal would be permitted by the law . The proposed use of the portion . of the . land in the light industrial district
 This brought the Board to consideration of the question of whether a nursing home is a residence or a business establishment . The Board is considering whether the nursing home should be considered a residence .
 The decision was guided by the Town Building Laws, Section 14 of Division 4, which classifies buildings according to occupance as residence buildings, public buildings, and business buildings .
 The only buildings at all comparable to the proposed nursing home, in the opinion of the Board of Appeal, which are classified as residency buildings are apartment houses, dormitories and hotels .
 It is therefor the Board’s feeling that though nursing homes are not specifically classified, the proposed nursing home falls more logically into the classification which includes hospitals rather than residence buildings .
 This differs from the definition of a rest home where j the purpose is “providing care inj cident to old age to persons over j B0 years of age’s age who are not acute1 Y8 ly ill or in need of medical or nursj jj
 Board unanimously voted to grant appeal from Building Commissioner’s decision and recommended that the permit requested by the petitioner be granted subject to the provision that construction be commenced within three years from the date of issue . Building Commissioner's decision was overturned by the Board .
 The nursing home will be two and one half stories high, of attractive design, fronting on Swanton Street, of first class construction, faced in brick, with an estimated cost of $300,000 .
 It will contain 82 beds and have a staff of 14 or 15 people . It will also have a kitchen and housekeeping staff . The new hospital will be opened in 2015 .
 There will be a parking area for about 14 cars at the front of the building on Swanton Street with a large area at the back and on the easterly side with estimated space for 40 to 50 additional cars . The parking area will be for 14 cars .
 Nursing home will include such features as a solarium, two recreation rooms, basement chapel and dining room, occupational therapy and physiotherapy rooms, a ***** **lv# ***** ***& * * If e also hare for your Sk « . * pleasure ^ FRESH KILLED
 Howard Elton Clark of Carmel, Calif., was united in marriage with John Philipp Becker, son of Mr. and Mrs. Becker . Howard and Philipp Becker were married at a ceremony held in Carmel .
 Standing, Fdward White, commander of Malden F’ost, 639; Marie DeLcna, president of Medford Auxiliary, 6.12; Maty Giovc,. president of Fverett Auxiliary.4; Ruth Gorman, Dept, chief of
 1 amnion Karel V Vit, pastor of the Fellowship, was honored with a doublering ceremony . The ceremony took place at 1.30 p.m.
 The bride wore a formal gown of white brocade with a sweeping chapel train . Given in marriage hy her father, the bride was given a wedding dress by her father .
 The fitted bodice had a sweetheart neckline and a fingertip veil was arranged with a self cap edged with pearls . The fitting bodice was fitted with a fitted neckline .
 She carried a cascade bouquet of white roses and carnations centered with white moth orchids . The ceremony was held in New York City .
 H Elton Clark, Jr., of Los Angeles, was the matron of honor, and the bridesmaids were Mrs. Clark's sister-in-law of the bride . Mrs. Elton's sister, Ms. Clark, was matron-of-honor
 The chapel at the First Congretional Church in Winchester, was the setting, Wednesday evening, December 20, for the marriage of Miss Linda Ann Monterey Unitarian performed the 3 Mr and Mrs. Burton R Pike of Modesto, Calif., and Miss Eleanor A Becker of Winchester,
 John A Maynard and daughters Cary and Becky of Cabot Street are moving December 26 to Minnesota . The Maynard family is moving to Minnesota from Cabot St. John A. Maynard .
 Mr Maynard has been transferred to the aeronautical division of MinneapolisHoneywell .
 As the Maynards have lived in Winchester nil of their lives, this is quite a drastic change for them . The Maynard family have lived there for more than a decade .
 A very successful membership social meeting was held at the Malden Post of the Veterans of Foreign Wars at 32 Union Street recently .
 The V.F.W. says "anyone interested in joining the Veterans of Foreign Wars or its auxiliary was admitted free and enjoyed an evening of dancing"
 In order to conserve our time and energy and keep our blood pressure within the limit of safety the Star is announcing that in the future stories with which pictures are requested must come to this office, complete with the pictures .
 We find we are wasting too much time trying to match pictures with stories when each comes to us separately . We find it too hard to match photos with stories .
 We feel that it is the obligation of the organization or person who wants the picture and story in the paper to get them together . Not to expect us to keep track of each and get them properly matched, we feel .
 It would be helpful and possibly ensure the desired publication of pictures and stories if those interested in them give us advance notice that they are to come. It would also be helpful to possibly ensure publication of them .
 Miss Sandra Margaret Margaret Eshbach is daughter of Mr and Mrs. Eshachbach . Have a picture of her to share with you? Send it to Mail Online home .
 Franklin Eshbach of 44 Brookside Avenue, and Francis Robert Dodge, son of Mr. and Mrs. Dodge Dodge, were honored at the ceremony . Mr. Dodge was the son of Franklin Easbach and Mr. Franklin Eassbach .
 Francis Gerbick of 66 Sylvester Avenue, were married Saturday morning, December 2, at St. Mary's Chapel .
 Edmund L Parker performed the 11 o’clock ceremony and was also celebrant of the nuptial mass which followed . Edmund Parker was also a celebrant for the wedding .
 Given in marriage by her father Miss Fentross a gown wore white peau de soie with a full cape attached at the shoulders and falling to form a short train . Gown was a gown worn by her mother-in-law .
 Advice on the care of animals during the winter months was issued yesterday by Dr. Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Schnelle: "Both dogs and cats, whether they live in the city or in the country, deserve special thought and care because of the hazards created by winter" Schnelle says . Schnelle said, “Both dogs ... and cats ... deserve special consideration and care"
 Following a heavy snowstorm, it is dangerous to allow dogs to run free, since they are likely to stay within the confines of plowed thoroughfares and thus risk being struck by cars .
 Attention should also be given to the feet of dogs and cats when they contact sanded sidewalks or streets .
 The sand is usually treated with calcium chloride to prevent its freezing and this is irritating to the tender webbing between the toes . This is usually used to prevent the sand from freezing and irritating .
 The pet’s feet should be wiped dry and if very hairy, like that of a cocker spaniel or poodle, washing is advisable . Washing is also recommended for a very hairy dog or a poodle dog .
 Rock salt or other defrosting agents used on sidewalks are also irritating . Rock salt is also very irritating to walkers .
 The three bridesmaids wore similar gowns of champagne peau de soie with matching wide bow head bands . Both dogs and cats can be -allowed outdoors even in extremely cold weather if they are active .
 The bridesmaids carried bouquets of dyed-to-match carnations, and Miss Donahue carried rust carnations . The bride and groom were married at the end of the evening .
 Miss Patti Lippa, niece of the bridegroom, dressed like the bridesmaids . A dictionary built right into your three-ring notebook, plus five subject dividers .
 A real boost to study efficiency, at the Star office. velvet in a deeper blue. velvet velvet in deeper blue .
 Becker wore a beige sheath embroidered with seed pearls and matching accessories . Becker wore an embroidered embroidered sheath to the event . Becker also wore matching accessories and wore a matching necklace .
 Dwight L Cart officiated at the seven o’clock candlelight ' ceremony . The ceremony was followed by a reception at the Winchester Country Club . Dwight Cart presided at the ceremony .
 She wore a silk satin peau de soie fashioned with long sleeves and a bateau neckline, which was trimmed with seed pearls and crystals .
 Her floor length skirt was accented in the back by a flat bow and ended in a chapel length train . She wore a floor-length skirt with a chapel-length train .
 Mr Loomis attended the Rochester schools and served with the Air Force . He attended Rochester schools .
 There still is a limit to the amount of space we have for cuts and the time we have to make them . We put in an expensive machine so that we can publish many more pictures than we used to, but there still is still a limit .
 "We simply can not continue to play musical chairs with pictures and stories as we have been lately," says the BBC . We simply can't continue playing musical chairs, says BBC presenter Richard Quest .
 Given in marriage by her father iss Eshbach wore a gown ol TO ALL OF OUR FRIENDS valley lilies .
 She wore an emerald green velvet dress with matching headdress and carried yellow chrysanthemums .
 Eshbach, mother of the bride, was gowned in orchid peau de soie . She wore matching orchids .
 Eaton’s personalized stationery for men and women . The bridegroom's mother, the bridegrooms mother, is the bridesmaidmaid .
 Ian Gibson, another sister of the bride, and Miss Marilyn Snelling, all of Winchester . Miss Snelling is Miss Ian Gibson's sister . Ian Gibson is the bride's cousin .
 They were identically gowned in Cerisean red satin sheaths styled with square necklines short sleeves and bellshaped skirts . The women wore identical red satins and Ceriseans satin satin gowns .
 Couples carried cascades of holly and babies breath which matched their gowns .
 The ushers were Tobias B Pope of Pine Orchard, Conn., and Mr JoKirsten Travel Agency orcaro . The best man, and ushering were Frank Comita and Robert Perry .
 Both the bride and bridegroom are graduates of Winchester High School, class of 1959 . Both are high school graduates . The ceremony will be held in New Hampshire .
 Ann Marie Porcaro is engaged to Anthony G Mucera, son of Mr and Mrs. David B Porcaros . Ann Marie's parents announce the engagement of their daughter, Ann Marie, to Mr Anthony G. Mucara . Ann Ann Marie will be married to Anthony
 Long’s Auto School on INSURANCE Rates era 15 years and 9 months; GRADUATES SAVE 50 graduate of Winchester High School and Lasell Junior College . Miss Porcaro graduated from Long's Auto School .
 He is a member ersons a; Jt V, an old-fashioned custom, r tis true. He is also a member of the Tufts Jt. V .
 To sing out our good wishes to you l 7 or a simply perfect happy holiday timet timet f)0^< f A Mr and Mrs. to sing out your good wishes l 7 .
 Merrell is associated with the William S Merrell Company of Cincinnati, Ohio . He is now associated with William Merrell .
 With all the warmth in our hearts, we wish joy to our many friends . An Octobe with all the warmest hearts wishes joy to friends .
 The Winchester Star buys a good game, and you can get it, and other new games at tile Winchester Star .
 Nichols died Sunday, December 17, at a nursing home in South Natick after several months of failing health . Nichols, a former widely known resident of Winchester, was a well-known Winchester resident .
 She was in her 94th year and until she entered the nursing home last spring had been a resident of Winchester for more than 60 years . She had been in Winchester, Winchester, since she was 94 years old .
 She was born June 29, 1808, in Dover, N.H., and spent much of her childhood there . Her grandparents' home is now the property of the Society for the Preservation of New England .
 In 1892 she married Nathaniel Marsh Nichols and they lived for a time in Haverhill before moving to Winchester in 1900 . In 1900 she moved to Winchester and moved there with her husband .
 Her late husband, who died Dec., 1947, was for a time custodian of schools in Winchester, later serving on the Board of Public Welfare and for 30 years until his death, as Collector of Taxes . For 30 years, he was Collector of taxes .
 The Nichols' first home after coming to Winchester was on Mystic Avenue . The Nichols moved to Winchester, Winchester, in 1964 .
 Nichols was honored by Governor Samuel W McCall of Massachusetts with a citation for her work in preparing Winchester for bombing during World War I . Nichols was also the first honorary life member of the Winchester Red Cross Chapter for her years of service .
 An honorary life member of the Oval Club in recognition of her many hours of work at the Veterans Hospital in Bedford . She was at one time on the grounds committee and an active worker in other ways for the Winchester Hospital .
 She was one of the charter members of the Winchester Historical Society . She was also a charter member of a Winchester historical society .
 Nichols was vice president of the President’s Club . She was also vice-president of the New England Women's Club . Nichols was an active member of the First Congregational Church .
 She and her husband were active for many years in the Appalachian Mountain Club . She was active in the club .
 Compton Allyn of Cincinnati, Ohio, and John W Pierce of Sherburne; also a greatgranddaughter, Sarah Nichols Allyn . Compton Allwyn and John Pierce also have two greatgranddaughters .
 Memorial services were held on Tuesday afternoon at Ripley Chapel of the First Congregational Church with the minister, Dr Dwight L Cart, officiating .
 William H Foley, 84, of 15 Hill * treet, died Sunday evening, December 17, at the Winchester Hospital after a short illness . Foley was a member of the 15 Hill treet family .
 He was born in Winchester and grew up in town, attending the Winchester schools . He grew up there and attended Winchester schools, graduating from high school .
 For 62 years he was associated with the Heywood Company in Wakefield as a supervisor . He retired two years ago after retiring from the company .
 When the Heywood Company moved to Gardner he made his home for a time in that city . He lived in Gardner, Gardner, when the company moved there .
 The funeral was held Wednesday morning from the Lane Funeral Home . Requiem high mass was celebrated at the Immaculate Conception Church . The funeral service was held at the church .
 Joshua J Vernaglia of 2 Robinson Park, a Boston attorney, died suddenly at his home Wednesday evening, December 13 . He died after a brief illness following a heart attack .
 He had not been troubled previously and his death, entirely unexpected, came a severe shock to his family and friends . Mr Vernaglia was the son of Louis, and Henrietta Vernagalia .
 He was born September 22, 1906, in East Boston, and commenced his schooling there .
 As a boy he moved with his parents to Medford, but he continued in school in Boston . He graduated from Boston English High School . As a teen, he moved to Boston with his family .
 He first practiced with Samuel L Bailen at 73 Tremont Street in Boston . He was admitted to the bar the next year .
 He was associated in practice at the same location with Melvin Breath, former mayor of Chelsea, and his brother, Frank Breath . Later he was associated with Melvin and Frank Breath in practice .
 At the time of his death he had his own offices at 73 Tremont Street, Boston, Boston .
 Associated with him were William Foley of Boston and James Cassidy of Dorchester . Associated with them were William J Foley and James F Cassidy of Boston .
 He was a member of the Massachusetts Bar Association, a member and former director of the Winchester Boat Club . He was also a director and member of a Sons of Italy in Medford and of the Eastern Association of Lawyers .
 He came to Winchester eight years ago from Medford, building the house in which he lived at the corner of Cambridge Street and Robinson Park . He moved to Winchester 8 years ago and now lives in the city .
 On November 11, 1940, Mr Vernaglia married Hazel E Mulkerin of Medford, principal of the Center and Wait Schools in Medford .
 She survives with a son, Joshua J Vernaglia, Jr., of Winchester . She also has two brothers, Dr. Dr. and two brothers .
 Mrs. Paul A Vernaglia, both of Medford, Medford; and four sisters, Miss Anne, Mrs. Anne and Mrs. Joseph, both Medford . The family also includes four sisters and two sisters .
 Harry T Baker of 34 Shawsheen Road, Bedford, died suddenly at the Emerson Hospital in Concord on December 13 . Baker made his home on Forest Street of this town until 14 months ago .
 Mr Baker is survived by five sisters, Irene, Edith, and Grace Baker of Bedford, Bedford, Mrs. Baker . Mrs Baker is also survived by her sisters Irene .
 Funeral services were held at the Douglass Memorial Chapel in Lexington Friday, December 15 at 11:00 a.m. with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. William Johnson was a member of the Lexington-area congregation .
 James S Whittaker of Saint Paul’s Mission Church of Bedford officiated at his funeral .
 Gear & Tool Company, founded in Woburn in 1922, and Technical Products Company in Concord in 1946 . Gear and Tool Company was founded in 1922 and in 1946 in Concord, Massachusetts .
 Its principal products are gears, gear assemblies, actuators, flexible shaft equipment, tachometers, and the ICE CAP refrigerator for meat grinding machines .
 The consolidation of its present plants in Concord and Woburn under one roof with carefully planned and streamlined production systems will effect great savings and efficiency, it i3 expected, according to John H Lyman .
 The public is invited to visit the new Geartronics Plant following its opening next April . The public will be able to view the operation of the plant .
 Arthur A Curry, chairman, chairman of Billerica Industrial Commission: Albert Clifford, vice president . Albert Clifford is vice president of the Commerce Commission . Arthur Curry is chairman of the committee .
 The ceremonies and luncheon were attended by state and local officials who congratulated the corporation on its longview planning and consistent growth . The ceremonies were held in conjunction with a luncheon by the company .
 The plant, expected to be completed in April, 1962, is a onestoried, pre-engineered steel beam and panel construction . The plant will cover 27,000 square feet and allows for continual expansion .
 Geartronics Corporation is a con George E Mitchell . Miss Martha Lee Wood, of 63 Church Street, is spending a short vacation in Bradenton, Florida, visiting her grandparents, Mr and Mrs.
 Harry L Pilkington, formerly j Lynn Mitchell of Hightstown, N.J of Winchester, has been married for more than 20 years .
 Also surviving are two sisters round trip by jet plane . She is making the most of her life in the world .
 Mr Mitchell was born October 10, 1886, in Dorchester . He was the son of Henry L., and Ida S. Mitchell .
 He attended the schools of Dorchester and Malden . After his marriage to Helen Caldwell of Worcester he and his wife made their home in Lynn, and later in Swampscott .
 Mr Mitchell was promoted to manager of the New England district with headquarters in Boston .
 His first wife died December 31, 1950, and on February 6, 1954, he married Charlotte S Brawn of Melrose . He was married to Charlotte Brawn in 1954 .
 She survives with two sons, Edwin C Mitchell of Williamsport, Pa., and George E Mitchell, Jr., of Columbus, Ohio . She also has two grandsons, Larry Mitchell of Hightstown, N J* and Gibson Mitchell of Detroit, Mich., twin sons of Edwin
 Frank Carbee of Watertown; and a brother, C Harold Mitchell of Lewiston, Me. Me. The family is survived by Carbee's wife, Carbee, and Mitchell's brother, Mr. Mitchell .
 Funeral services will be held Friday afternoon at 2 o'clock at the Bennett-Norris Chapel with the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Bennett will officiate the service .
 Newton Clay, pastor of Crawford Memorial Methodist Church, officiated the service . Newton Clay was pastor of the Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist .
 Officer Farrell has not been remuneration since the accident . It is believed that worry over financial obligations and the care of his family can prevent him from making a satisfactory recovery .
 The John P Farrell Fund is being raised to help the young officer . All who may care to assist the officer can have the opportunity to do so .
 Containers have been distributed about town, and individual letters are being sent to many residents, asking for contributions . Containers are being distributed around town .
 Those who may wish to contribute to the fund can make checks payable to the Officer John P Farrell Fund and send them to William D Sullvian, cashier of the Winchester National Bank .
 Any who may care to assist the committee in the raising of the fund can contact the fund chairman, Michael A Penta, whose number is PA 9-3011 .
 Eleven-year-old Arthur L Hayford of 54 Richardson Street was treated for a hip bruise and hip cuts Saturday morning . Ik* ran into a car driven by Dr. Dr. Hayford . Hayford ran into the car and suffered a bruise .
 Kaufmann told police he saw the youngster run out of a house onto the sidewalk and pause at the gutter before the accident occurred . Kaufman told police that lie saw the child run out onto the street onto a sidewalk and paused at the sidewalk before the incident occurred .
 Robert Fitzgerald of 28 Rangeley Road, Arlington, lost control of his car, smashing into three cement guards owned by the Town of Winchester . Fitzgerald was driving a panel truck* west on Johnson Road near Cox Road . Fitzgerald smashed into the cement guards .
 The collision disabled the truck which was then parked on the side of the road . Fitzgerald reported no personal injuries reported by Fitzgerald .
 Ernest P Mayer, 41, of 7 Russell Road, Lexington, hit the rear end of the truck as he was proceeding along in his Dodge . No personal injuries reported to police, but with some damage to the Dodge .
 Superintendent of Parks Stanley Mullen reported the license plate missing from the Rotary Chuck Wagon parked in the town yard Tuesday morning .
 A hydrant on the corner of Main Street and Town Way was found broken off at the base . A truck parked nearby was damaged on the right front side of the hydrant .
 The driver came to the station, reported the accident and filled out the proper forms . The driver was not injured in the accident .
 Besides her husband, she leaves behind two sons, Winthrop A Palmer and Lawrence R Palmer, both of Winchester .
 Family services were held Tuesday afternoon at the Kimball Chapel with Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister attended the funeral of Dr. Ronald Reagan .
 Winchester's combination play fell apart toward the end of the game and the Sachems were not covering effectively . Winchester was not covered effectively in the game .
 Coach Phillips altered his defenses in an effort to contain the Tanners . The Orange gradually pulled ahead to win by 11 points . Coach Phillips alters his defenses .
 Donovan was high man for Woburn with 24 points . Bellino’s 16 points was high for Winchester . Donovan Donovan scored 24 points in the game . Winchester had 16 points high for the win .
 Jim Devuney: "Such fins’ losing game with Woburn Tuesday at Winchester. Such fins' losing game is one in tin* such fins' loss at Winchester .
 Also Available is a Complete Selection of Genuine Capons, Ducklings, Geese and Fresh Turkeys . Also available is a selection of Fresh Turkey, Capons and Ducklings .
 F Playmobile — only $11.88 Like real car — ignition key, window wiper, sionals, horn, shift, antenna, etc. The Playmobile comes with the keys, window, window and sional .
 The Winchester Star was established in 1880 by Theodore Wilson, Sr. Established by Theodore P Wilson, Jr. It was the first newspaper to publish the Winchester Star .
 There have been other great men and women ; soldiers, statesmen, scientists, educators and philanthropists . all of whom have left their marks on the times in which they lived .
 The Crist Child began in a stable under the most humble circumstances and the meanest surroundings . None, however, has so changed the direction of the world .
 Parents were unable to get a room at the Inn. Christ did not come of an exalted family. Parents were able to get to the Inn at Christ's birthplace .
 In that humble manger of Bethlehem began a way of life that has altered the world as no other philosophy or credo has succeeded in doing through the centuries . The birth of Jesus Christ was born in Bethlehem, Bethlehem, on December 4, 2012 .
 Followers of the Christ are commanded to love their God and their neighbor as themselves . Followers should love God and neighbors as themselves, says the author of the book .
 Christ was ever the man of peace, preaching peace and the brotherhood of man . Christ preached peace and brotherhood, says the author of the Bible .
 This week has reminded us all that winter has arrived, and that any time now we may have a blizzard . The Magi, or wise men, brought costly gifts to the infant Jesus, but the adoration of the poor shepherds who knelt at the manger was
 W hether the plowing crews will do a good job of clearing the snow will depend upon the cooperation they get from carowners .
 I f the men on the plows are able to get through the streets without having to drive around cars left in tlie roadway, they will do a good job of making our streets passable for all of us .
 If the plows have to be maneuvered around parked cars, the job of the men driving them becomes much more (lit* ficult)
 Even if the plows can get through, the cars on the street are walled in with snow . Even if plows get through the wall of snow, it will remain there until the next snow fall .
 Police Chief Derro asked the Star to request its readers to keep their cars off the street during the season when snow is expected .
 All night parking on the street is not permitted in Winchester at any time . Winchester is a city that has a history of parking in the city centre . Winchester police say all night parking is illegal in Winchester .
 The town has voted to the Superintendent of Streets the authority to remove cars interfering with his crews' attempts to clear the streets of snow . The town voted to give the superintendent of streets the authority .
 It just may be that he will get riled enough to do it during some storm this winter . He just may have gotten riled during a storm .
 It might cost you a lot more to get it out of hock than it would have taken to buy it off the street in the first place .
 The Chief assures us he will have no sympathy for the on-street parker who gets into trouble with the snow-plowcrs . The Chief says he will not have any sympathy for those parkers .
 Why not avoid any unpleasantness, and help those on the plows do a good job by keeping the family chariot oft the street this winter .
 There will be a time when the rules catch up with you, when you would have missed a lot of trouble if you had played or acted according to the code . There will, however, come a time in life when you have to play the rules .
 Late in the game, with the Eagles leading, the Giants were forced to kick deep in their own territory to give up the football at a time when possession was of utmost importance .
 The kick was gotten off and the Eagles got the ball not too far from midfield . The Eagles were able to get the ball back in the first half .
 They might very well have gone on and scored a touchdown that would have clinched the game for them, because they had stopped the Giants offense and seemed the more spirited team of the two at that time .
 The Giants kicker was bumped by an Eagles player trying to block his punt . The hump was an infraction of the rules, and was immediately called by the official nearest to the play .
 The end result was that instead of the Giants losing the hall and some mure of their waning morale, they got the hall hack, a lo-vard advance on the penalty and an all-important first down .
 From this unexpected good fortune, the rejuvenated Giants proceeded to move steadily down field for the game-winning touchdown . The Giants went on to score a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Such bumps occur fairly often in football and generally result in penalties of either five, or fifteen yards, according to the official’s judgment of the damage done the kicker . Such a penalty' doesnot have a really vital hearing on the result of a game, but it very well
 The player who has schooled himself to play the game according to the rules is less liable to get his team in trouble than the one who contravenes the code if lie thinks he can get away with it .
 The coach who forbids his boys to break the rules, regardless of the provocation, is less likely to see a [H>lential championship washed down by an illegal play .
 The motorist habitually fails to stop at a stop street, because there is usually no other car coming and no law enforcement officer around . Finally is whistled down by an unlooked for policemen as lie is driving out of the stop street while taking his mother-in-law
 The I 'ire Department’s burning ban during a long dry spell, takes a chance . The resulting lire does several hundred dollars worth of damage to his neighbor's garage and shrubs . The individual who thinks it is foolish to pay an v attention to the I .
 The householder who sees no necessity for having the requisite inspection of new wiring in his house, because lie knows it is all right, feels terribly abused when the insurance company refuses to pay after a fire at his home Iiecause .
 The football player who humped the kicker in the big professional game did not count the possible cost of his infraction of the rules . The player didn't count the potential cost of the infraction .
 The habit of playing according to code, whether it he on the athletic field, in the gym, on the gulf course or in every day life is a good one to cultivate .
 The world is rapidly becoming an armed camp and suspicion and violence are rife . What a wonderful thing it would he if the world could capture the true spirit of Christmas; peace, brotherhood, tolerance, self sacrifice, self-sacrifice .
 Peace is in every one’s thoughts this Christinas, as it has been many times in many places throughout the years . The hope of “Peace On Earth” meant the lifting of a burden for the many who were poor and oppressed . Peace is also in the hope
 The desire for peace is world wide, especially with those who would follow in the lootsteps of Him who gave us Christmas . The need for peace in the world is world-wide .
 Everywhere churches are preparing special services for Christmas . We ask our prayers for peace, both within and without their portals . We are asking for peace .
 Never has there been a greater need for Christians to gather together to pray for peace that is so vital to us all if civilization is to endure . Never has been a more pressing need for Christian unity than for peace in the world .
 We can all help bring peace by thinking peace, by talking peace and working for peace . We need to talk peace, talk peace and work for peace, not just talk peace .
 Let 11s then this Christmas remember among the pleasures, which after all are good for us too, what we arc celebrating on Christ’s Birthday . Let 11's then this . Christmas remember .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist will hold two identical services of worship at Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist . There will be identical services at the two churches .
 There will be the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism for Children following the second morning service, or at about, 12:15 o’clock .
 Methodist Youth Fellowship will sing Christmas carols for the sick, aged and shut-ins . At 7:00 o’clock in the evening the members of the youth will sing .
 Later in the evening, after the carolling, they will he served hot chocolate . The family will also have hot chocolate at the end of the evening .
 Traditional Christmas Eve Candle-Lighting Service will be held in the sanctuary of the church at 11:30am .
 Prelude “Swiss Noel” Daquin Introit by the Choir The Carol “Adeste Fidelis” Traditional Gloria in Excelsis Deo Old French Carol Prayer Response Brahms by Youth Choir Anthem “O Children, Come Quickly” Austrian Carol
 The Rev. Gloria Maifeld, soprano, sings The Carol "Joy to the World" The Organ Postlude “The Heavens Declare” Marcello is the organ postlude .
 H Newton Clay, pastor, will preach at both the 9:30 and 11:00 o’clock services on the subject . Clay will be preaching at both of the 9-30 and . 11-minute services .
 At the 11:30 o’clock Christmas Eve Service several of the familiar carols will be sung . The pastor will conduct the beautiful symbolic ceremony of the Lighting of the Candles .
 The Anthem “There’s A Song in the Air” Speaks . The Solo “Ave Maria” Schubert Organ Postlude Improvisation by Prof. Roland Nadeau .
 Pastor Mr Raymond Shannon, Organist and Choir Director . Sunday, December 21 at 10:15m. Sunday .
 Handel Duet “O, Divine Redeemer” Charles Gounod Soprano, Hazel F O’Donnell Contralto, Nalora Steele . The congregation will sing carols by the light from the manger seene .
 Junior High BYF will present “Holiday House,” a one-act drama . The manger scene will be the focal point of the service .
 Christmas Day 7:45 Mass Christmas . Introit “Holiest Night’s” Offertory “Silent Night, Holy Night”
 Midnight Choral Communion Choral Service at Epiphany Church will he presented by a program of Carols and Christmas Anthems beginning at 11:00 o’clock .
 Bach Anthems by the Choir: “How Far is it’ to Bethlehem” Shaw Familiar Christmas Hymns and Carols . Kirkpatrick Postlude: "Toccata in D Minor"
 Cherub Choir Special “Away In A Manger” Directed by Mrs. Dwight Moore Cello, Mr. George Bragdon Cherub .
 The Herald Angels Sing Recessional Music by the Senior Choir Members Miss Kay Roache, Organist FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH Christmas Music Sunday morning, December 24 .
 Waas Senior Forum Choir will sing at the end of the month . Special music will be played by Miss Y’uko Hayashi .
 All (Of llrni ss A jHiifit JiarptJ Unliiiag S’paamt if a i I' I I l -• a jPiM JPPK JPiM Iftfe mm mm mm . JIftfe
 His Name shall be called the PRINCE OF PEACE by Wilson Sullivan . His portrait of Jesus emerges as one of an uncompromising fighter for social justice, liberty, and religious sincerity .
 Harry Emerson Fosdick says in “The Man from Nazareth,” is simply npt accurate . Harry Emerson . Fos dick said in ‘The Man From Nazareth’
 Because He taught new truths “as one having authority” and because He appealed splendidly to the imagination of His people, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. taught “a new truth” Dr. Luther says, “because He taught a new truth,
 For here was no Pharisee concerned more with the letter than with the spirit of religion . Here was a Man who cared that people were poor and oppressed, and needed food and love .
 Jesus made apostles of humble fishermen, eating with hated tax-clectors, mixing with lepers, forgiving a harlot, and respecting women as human beings in their own right . Jesus made disciples of the self-righteous by mixing with hated lepers and forgiving lepers . Jesus
 Jesus defied provincial prejudices of race and nation in cosmopolitan Galilee . Jesus moved among Assyrians, Greeks, Romans, and Romans . Jesus defied national prejudices in the Bible's birthplace .
 He rejected the concept of an ethnically chosen people by hailing the faith of a Roman soldier as the greatest in Israel . He cited a Samaritan as an exemplar of charity .
 Always, Jesus’ primary concern was for the humble and poor . His Truth, He said, was for all men in all times .
 He knew that the conquest of enmity lay not in the use of physical force, but in removing it at its psychological source, he said . He said: "He knew that he knew that . . He knew not to use physical force but to remove enmities at its
 In the Sermon, Jesus concerns himself less with the symptoms of moral illness than with the sources . To repay evil with evil, He taught, is only to increase evil .
 He reminds man that murder begins in anger and that we should be as concerned with preventing murder by dealing with anger as with punishing murder after the fact . We should be more concerned about preventing murder in anger than dealing with it after it happens .
 “tithing” without love is without value . “Make peace with your brother and neighbor,” says author . ‘Tithing’ is without love, says author. ‘tithing without love without value.’
 Avoid self-righteousness and ostentation even when you are at peace with your neighbors and come to church, avoid it . Avoid selfrighteousness, avoid ostentating .
 In the Sermon, Jesus also urges the standard of perfection as a guide to conduct, for only such a standard precludes self-satisfaction and permits us to realize that human growth is limitless . Jesus urges us not to be satisfied with perfection, but to be content with it
 He also reminds us that a good example is morally more effective than mere preaching . A good example of moral character is morally better than mere preach .
 He teaches that it is what we are and not what we possess that matters that matters, for even the finest possessions are subject to moth and rust . Even the best possessions can be subject to rust, he says .
 Jesus eared less for the good opinion of His contemporaries than for the judgment of history . Like the Prophets whose insights He sought to fulfill, Jesus sought to be judged by history .
 And because He spoke the truth with uncompromising force He paid truth’s high price, He paid the high price . The Bible says, “Because He spoke truth,” “He paid truth's high price.” The Bible said, ‘Because He
 Caesar executed Caesar as a “subversive,” he was executed as a common felon . Caesar was rebuked by religious leaders as a "heretic," and by Caesar, he was a "subversive" He was executed by a common criminal .
 The empires of Pilates murderers are in ruins now and the Pilates suffer the inexorable judgment of history, while the message of Jesus remains supremely alive . But the empires of His murderers are now in ruins, while Jesus' message of God is supremely still alive .
 The Winchester Star, left at your Kesldenca for one year, $4.00 in Advanca Single Copies, Ten Cents . The Winchester Stax assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpiral errors .
 Snooz Alarm Clocks Revlon Travel Kits Brush and Comb Sets Pen and Pencil Sets Little Lady Sets Yogi Bear Bath Salts Men’s SETs . Max Factor Faberge English Leather Old Spice Yardley .
 Russell Stover Candies and Whitman Chocolates . We carry a complete line of fine Domestic and Imported Cigars . We also carry a range of fine domestic and imported cigars .
 A proproa of the discussion reln-j tive to shelters, 1 thought the enj closed Item, which was reprinted in a recent Christian Science MonI itor, would be of interest to your | readers .
 At the risk of being labeled unrealistic, unpatriotic, or worse, here is one voice that joins his majesty’s loyal opposition by voting an emphatic negative .
 When our neighbors came knocking at our steel door, we as Christians could do nothing but let them in too . We as Christians can't wait to see if they want to see their neighbors in their homes . We are not afraid to see our neighbors in our homes, but to see them
 What “stormy blast” are we thinking of if not the mushroom cloud of sin over our world? What ‘storm’s” blast’ is we think of?
 Your paper deserves a heartfelt "Thank You" from the volunteers and staff of the Greater Boston United Fund for your part in publicizing the 1961 campaign .
 Your help by bringing to your readers the events and progress of this year’s drive, cannot be too highly appreciated .
 This can be attested' by the fact that a record sum of money for United Fund agencies was raised this year . This is a record amount of money was raised for the agencies .
 T read with deep appreciation the article in your December 7 edition, regarding Miss Lillian Sa1 ice’s teaching career and what she meant to the Winchester community . T read the article, which was published on December 7, about Miss Sa1 .
 I know so well what she did as a teacher since I was her principal at the Lincoln School for three years . She was principal at Lincoln School in Lincoln, Illinois, for 3 years .
 Someone has described a great teacher as one who has enthusiasm, simplicity, dedication, purpose and humility . A great teacher is described as someone who has passion, simplicity and simplicity .
 This is no time to take a furtive attitude toward what can and all too frequently does happen to a far too high proportion of young drivers . This time of the season is not the perfect time for young drivers to get involved in the sport .
 The wrecker would be moved to the front lawn of the High School or at the furthest that area of lawn that belongs to the former McMangs property . The owner of the wrecked car would like to vote on the location .
 There must he lots of ‘West Side’ people that have not had this shock also. There must be lots of "West Side" people that haven't had this experience .
 Let's face up to the fact that the more people that see this, the better . Let’s face up . The more people who see this . see it, the more they see it. The more . people that . see this.
 I am well aware that many of our junior drivers have great competence, this is not aimed solely at them, they have my great respect, hut if a new location will impress the horror of these accidents on one more person, particularly a younger person . Any effort that has to be spent
 Recently my husband underwent serious surgery at a Boston hospital, and a crisis in his condition made it imperative to reach me one morning at three o’clock . This morning, she called her husband at 3:30 a.m. ET from his Boston hospital .
 The hospital called the police, a cruiser and two officers being sent to my house at once . For some reason my telephone did not arouse me, and the hospital called police, and a cruiser .
 State Troopers were covering the town with the Auxiliaries . It was the night of the Policema’s Ball . Troopers covered the town in the night .
 The trooper who came into the house was John Riordan, who I am told was a fine football player at Winchester High School . Two of them came to me. The trooper came into my house . The trooper was a good football player .
 J can not stress too much his kindness, courtesy and knowledge of his job . J can also be seen for his kindness and courtesy .
 Seeing that I was badly upset he phoned the hospital for me got the latest report from my husband, and then announced that he and his associate would stand by in the event it became necessary for me to go to Boston .
 Officer Riordan and his brother officer stayed until everything had quieted down before driving away from the scene . I did not have to go, but they stayed with the officer .
 A very grateful woman wants the town to know* how much she appreciates what they did for her at a very critical time . They left her a very grateful note of thanks to them .
 It is nice to know there are men like Officer Riordan ready to help us in our hour of need . It's a good thing to know men like Riordan are there to help you in your moment of need.
 R Darrell Harvey 23 Lloyd Street BEARING Oil* TS OF DOG FOOL) AND llOLLARS for needy animals at Sudbury V Buddy Dog farm are . left to right, Mrs. Mrs. Darrell Harvey and Mrs. J. L. Lillars for needy
 The non-profit Buddy Dog Club strives to find homes for lost or unwanted animals . The club is dedicated to finding homes for unwanted hut friendly animals .
 A wonderful opportunity to acquire a fine family pet is offered by this warm-hearted ‘shelter’ where the homeless are housed . The homeless are also offered a chance to get a good pet .
 Winchester residents have become interested in helping such a deserving cause . Winchester residents are looking to help raise money for a local hospital . Winchester is looking to raise funds to help those who need it .
 Our New Teachers A Tribute To Miss Bancroft . The Fortnightly has lost a valued member of its staff .
 From 1928 when she joined the club, she served continuously on nearly all the committees, often as chairman, Antiques . From the year 1928 she joined, she joined nearly all of the committees .
 American Home, Conservation (in which she >vas particularly interested and was five times on the State Conservation Committee), Literature, Nominating, and others .
 She was also several times chairman of Pilgrimages, for she was very fond of adventuring and visiting historical places .
 She was one of The Fortnightly's most loyal and faithful workers . Always willing and tireless in many activities, she was tireless .
 A tree will be planted in her memory at the Memorial Forest of the Massachusetts State Federation of Womens’ Clubs .
 Elaine Corcoran is filling her first position as a regular teacher at the William G Noonan School this year .
 Last year she practice taught at the elementary level in the Framingham schools . She also taught at an elementary level .
 Miss Corcoran was horn in CamI bridge but now makes her home in Belmont with her parents, Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Carver .
 Miss Corcoran was graduated from Framingham State Teachers College in the class of 1961 . She is a graduate of Belmont High ’ School in the . class of 1957 .
 The Woburn Package Store, Inc. is located at 3-0932 Mill St., near Arlington, near Arlington .
 Vour club** fumls will earn a nice profit, be fully insured and readily available . Vourclubs can be found in France, Belgium, France and Germany .
 George Elwell won his cross country letter at Maine Central Institute in Pittsfield, Maine, at the school’s fall sports assembly .
 En Ka Exchange will be open Wednesday and Thursday, December 27 and 28 only . During Christmas vacation En Ka exchange will be closed only .
 Ben Newlands of North Wood Center, N.H., is spending the cold weather at West Palm Beach, Fla. He is a former well known resident of Winchester, New Hampshire . Newlands was a well known member of the Winchester community .
 On Saturday a Washington Street resident reported that children were out on the ice on Mystic Lake . The lake was definitely not in a condition that could be considered safe .
 Chief Derro again urged parents to advise their children not to get out on the ice until it is thick enough . Chief Derros says parents should not get their children out on ice .
 The chorus appears often at university concerts during the college year . It also makes occasional appearances off-campus appearances . The chorus is often at college concerts .
 Give a SAVINGS ACCOUNT for Christmas . Tel EXport 6-3349 after Newsy Paragraphs give a savings account . Give A SAVING ACCOUNT .
 During this term he has been on the varsity soccer team, staff of the school newspaper, and social committee . He has also been on staff of staff of school newspaper and the social committee.
 The Star got a Christmas Card this week from Herb and Marion Ross from Moulins, France . They report seeing a Winchester Rotary Flag on the wall of the Hotel de Paris, placed there during an International Convention of Rotary three years ago .
 The Rosses are in Europe while Mr Ross sets up a European office for the Uni ted Shoe Machinery Company .
 William J Sullivan of 2 Frank Street, Woburn, lost control of his Ford sedan on the ice-slicked surface of Washington Street near Tufts Road and skidded into an Edison pole . Sullivan was driving on Sunday when he lost control on the icy surface .
 The car was damaged on the right rear fender, the trunk and the rear window . No personal injuries were reported to police .
 Firefighters responded to a report of a car fire at the home of Dr. Dr. PA 9-1286, between 12 noon and 12:30m. and after 5:00m.
 Firefighters sprayed the motor fire with a cylinder of CO-2 and disconnected the car battery . Using asbestos gloves, the firemen sprayed the fire with asbestos gloves . The car battery was disconnected .
 Firemen answered a number of calls reporting wires down on Monday during the nasty storm . Firemen responded to reports of wires down during the storm .
 Edison Light said the entire East Side circuit was out pending repairs to the line . Edison Light explained that the line was shut down for repairs .
 The Supreme Court had its affect upon the Heitz case, and had it been made sooner, might have removed the original opposition of the Winchester Re tirement Board to Firefighter Heitz’s request for a pension .
 Firefighter Heitz’s appeal from the ruling of the local board was heard by the State Contributory Retirement Appeal Board on November 10 at the State House . Heitz's appeal was heard in a hearing held at State House in New Jersey .
 He is entitled to a pension of two-thirds of his base pay with a substantial allowance for his wife and children under 18 . After hearing testimony the board ruled his disability was service induced and that he is entitled .
 House Speaker Thompson had not issued a statement in response to I the Star’s request for information on what he intended to do in January with regard to Mr Chadwick's allegations . The Star asked Thompson to respond to the Star's request .
 Speaker Thompson will have sent a statement to the Star by next edition . Speaker Thompson is expected to make a statement by next week .
 His Excellency Governor John A Volpc, warned against witchhunting in the current gamb| ling crisis . Governor warned against 'witchhunting' in current crisis .
 Governor made his remarks in a speech before the Boston Commercial Club . Governor made the remarks in Boston's Commercial Club speech .
 Attorney General Edward J McCormack Jr. Jr. made the comments in an address to the Winchester Rotary Club two weeks ago . Attorney General McCormack, Jr., Jr. said the comments were made at the same time .
 Both public officials urged that fair legal practices be observed at the same time that organized gambling and political “bad apples” were exposed .
 R Harry S Parsons poured at the brightly lighted Christmas decorated table . Harry and Harry were at the scene of the incident .
 Everett F Kidder reported on the Christmas gifts sent to Hillside School in Marlborough . Kidder thanked the Chapter members for their most generous support .
 Paul F Stoneman Chapter Chairman of National Defense reported that the National Defense Chairman’s speech has been inforporated in the Congressional Region by Senator Strom Thurman of South Carolina . Senator Thurman has inforporated the speech into the Congressional region .
 Registrar reported one new member and five candidates . Carlton M Strong, Registrar reported a new member of the council .
 Katherine Blaney was the Speaker of the afternoon . Her talk on “Christmas Comes to America’ was most interesting .
 She illustrated her story with table settings of Antiques of long ago and their use today . She illustrated the story with tables settings of antique items .
 A Woburn man was reported injured in the incident on Vernon Street near Highland Avenue . A water hydrant was broken off at the base of the hydrant at 10:50m.
 The Horton car skidded on the icy road, veered across the road, hit the Horton car in the rear and forced it to ram into a tree . He said that apparently the car skid on an icy road and veered into the road .
 Mr Horton said that the other car hit the hydrant, breaking it off at the base . The hydrant was broken by the other vehicle .
 Mr Horton said he would consult his doctor about possible injuries . Complaining of chest pains, he said he was suffering chest pains .
 Donor Peter Marchesi and Jimmy II first-prize-winner Jimmy II . Cathy Blanchard of the Parkhurst School and Sam Bonasera, past president of the Winchester Lions .
 Carl Thomas of Parkhurst School and sixth of Oxford Street . Carl Thomas and James Hession of St. Mary's School . Mr Roland A grader and sixth-grader of Oxford St. London School of the Year are pictured .
 Nault of Washington Street and School each awarded a Rali Mr Robert A Nyere of Squanto eigh bicycle, first prizes in the j Road .
 The Winchester Lions put on a gala party for sixty children, complete with Santa Claus . The presentation was made by donor Peter Marchesi and Lions past president on behalf of the Winchester Lions .
 Sam Bonasera tells the Star that these little surprises have been ordered and are on their way . The Star will feature a full set of photos of the characters in a new series of episodes .
 William Cusack of “My eyes play an important role in life,” young Jim Hession wrote . William . Hession: “I'm glad that I've been able to do so far as I can’t wait.”
 Cathy Blanchard, 4th grader, wins award for "What My Eyesight Means To Me" "With my eyes I see the wonders of God," she writes .
 "I have seen the coming of spring and the beauties of nature and the earth," says the author . "It is a sign of spring," she says .
 I love to see the rain making rivers down the street and the snow falling silently . I love seeing the snow fall silently, and the rain falling silently. I love the rain, but I'm not afraid of it .
 "Most of all the good feelings I have when I see my mother and father, brothers and friends. Most of all I have are good feelings," she says of her family and friends .
 Boys “What Mv Eyesight Moans To Me” by James Hession Grade 6, St. St. Michael’s wins .
 I treasure my eyesight dearly, it is God’s greatest gift to me. I treasure it dearly. It is God's greatest gift, I say .
 I realize how fortunate I am to he able to see all the works of God’s creation. I realize that I am lucky to have been able to .
 Cambridge police reported the recovery of a Studebaker sedan reported stolen on December 13 . Cambridge police said the car was stolen in Winchester, Massachusetts .
 The owner of the stolen vehicle, Mr Edward W Machnic of 92 Hume Avenue, Medford was notified that his car was found .
 Mail a jigsaw puzzle postcard of Winchester to your friends . 25 cents each at the Winchester Star . Mail a postcard to your friend .
 The Boston Globe again brings you a program of some of the most beautif ul Christmas music in the world on Station IVCRB — IJJO AM, 702.fm . Christmas Bay in the morning, afternoon and evening .
 One of the high points of the program will be the playing of the original version of Handel’s Messiah with an outstanding cast headed by Joan Sutherland . IT ashington — 94-9. The show will be held in New York .
 There will be no commercial announcements during the entire broadcast day ... no interruptions . Nothing but beautiful Christmas music in thrilling stereo . No commercial announcements will be made .
 Enjoy a Merry Christmas with music from Qh osron . The Winchester Star will feature a special Christmas tribute to Qhosron .
 The first three trams dropped the majority of their nmtrhf . They retained the arm* places in the standings in the bowling league .
 Eleventh-place Army stopped California 3-1 . The big guns for Army wore Hobo Fiore 10.1-109.1 .
 Frank DiMambro and Angie Amico tried hard for Cal. with 82106-1 28 and 96*90-95 respectively. Cal. had a record of 96*95-95 .
 I Bowling League wishes uli the readers the readers of this column a Very Merry Christmas anil a Happy New Year .
 Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3V4 HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and hfcavily packed .
 There will be no badminton the week between Christmas and New Years December 26 and 28 . All Day Badminton Cancelled .
 Troop 59 presented the Christmas play “The Broth of Christkindli” to the mothers of the group at the home of Mrs. Mrs. J. L. Lillinger .
 On Tuesday afternoon the troop presented the same play with a second cast at the Winchester Home for the Aged .
 The girls also made the ornaments by hand to decorate the little tree used as part of the scenery . They also assisted in serving refreshments after both performances .
 Travelers — Donal Murphy, Helen Manning, Eileen Gill . Carolers — Cathleen Gill, Jane McBain, Mary Wadsworth, Marjorie Cunningham, Junice Russell . Play directed by Mrs. Caudill .
 The standings of the league were not published in last week’s Stur. P CH1ARENZA WElls 5-2697 nov9-8t Town Bowlinlin .
 A L. also broke two team season’s records by posting a team single of 5(54) and a team triple of 1668 . In doing this, A L.'s also broke the team season's records .
 Atlantic Gelatin’s pulling up to a tie for third place with Strike Lanes with third place . The only important change last Tuesday was Atlantic's pull up to third place in the race . Atlantic's only change came from Atlantic's third place finish .
 Gelatin 78 34 19,701 Gelatin . Post Office 68 44 19,555 K of C 63 49 19,067 49’ers 60 52 19,604 St. Louis County residents .
 Many elderly and infirm persons, as well as those with small children and limited incomes, need help at Christmas if this holiduy is to be a happy occasion .
 To help our less fortunate Winchester friends during the holiday season, gifts of money, food ancj clothing are ournestly solicited . Winchester friends are asked to help Winchester friends .
 Springfield College Frosh 7:30 Jan. at Newton . at Newton 3:30 . at Needham 7 :30 Feb. 7 . At Needham, the college will hold a 7-11 Jan. 7 at Newton College .
 The National Society of the Colonial Dames of America is announcing a competition open to all juniors and seniors at accredited Colleges on the 170th anniversary of the enactment of the Bill of Rights . To— PHARMACY GIRL INC, LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn
 The subject is “Patriotism Reappriased’s” a study of the individual American's duty to his country . The subject of the study is ‘Patriotisms Reapprieased”
 The first prize will be $2,000, the second $1,000 . Five honorable mentions at $100 each will be awarded at the event .
 In this day of increasing world tensions and emergencies of the new African Nations, it is important that young people, the leaders of the future, should state their ideas and beliefs about their country . Young people should reappraise the fundamental truths in the Bill of Rights .
 NEW: CHURCH * ANT) HOSPITAL BONDS j In Units of $500 or More t . KEENAN & CLAREY, Inc. Inc. holds a hospital bond .
 Best wishes for the happiest of holiday seasons . Winchester Taxi Service welcomes all .
 May all the joys of the season remain with you throughout the year ahead .
 Postmaster Ephraim Martin, right, commended Air Force Air Force . Postmaster Martin presented the award to Air Force One .
 B C. C. merged into a large single section of play on Wednesday, December 13 . B C.'s B and C. B merged into one large section on Wednesday 13 .
 Since this is the special season for thankfulness, we’d like to voice our appreciation to all who have helped make the WDBC a success . Robert Blackler 94 V& Peg Sullivan and Dolly Pasquale 93 V and Peg Sullivan are 94 V and 93 V&
 A particular tip of the hat goes to the Winchester Star, Draper Sears, Anderson’s Jewelers, and the Knights of Columbus .
 We owe a big debt of gratitude to Ann Dean and her fine entertainment committee, Dick Herlihy for his unstinting contribution of coffee . The Roots for their efficient handling of reception, and Jim Wharf for his patience and hard work .
 Christmas presents we'd like to slip secretly under the Christmas tree . Here are some presents we’d like to sneak under the tree .
 Tickets for the ACBL Charity Tournament on January 19 are on sale for the charity tournament . The tournament will be held in New Jersey .
 To Chet Davis, a tool ed leather leather leather traveling case fitted to carry master-point certificates . The case was fitted with master-points certificates .
 To Ruby White and Polly Dallin, a green door to have interesting things going on behind . Ruby White: "To Ruby White, the door to the green door has interesting things happening behind" Polly White: The door is a door to a green room with interesting things behind .
 To Trudy Mainberger, a large supply of duplicate bridge boards as prizes for her coming series of raffles . Mainberger: "I'm going to be very happy to have a lot of fun with my friends"
 To your bridge editor, a long white beard, so he can continue being Santa Claus at the bridge table in 19G2 . The bridge editor asks for a white beard .
 You’ll find our wide selection of modern formals perfect for the occasion . * they’re designed for comfort as well as elegance* GREGORY’S Formal Wear Rental Service .
 Douglas Wickwire, Douglas Carlson, Paula Ward, Steve and Paul Sanborn, Martin Garnis, Frederick Josephson, Stephen New, Joan Sheppard, and Judy Dunn .
 The “Holiday Houses* in Winchester’s ‘Winchester’ will be featured in a new series of Christmas stories . The ‘Holiday’ Houses* is a collection of photographs of the houses in Winchester .
 Through the reading of Scripture, ministry of music, and carol singing, we will be led in a deep and meaningful way in preparation for thfe Christmas morn .
 The Holy Family, the shepherds with their sheep and the three kings with their gifts are reverently placed in position in the cattle shed by members of the upper classes of the Sunday School .
 All are most cordially welcome to this non-liturgical service . promptly fired it into the St. Michael's St. Louis Cathedral .
 Jim Moran took a centering pass from Frank Hession and split the pads of the Norwood goal tender . Moran's goal, thus closing St. Mary’s goal, was the goal of the game .
 Dick Norberg grabbed another feeder from Moran and rifled goal number seven into the upper-left-hand corner of the St. Louis area . Norberg added another goal to his tally in the second half .
 Winchester St. Mary's takes on Saint Anne’s of Peabody in a game which could give the Winchester team undisputed claim to the top berth in the league . The Winchester team could claim the top spot after the game .
 Jos* Farrar says 'The Roberts leaves nothing to be dasired' In terms of recording and playback quality .
 The game was three minutes ola wnen Dick Norberg slapped in Frank Manzie’s centering pass . It's really unbelievable at $209.50."" Game was played in the first half .
 Midway through the initial frame Jim Moran sent Norberg in with a perfect lead pass . Dick put it away to give Saint Mary’s a 2-0 lead .
 The seven o cluck service at the Church of the Epiphany is a family, non-sacramental service . The service consists of the singing of familiar Christmas carols and the reading of the nativity stories from the Gospels .
 Mary’s went into the second stanza with a 3-0 lead which was quickly boosted to 4-0 . Norberg took a drop pass from Jim Moran and blasted a forty footer off the cross bar and into the Saint Catherine's cage .
 Norwood retaliated seconds later when their right wing beat the Winchester defense and fired the puck into the lower left-hand corner of the net . Norwood responded with a second goal in the second half of the game .
 Norberg collected another Moran pass to the right of the Norwood goalie and got a shot that deflected off the goaltender’s pads and dribbled into the goal . Norberg's shot was the only goal of the game for Norwood .
 Norberg completed his hat trick of the day with a goal from the goalie to the right of goal and then slid a pass over to Norberg . Norberg flipped it into the empty net, thus completing his second hat trick .
 NEW: YOUNG, PLUMP SQUANTO TURKEYS FOR THF, COMING HOLIDAYS SQUANTo TURKEY FARM Tel.4-2367 60 Haverhill Street, Reading — Route 12B, Exit 24-2 .
 Open the flash compartment, and the ""auto•hlft"" shutter is automatically set for flash . Close it, and you're ready for outdoor shots .
 Weatherly by Lenox Place Setting $19.95 WINCHESTER CAMERA SHOP trying to take good :;fi photographs or are you afraid to even try?
 If you are giving her some of the missing pieces in her ft China, Silver or Glass to complete her set, you are sure to find it at Swanson's .
 Stielf, Towle, Wallace jg GLASS 4 Fostoriu, Tiffin. Gorham, Heirloom, International, Reed and Burton . Gorham is Gorham's first ever Silver Gorham .
 Our 16 th Year In Winchester “PHOTOGRAPHY WITHOUT FEAR"" is the funniest and most in* structive booklet onautomatio photography . Our 16th year in Winchester is the best in the world .
 Just bring this ad to Call PArkview 9-3636 single Magic Key operation . easy flash system ■ shutter speeds up to J/800 "" fast f/9. precision Agfa Color Agnar lens .
 She is making a satisfactory recovery and will be glad to hear from her old friends in Winchester, Winchester .
 Ill, by Shirley Thomas Miracle Gardening Encyclopedia by Samm Sinclair Baker Schools, by Lawrence Bradford Perkins Shanghaiing Days, by Richard H Dillon Tomorrow’s Illiterates, by Char les Child Walcutt, ed. Illiterate .
 The birth of Christ Jesus will form the background of the I yesson -Sermon at Christian Science church services Sunday . Christian Science is a Christian Science denomination .
 Miss Mary A Skruta, M.A., Director of Christian Education, Mr William R Sorenson, Church School Superintendent. Miss Skrutta was Director of the Christian Education . Mr William Sorerson was Superintendent of the Church School .
 Carol music; readings from the Scripture; drama, ""Holiday House"" by the Junior High Baptist Youth Fellowship . Carol music, readings from Scripture and drama by the youth choir .
 Open House at the ParRonage for College and Preparatory School students, working young people, and mil tnry servicemen . Open House for college and pre-school students, young people .
 A pageant by the Primary Department. the Junior Choir und the Motion Choir. The Primary Primary Choir . A pageant .
 Nonagon, Forum members may attend Christmas Sunday at church with their families . Nonagon and Forum members can also attend church with families .
 Care will be provided for Nursery 1 through Kindergarten 4 in the Vestry area . Care will also be provided in the area of Vestry .
 There will be two Worship Services U*lay one at 9:30 and one at 11:00 o’clock . The service will be held at 9-30 and 11-11 o'clock .
 Following the second service, there will be the administration of the Sacrament f Baptism for children .
 This midnight service on' Christmas Kve is one of our beautiful truditions . The service will be held at midnight on December 25 .
 The Wildwood Group of the W.S.C. will be entertained at the home of Miss Beatrice Blake . The group will perform at Beatrice's home .
 Members of the group who cannot attend please call PA 9-2639 or MI 8-6042 . Members of this group are encouraged to attend .
 Collector’s postuge stamps and albums now oil sale at the Star office on all price levels .
 In “Heidi,’s on fifteen minutes notice, Kathy Dale substituted as Klara . Kathy Dale replaced Klara on 15 minutes notice .
 In ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream, the part of Oberon, King of the Fairies, was .taken by Edward Marcy, substituting on 36 hours notice when Ronald Marcy . was stricken with ap pendicitis .
 The Eighth, Ninth and Tenth fairies were absent during the December 15 performance . The Eighth and Ninth fairies are absent from the performance .
 Henry Dietrich improvised the wood scene without his usual acting companions, Quince, Snug, Flute, Starveling, and Snout . Dietrich, as Bottom, improvised the scene without the usual actors' usual partners, Quice, Snugs, Flutes, Star
 Heidi, Mary Wadsworth, Brigette, Leslie Buchanaan; Sebastian, Stephen Edgell; GoatPeter, Brian MacDonald; Barbel, Adena Krasnow; Dete, Cornelia Taggert; The Grandmother, Barbara Light; Brigette .
 The Professor, Richard Grandfield; Klara, Jane McBain; Doctor Classen, Henry Dietrich; Tinette the Maid, Mary Balliston . Seseman, Donal Murphy; Miss Rottenmeier, Judy Morrill; The Professor; The Tinette, Richard
 Puck, Geoffrey Brackett, Kristen Beard and Cara McCarthy were the first and second Fairy . Queen Titania Titania was the third Fairy (Peaseblossom) and fifth Fairy Marla Johnis was the eighth Fairy .
 The Elves were Perry McCarthy, Stephen Johnis, Stuart Johnis and Chucky Birehall, Tip MacDonald .
 Pyramus Henry Dietrich, Quince, Richard Grandfield; Snug Stephen Edgell; Flute Bill Chase; Starveling Geoffrey Brackett or Brian MacDonald; Snout , John Newton. Pyramu Henry . Dietrich . Quince .
 Arthur Warner, nee A dele Jonah, formerly of Edgehill Road, is producing and directing the Christmas pageant for 1500 young people of the American Youth Association, of which she is a director .
 Parker, Esterbrook, and Scripto pens and fillers available at the Star office .
 Members of Church School staff and parents of Second Congregational Church School children remarked that while they had expected merely to be amused, they found themselves responding deeply to the moods created by sensitive boy and girl actors .
 High School students in “Heidi,” “A Midsummer Nigth’s Dream” and “Robinson Crusoe” at the High School matinee performances .
 In the Children’s Theatre School, spontaniety is valued as one of the special attributes of childhood . The Children's Theatre School is dedicated to children's theatre .
 Children’s spirited interpretation of stories into unforgettable performance was amazingly achieved . Under Carlene Samoiloff's guidance, the complicated art of transiting children's spirited interpretations of stories .
 ANNE R WILD. 45 Church Street PA 9-3268 nov3-tf to present items for Worship Services .
 During the carol service which preceded the plays, Mr Ronald H Richburg, Church School Superintendent, presided . Rev. Rev. Richard Richburg of the Church School, presided and Rev. Ronald H. Richburg was the church school superintendent .
 Members of the Junior and Senior Youth Fellowship Groups assisted in serving refreshments .
 The lighted creche and the Christmas tree were set up by Miss Carol Richburg . Miss Carol set up the creche at the bottom of the garden .
 Mr William McClintock was in charge of stage lighting, assisted by Charles Saunders, Mr Roy Carlson, and Mr Richard Brownell .
 The Winchester Red Cross loaned the wheel-chair which was used in one of the scenes in “Heidi,” and Mr Ronald Richburg, Sr. transported it . Mr Richburg transported it.
 Mr Ronald Richburg transported the live pure-bred goat and its owner, Mrs. Mrs. Richburg, to the live goat and her owner's home . The goat is a pure-breed goat that has been transported to the farm .
 The scenery was painted by the children themselves, under the direction of Mrs. Mrs. Barbara . The children themselves painted the scenery themselves .
 Animals' Christmas was held at Forest Crest Farms School on Tuesday, December 19, at 10:30m. Animals’ Christmas at Farm School . The traditional Animals Christmas at the Farm School was held on December 19 .
 The small pupils of the school sing and dramatize their songs with a background of ponies and small animals creating a delightful and unusual atmosphere .
 Children bring money donations with which to buy grain for the work horses of Boston at Christmas time . Prior to the program, the children bring money .
 Three ponies ‘and a little donkey ridden by Wendy Jane Capobianco’ as the Christmas court of honor followed . Three ponies and a little donkeys were 'rides' by the team .
 A long line of small children bearing carrots and apples for the horses’ Christmas . The animals were given carrots, apples and blankets for the Animal Hospital .
 WRC Has 'Christmas Program' at Winchester Republican Club . WRC meets at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Martha Jones .
 Coffee, tea and Christmas cakes were served in festive holiday fashion by the Social Committee under the co-chairmanship of Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth .
 The business meeting was omitted and after the social hour club members sang carols with Mrs. Mrs. Jones . The club was omitted from the meeting .
 Mrs. Witham read beautiful poetry selections by Mrs. witham . The reading of beautiful poetic selections by the poetessessess .
 Constance Morrill interspersed with carols sung by a talented group of High School singers .
 The group of singers consisted of Betsy Aiken, Christine Harrison, Jennifer Rochow, Virginia Stearns, Jane Littleton, Judith Morrill, Allison Morrill and Patricia Morrill . The group sang for the first time in three decades .
 She and the young singers combined to make an inspiring program which touched the hearts of their audience . The young singers were joined by the audience of the audience .
 FOLEY Realtors Real Estate — Mortgages Insurance PArkview 9-1492 autrl2-tf INSURANCE AUTOMOBILE PUBLIC LIABILITY FIRE — HAIL — WINDSTORM RESIDENCE BURGLARY FURS — JEW
 Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street PArkview 9-0568 nov3-tf .
 Season’s Greetings to all . J 4 W Dinn £ Co. LAfayette 3-5730 .
 PA 9-58t>0 Monday through Friday. Call PA 9/58t.0 Monday and Friday.
 One-and-a-half baths, garage, kitchen with countertop stove and many builtins not found in the average home . Garage, kitchen, garage and many other features not seen in average homes .
 Three bedrooms, ceramic-tile bath, basement play room, storage room, and one-car garage for just $21,500 . Three bedrooms and ceramic- tile bath, one car garage, and three-bedroom home . One car .
 Attractive pre-war Cape, offers large living room, dining room, modem electric kitchen, lavatory and screened porch on first floor .
 Long rambling, custom-built brick-and-shake-shingle English Colonial on two acres of landscaped privacy overlooking Country Club and Boston skyline .
 This is not a huge house, but it boasts five rooms on the first floor . It boasts four bedrooms and two full baths on the second floor .
 WINCHESTER CLEANING SERVICE Storm Windows. PArkview 9-4572 j janl9tf . Clean Windows Windows.
 ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. A. is a master electrician . Shoveldozer Cellar Excavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 .
 STOCKWOOD Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 decl5-tf . Wood well-seasoned Oak & Maple .
 WALTER J J. J. Barry WINCHESTER Painter & Decorator Complete Insurance Coverage PA 9-3361 augl2-tf PIANOS PIANO CARE Tuning — Reconditioning Organs and Players Complete Rebuilding Clinton Jonas PArkview
 Reward LOST: smnll round gold watch in Wlnohest. r ( 'enter on Monday. r' 'enter the Monday.com' Reward: Smnll gold watch .
 Professional office spare 1 with parking on ground* central location. For rent, spare 1 is available for rent .
 Economy Wild Bird S»*ed, 5 lbs.c; 10 lb*. 95c; 26 lbs. c; 26 lb.c . Call O Liver 8-3293. no v 30-4 1 * FOR SALE Economy Wild bird S »*ed .
 Kntdsael Hki two year* old, but in excellen condition . For SALE — *1 pair of KNTdsael . Hki 2 year old .
 In Winchester, west side location. or Arlington, Mystic Lakeoi Country Club an*a, large house with 6 or 6 bedrooms . Mystic Lake, an* a, large country club .
 Genuine Afghanistan Per slan lamb full length coat, gray, size 18 . Genuine Afghan lamb full-length coat is gray and size 18. For sale .
 Austrian ski boots, size 10, $30. worth $70; meing poles, $10 erost* country rncing boots, . size 11 . For sale, Austrian ski booties are size 10 .
 Electric Clothes Washer Spindry, workable condition, but needs overhaul, $14 . $14.99 .
 Two pair women’s professional figure ice skates, size 5 and $10 each. For SALE: Women's professional figure figure ice skating .
 Picture j| | | Framing % I »t i — Winslow Press *5 2A Mt. Mt. E. Mount Kilimim, New Jersey, is a collection of photographs by Winslow .
 Weekly Pick-Up If Desired janU-tf calls aasMted promptly . PArkview 9-3516 . Weekly pick-up is a weekly pick-Up .
 Full-time position for a ponton with some bookkeeping and clerical experience . Call PA 9-5758, or write Nancy Boyle, 19 Bacon St., Winchester .
 If you have spare time, if you need extra money, you can earn an excellent income . Selling Avon Cosmetics is a great way to earn extra money .
 Live-in housekeeper for two adults in fully-equipped Winchester home . Winchester home is fully equipped with fully equipped kitchen and living quarters .
 Let us know your travel plans and we will be happy to work them oat with you .
 Warrant for the Annual Representative Town Meeting to be held on March 5, 1962, be closed at seven thirty o’clock P.M. on Monday, January 8, 1962 . Public notice of the order should be given by publication of this order in the three consecutive issues of the
 Selectmen of the Town of Winchester duc21-St. WANTED Antiques — Brie-a-Brac China, Glass, Furniture, etc. John F Sexton Selectmen .
 No fancy formula is necessary or any particular pill, or even a dramatic rearrangement of customary meals . Instead, you can find a way to get a healthy start to the day .
 All that is needed is a little thought, and some understanding of facts that can be lifesaving . Facts that cun guide a whole family to better health .
 Every day every generation needs body-building protein, vitamins minerals . We know that every day, every generation, needs bodybuilding protein and vitamins .
 Every part of the body at every age can flourish only if properly nourished . Bones, teeth, muscles skin, skin, eyes and eyes, eyes, blood vessels, all part of body can flourish if nourished, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 To be sure, growing youngsters must have more of the essential nutri ents than oldsters, but this should present no problem . Growing youngsters need more of these essential nutrsents .
 A child’s normally big appetite guarantees him enough of his requirements, so long as the daily meals guarantee him and all the family a good variety of wholesome foods . A large appetite guarantees a child's full appetite .
 By the mid-twenties it’s time to stop, look, and listen, to count the calories and cut the size of servings . By the middle of the 20s it's time to look at the calories in your diet .
 This decade may mark the height of youth, but nevertheless calorie needs are decreasing, and they continue to diminish with the passing years . This decade's youth may be the peak of youth but calorie intake is decreasing .
 Grandparents in middle years may appear as spry and vigorous as ever, but energy requirements are 10 to 30 per cent less than those of their 40-year-old children .
 Restaurants should cooperate by serving grandparent portions as well as children’s meals . Grandparent portions should be served in restaurants, not just for children .
 Of all the hazards contributing to heart disease one of the most serious is overweight . The Massachusetts Heart Association has pointed out .
 Weight watching is one of the best possible ways to build health and guard against heart disease . Weight watching can be a great way to protect your heart health .
 Parents who set a meal-time example of pru dence are helping themselves to health and bequeathing a priceless gift to their children .
 Good food habits firmly established in childhood and wisely followed throughout adulthood pay big dividers . Good food habit pays big dividents, says author .
 Stuffing may be fine for poultry, but its poison for people, young and old alike . Stuffing is fine for birds, but it can be deadly for people who eat it .
 “saturated” fats are found in some dairy products and in meats . “Saturated’ fats, such as those found in dairy and meats, may need special attention . Fats, too, should be taken to account for the health of the body .
 All of the facts aren’t in yet, it may be that diets rich in saturated fats may not be desirable for all . This may be especially for those who may be prone to heart disease .
 Even the arteries of teenagers can show changes, and these have been attributed to unhealthy food habits . Even teenagers can see changes in their arteries, according to experts .
 By some substitution of skim milk for whole, of fish and chicken for meat, and more use of vegetable oils and margarines . More use of margarine and vegetable oils .
 By inclusion of a variety of fruits and vegetables, and enough whole grain or enriched bread and cereals to satisfy everyone’s needs, you can satisfy all your needs . This is a healthy way to get around the world .
 By discriminating resistance to desserts, desserts can be found in the U.S. desserts .
 Eating should be Legal Notices . COMMONWEALTH of MASHAUHJSKTTS Middlesex. ks. Middlesex ks .
 To all person* inbfiMted in the ••state of MAHELLK ROSA LIE NICKERSON late of Winchester in said County, d«»ceased .
 A petition ha* been prmented to said Court for probate of n certain Instrument purporting to lw» the last will of said deceased by GRACE NICKERSON BANGS of Providence in the State of Rhode Island praying that she ho appointed executrix thereof without giving a
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of Deoembor 1961 . Witness: "Deoemor 1961"
 Probate Court To nil persons interested in the trust estate under the will of JOHN H JOY late of Winchester in said County, deceased . For the benefit of EDNA O JOY and others. for the benefit . for EDNA JOY .
 Trustees presented to salil Court for allowance theyr first to fourth accounts, inclusive . Trustees of Haiti estate presented to court for allowance for first-to-fourth accounts .
 Witness: John C Leggpt, Esquire, hirst Judge of said Court, this fourteenth day of December 1961 .
 John V Harvey, Register. Dec. 2 1 -3t . COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex . Middlesex, ss. Middlesex.
 Probate Court to all persons interested in the estate of LOUISE J BANCROFT late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased .
 A petition bus been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by MARY LIN NAN E of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying thnt she he appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond
 Witness: John C Loggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this fifteenth day if December 1961 . Witness: Judge Loggat .
 Dec21-3t fun ami some extras are fine, but not the excesses that pile on the pounds that burden the blood vessels . Register. Register.com to see how much you can buy.
 It’s a lucky child whose parents •ind grandparents lead him out of the paths of temptation . It's a lucky boy whose parents .
 LKTITIA F. HOPPER late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of LKTitia F. LOPPER, deceased. deceased .
 Tile executor of the will of said LETITlA F HOPPER has presented to aaid Court for allowance allowance .
 If you desire to object to you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in said Court nt Cambridge l»efore ten o’clock in the forenoon on the twentyseventh day of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 John V Harvey, Register.com: "Middlesex, Middlesex Middlesex"
 A petition lias been presented to said Court praying that . MARGARET F ('HICK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex be appointed administratrix of said estate, without giving a surety on hor bond . A petition has been presented praying that Mrs. F ('
 Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Street PA 9-0342 . Register. Register.
 A petition has been presented to the Probate Court praying that MAE I FALLON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex, or some other suitable person, be appointed administratrix .
 Witness: Johrt C I^-ggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this seventh day of December 1961 . Witness: "Johrt C C I. I.ggat"
 Middlesex, ss. John V Harvey, Register. deni 4 -3 1 COMMONWEALTH of Massachusetts .
 To all pei-sons interested in the estate of LILLIAN SAUCE Into or Winchester in said County, deceased . To all . pei,sons . interested in Lillian Sauce into or Winchester .
 A petition I ms been presented to said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to he the last will of said deceased by MARY LINNANE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving a surety on her bond .
 First Judge of said Court, this eighth day of December 1961, John V Harvey, Register, decl4-3t .
 James P HOPKINS late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of J. P. HOPkins, deceased, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to said Court, praying that THOMAS W HOPKINS of Boston in the County of Suffolk he appointed administrator of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond . A petition was presented to the Court praying that Thomas W. H
 If you object to the case, you should make a written appearance in Cambridge before ten o'clock on the twentyeighth duy of December 1961, the return day of this citation .
 Plioto by Jlyeruonon STAMP EXHIBIT ... in St. Louis. PA 9-2990 Open Every Nite ’Til Christmas .
 Sally Campbell, Elizabeth Moran, Marlene Velebny, Rebecca Boylan, Peter Farrell, Peter . Farrell: "It's been a great year for the country, but it's never been a good time"
 Star Market Co. BANKING HOURS — 8 A.M. to 2 P.m. except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 a.M.- till Noon . 2k Except Saturdays and Wednesday nights, Star Market will be open to customers .
 Star Market Co. named Leonard C R Langer treasurer . New England supermarket chain named Langer at annual meeting . Langer was elected treasurer at Star Market's annual meeting Monday .
 Langer will also serve as chief financial officer of the company . Stephen P Mugar, president, stated that Mr Langer . Mr Mugar has been named the president of the firm .
 During his teaching career Mr Langer acted as consultant to numerous government and industrial organizations, including General Electric, I.B.M., and Bell Telephone Co. During his . career he acted as a consultant to many government and . industrial organizations including General . Electric .
 In the fall of 1961 he returned from a 15-month tour as Visiting Professor of Finance at IMEDE in Lausanne, Switzerland . He also conducted studies of European corporate financial management and the organization of the Euro pean capital markets .
 Star Market Co. operates 30 super markets and two home center stores in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Maine and New Hampshire . The company has two home centers and 30 supermarkets .
 For the fiscal year ended September 30, the Company reported record sales of $86,000,000 . For the previous period, sales were 11 per cent higher than the previous year .
 Star recently announced plans to acquire Brigham’s-Dorothy Muriel's, Inc., a chain of 74 ice cream, confectionery and bakery stores in the Greater Boston area .
 Oc curs is a sort of human miracle when peace and goodwill, love and friendship prevail . Here, for a season, oc curs a season of a human miracle .
 Christmas carols fill the air, and waning friendships reach for renewed contacts . Curt nods give way to friendly greetings; selfish pursuits yield to friendly thoughts and remembrances .
 June is full of feelings of human brotherhood which is the essential spirit of Christianity . June is of sunshine and the balmy breath of roses .
 The universal joy of Christmas is indeed wonderful . And — praise be! — perennial. And, praise be, perennial.
 You cannot cut Christmas out of the calendar, nor out the heart of mankind, says author . You can't cut Christmas from the calendar or from the heart, he says .
 Peace, joy, faith, love, home, hope and cheer are words we all can understand . Peace and joy are peace, joy and home, home and cheer . Peace is peace and joy, love and home are words that we all understand .
 Human antennae must be permanently attuned, as they briefly are at Christmas, to things of the spirit, as opposed to things selfish and material . The answer is, of course it could, but to accomplish it must be permanent attuned .
 It may even be that, little by little, the world moves in that direction . The world is moving in that way, and it may be that it's happening .
 The whole of mankind has burst forth with a revolution of rising expectations among the under-developed, and with a deeper concern for the underprivileged, wherever they may be .
 Let church bells ring, carols roll over the wide earth, Christmas trees be lighted and Christmas stockings hung, children chortle over presents, friends renew old contacts, and families gather together in loyalty and love . Let the world ring with bells ringing and carols rolling over
 Let this uneasy world find its faltering way, slowly but surely, toward Peace. And, last but not least, let this uneasy . world find their faltering . way . toward Peace .
 From our wanderings through Boston’s shopping center, we gather Santa is a victim of mass jiroduction . We gather Santa has been a victim .
 You can, for instance, call a kitten but not a cat; a mouse, but a rat; a chicken, but . not a hen; a duck, but not an goose; a vision, not a sight . You can also call a v/oman a cat but not
 The pnly trouble with doing your Christmas shopping early is to get your wherewithal on the same schedule . Tidbits: Do your shopping early this year .
 We Cafry a Complete Stock of Quality Liquors And the Finest Imported and Domestic Wines . FREE DELIVERSING ANYWHERE in WINCHESTER .
 FISHER Wide-hand Tuner and superb reproduction of your stereo and mbnophonic records are a few of the dividends of musical enjoyment it will bring to your home in die years ahead*
 VERNON STREET — PA 9-0685 ristmas PERMANENT ARRANGEMENTS OF ITALIAN FLOWERS . Daily from 8m. to 5:30m. daily from 8 m. to 6:30 m. ET daily .
 He also at present is ALL ALIKE TWO EXTRA ENVELOPES PER BOX . We have a large variety from which to make your selection . We also have an all-inclusive selection of all the latest and most popular items .
 It’s a mystifying toy and a fascinating competitive game . It's a mystery toy and is a fascinating game .
 The Brave Chipmunks; Japanese Banana ; Stuck in Arabia; Rudolph the Rednosed Reindeer and 8 others . GIVE a GIFT CERTIFICATE 5 Thompson Sired PA 9-0350 .
 30 Wyman Street WEIIs OPEN 9m. to Woburn, Mass. to Christmas . PA 9-299C OPEN EVERY NITE ’TIL CHRISTMAS . Wyman St. is open every night ‘every night ’till Christmas .
 The true spirit of the first Christmas Is * reverently expressed in tjf^dignity and quality of thege . Every Day % RELIGIOUS Christmas Cards .
 The action was authorized by * IOIIIC I I I Ulll MDC Commissioner Robert Murxm » j phy upon recommendation of Met1VI|« lUct ropolitan District Police Supt. U F . U F The action is authorized by . IO
 Miss Deborah Wadssoon and Miss Janet Do Do, both of 12 Dartmouth stunovan . The Dartmouth police unit hurries to the scene as it is notified by the Regisworth .
 The group im/ * J * mediates an exhaustive Christmas vacation from Mt. Mt. J * .
 Ida investigation into all factors which contributed to the highway death . All four girls are graduates of and it installs equipment designed for Winchester High School .
 At the end of the current five Miss Wadsworth is studying to be year study, the Harvard team is a medical secretary . Miss Deto determine the traffic flow and Vries is majoring in retailing, the average vehicular speeds at that .
 The Social Security Contact Station located at the Woburn Public Library will not be open to the public on Monday, December 25 or on January 1st . Police Station M. will be closed on Monday .
 Contact Station will open Tuesday, January 2, 1962 from 9:30m. to 12:30 m.m. However, the Contact Station is closed from January 1, 1962 . The Contact Station was closed from December 1, 1961 .
 The regular Monday schedule will be resumed January 8, 1962 on a continuing basis . A representative from the Cambridge District office will be present at the Library each week .
 Burlington, Bedford, or Lexington may avail themselves of the above service . The service will be available in the winter months .
 Christmas messagep is renewed in our hearts. Once more the Christmas message is renewed . Song sheet lyrics come with every record .
 "Open Every Nite ’Til Christmas" is open every night at 9 p.m. PA 9 .
 Embassv EXTENDS HOLIDAY GREETINGS to its Patrons and Friends . 1 I Ford Announces Contest Winners . I Ford announces contest winners .
 Robert Lamaon, son of Mr Rosalie Lamaon of 33 Kenwin Road, and the late Professor If. If. Lamaon . Mr Lamaon was son of late Mr If. Robert and Professor If . If. Mr If .
 Lamaon Lamaon has returned to his work as assistant to Senator Bartlett of Alaska, in Washington after a Fall vacation in Europe . Lamaon is assistant to Alaska's Senator Bartlett, who is a Democrat .
 1/VjcC^ormach's s^pothecarij. CANDIES . . Because you want the finest 1/jcC .C.M.ach's . The best 1/JjcCormachs . CANDERS . . .
 Five grade school boys from California, Michigan, Oklahoma and Wisconsin are winners of national championships in the “Punt, Pass and Kick” youngsters throughout the United States .
 P & K."" contest was launched this year by the Ford Division of Ford Motor Company and its dealers, in cooperation with the National Football League . The contest is a collaboration between the NFL and Ford dealers .
 The winners, their fathers and the Ford dealers who sponsored them will embark late this month on an expense-paid ‘Tour of Champions’ The event includes an official reception at the White House in Washington, D. C., and a trip to the National Football League’s
 The five champions will reeevie trophies and autographed footballs . They will be introduced to a nationwide television audience during half-time ceremonies at the NFL title game .
 The young champions posted the best total scores for punting, passing and place-kicking distance and accuracy in final competition . 85 other boys who qualified for the championship round were also in the competition .
 The 70 finalists were regional winners . They vie for national honors in half t ime competition at a selected NoI VTinber game of each of the NFL’s 14 teams .
 Contest scoring was based on distance and accuracy, with one point for each foot the hall traveled in the air, minus one point the ball landed to the right or left of a center line .
 The 56 pound, 50 inch tall youngster won by a comfortable margin in the final competition . He performed at the half-time of selected NFL games throughout the country during November .
 Parents, participants and sponsors alike endorsed the program strongly . Parents and sponsors of the program have also endorsed it .
 Forty-one years ago, four members of the executive committee of the National Tuberculosis Association put their hands in their respective pockets and brought out $100 .
 The NTA added $100 to the pot and the sum of $500 was turned over to Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was awarded $500 by the NTA .
 He was able to complete his lifelong study of lung anatomy . He was then able to write the book which is still the standard reference text .
 The first grant was made under TB Christmas Seal sponsorship . That was the first grant to aid research made under the sponsorship . It was made in response to the Christmas Seal .
 The next year, 1921, the NTA’S research program had a budget of $20,000 and made four grants . The NTA's research program was budgeted for four grants that year .
 In the forty years since, the organization has appropriated about $3,700,000 for research grants . In the past 40 years, the foundation has received about $4,000 .
 Scientific research is man’s puny but valiant attempt to find what makes the world of nature tick . Scientific research aims to find out what makes nature tick.
 Each apparent advance leads into a new maze. J0SEPHS0N Real Estate i* WALTER Y J0 SEPHS 0N INSURANCE J i dec""-3t ^ e*i«w ; ■* trim m\.m t*im
 For instance, TB doctors know that TB germs can be knocked out very handily by some drugs, in a test tube . For example, some drugs can be used to knock out germs in tests .
 TB is only one problem among thousands that must be solved if TB is ever to be finally licked . But they are only one of thousands of problems that must have been solved if it is ever licked.
 In most diseases, antibodies prevent a I second attack if the person be1 comes infected again . In most cases, these antibodies prevent the person being infected with the disease .
 Pierce Julius Kayer Cambaa Mogen David Parma Duff Gordon Mira flora Widmer’s Chriitiaa Br*a, Marv^y’a and others m Wines From France Germany Portugal Spain Greece Denmark Italy etc. Pierce Julius . Mogen Camb
 Four Corners • West Side of Woburn • Cambridge Road WE 5-2322 dec7-tt K I I m 1 1 0.0 .
 Your TEXACO Dealer BO-DELL AUTO TOPS Seat Covers . Road Service Convertible Tops .
 PArkview 9-9886 mit* mit * mtm mitt mit*. m mit* m it* mim mum mim mim mi mi . Turner’s Neil’S Gulf Kiley’'s Sunoco Service Service Station Esso Station .
 Employees at AMPEX Stereophonic Soi will receive an annual profitsharing bonus from a company which totals $180,000 this year .
 Distribution is made solely on the basis of length of service with the company . The distribution is made based on the fact that the company has a history of distributing its products .
 Each employee with more than one year of service is tfiven one unit and an additional ten per cent for each successive full year of . service . Each employee is given an additional 10 per cent of service for each year .
 Carl Fontnr H.S.A., Arthur Bonnev, Bov Scout district and accident insurance a sions for total disability, l Eagle Awards To [ Fontneau Brothers WINCHESTER APPLIANCE CO obligated military service attending drill with the Second Infantry Battalion, Marine
 Second Infar is the latest in a series of games from the World War II-era World War I games .
 The highlight of the evening was the presentation of the Eagle awards to Carl and Peter Fontneau, sons of Dr. and Mrs. Fontneau . Carl andPeter Fontneau were awarded the Eagle Awards for their efforts .
 The award is the highest achievement award in Scouting . The award was presented by the president of the Minute Man Council, Inc.0 .
 Wishing your way, warmest wishes for I I * i t 1 X Holiday i j I j J \ | I I s { 4 \ \ pleasure and % . , joy .
 Since its charter was issued in Columbus, Ohio, in May, more than 15,000 have joined . Most of these members are buttonholing their friends to join and support it .
 No effort has been made to put a major public relations push behind the program . Outside of half a dozen test advertisements in widely scattered weeklies, and an advertisement in the Toledo Blade, there has been no effort .
 Growth has derived largely from volunteer speakers at meetings of unions and civic organizations . Growth has come largely from volunteers at unions, civic groups .
 Goal of SIXTY NOW is to amend Social Security to permit retirement at 60, with benefits of $200 a month, plus $100 for each dependent of any age . Goal of 60 is to allow retirement at age 60 with $200 benefits a month .
 Advertisements, speakers and advocates argue that at surh a benefit level, at least five million working Americans would promptly retire . They say that much or all of this retirement would result in immediate job openings for six or seven millions who are unemployed or only partially employed .
 The average benefit under Social Security is less than $80.00, and the majority of those who retire under the law actually draw much less .
 They see in their plan a “shot in the arm” for the economy, with millions retired on a spendable income . Millions employed at full wages to replace them, and the market enlarged as u consequence .
 Most of the 15,000 members have conn* from the Toledo area . The daily mail brings new applicants from all over the country, with 20 states now represented .
 Miss Jeanne Chase has been elected as a representative to the jjjr Executive Council of the College ^ Government at Lasell Junior Coljgf j lege .
 The College Government is made up of representatives from the student body, X who take an active part in exercisJJJj ing the various powers that have S heen committed to it .
 Miss Chase is the W daughter of Mr and Mrs. Chase . Miss Chase was a 1961 graduate of Winchester High School .
 Miss Robbins is a freshman at the Pittsburgh women's college . She is a member of Chatham’s 40-voice touring choir .
 In recent weeks she has sung at concerts on the Chatham campus, at the campus of Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster, Pa., and on special television broadcasts in Pittsburgh .
 Holiday greetings i Herbert T Wadsworth Holiday Greetings to YOU and YOURS . John B MERCURIC INSURANCE and REAL ESTATE Tel.
 Just slip in giant size cartridge of Super Quink ink or insert converter in place of cartridge and it fills from ink bottle . PArkview 9-8400 to seek a choice gift .
 See our big selection of PERFUMES, TOIIET WATERS, BATH POWDERS, SETS, CHOCOLATES, WALLETS for MEN AND WOMEN, ELECTRIC SHAVERS, BRUSH AND COMB SETS and many types
 Available in 1 -2/£ or 5-gallon quantities . Ice cream for Christmas parties available in 1-2-£ .
 December Most Dangerous Traffic Month . JK 0 5 1 % n 6 58 0 m 0 m . f December Most dangerous Traffic Month. With a genuine of association, you our Cii ristmas .
 “December is our most dangerj must consider the possibility of , order.” “Police and ambulance sirtnln can he dangerous to motorists ens because of the carelessness of and pedestrians who relax their a motor vehicle driver or a pedes“
 A Variety Show was held in the New England Mutual Hall on Clarendon Street Boston .
 Margaret Eikrem spoke briefly on what the success of the Shpw meant to the Veteran . Margaret Ekrem was called upon and spoke briefly about the success and importance of the Veteran's role .
 Hospital Chairman thanked all those who helped in any way to have such a successful show . Hospital Chairman thanks all those involved in the show .
 All the patients in our Veterans Hospitals in Massachusetts will benefit and Christmas will he a lot brighter for many of the patients, as gifts will be distributed to them by the Dept, of Mass. The Dept. of Massachusetts .
 Many veterans attended the Variety Show as many of the local Posts and their auxiliaries including Woburn and Wincheste purchased tickets and forwarded them to the Veterans Hospitals which enabled them to enjoy the show . The local Post and Auxiliaries also purchased tickets for the show and
 The directors of the hospi tals take the patients out to local Bowling Alleys for an afternoon of Bowling . Money donations are also sent to these hospitals which enables the directors of these hospitals to take them out to bowling .
 Middlesex County Council Auxiliary are holding a Square Dance at the Bedford Hospital on December 18 . The event will be held at Bedford Hospital .
 Old Sturbridge Village is offering a special winter tour schedule for elementary and high school groups . It has been announced by Miss Elizabeth Hitz, director of the School Admissions office .
 Two hour tours will be conducted Monday through Friday with visits to Village homes, shops and craft areas . Starting January 15, 19G2 will offer tours of Village homes and shops .
 The program will include demonstrations of fireplace cooking, candlemaking, spinning, weaving and printing .
 Students will actually participate in these tivities under this learn-by-doing program . Students will be able to participate in this program .
 During the past year more than 35,000 school pupils visited the Village in organized class groups . The Village is based in the village of Buryury, in the north of London .
 Reservations are necessary for the tours and may be made through the School Admissions Office, Old Sturbridge Village .
 Now you can play more than 50 different kinds of solitaire card games to intrigue you . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of events in the news you need to know about them .
 Water sealed heating unit plus integrated automatic heat control in handle permits quick, easy ""under water'* washing" M\ completely IMMERSIBLE Water sealed .
 Look for the Frypan with the ""Cloverleaf Design"" heating element that guarantees perfect heat distribution on entire cooking surface .
 Magnavox automatically captures the biggest, clearest pictures automatically . Pictures half again as large as 23-inch screens . More than twice as large . as 19-inch sets .
 Magnavox Micromatic rec* ord player is no wear on either record or Diamond Stylus . The stylus s are guaranteed for 10 years . Model 1-SC265*14950 in mahogany .
 Magnavox has a vast selection of TV and high fidelity models in every style and finish . There is a Magnvox to suit your style taste and budget* Come in and see our vast range of TV models .
 Rotarian A1 Elliott suggested that the gift be publicized so that other organizations will join in the light to rebuild the fire-razed station . There was no debate on the subject, only the original motion by Rotarian Charlie Murphy .
 Rotary session marked by the customary display of wit and banter, and then some . It was a session of Rotary marked by a display of wags and jokes .
 Carpenters working on the Hevey Block renovation on the floor below almost brought down the house . Gilson didn’t literally bring down the home, the carpenters worked on the renovation .
 Police Chief Joseph J Derro betook himself down to urge a cessation of pounding until the distinguished speaker had finished his remarks . Harrison Chadwick was a guest speaker at the event .
 Rotary luncheon took due cognizance of the Christmas season . The Rev. Rev. Michael Lister was present at the luncheon .
 Mr H Newton Clay of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church led one contingent in carolling . Aram Mouradian led another contingent of carollers in Crawford .
 Nelson Fontneau was forced into more simple carols by popular insistence . Fontneau seemed all primed to play ‘O, Holy Night,’ only to be forced into simpler carols .
 Around 80 adults and children gathered around the lighted tree on the common to sing carols .
 Their voices rang out as clearly and reverently as though it were a perfect winter’s night and the sky bright with stars . Their voices were as clear and reverendly as if it were the perfect winter's night .
 "It was a rewarding experience for all who were present,” Fortnightly reports to the Star .
 Alfred Bonney, Fred Cardin, James and Terry Cron burg, Robert Eddy and Richard Hanson are featured in this week's edition of The Washington Post .
 A r mm lip i } mm im m wmfm mpf / / / mpf// mpf . A rmm lip i . mm immf immfm immwmfm wmf mpf: mpf, mpf; mpf mp
 Ronald Chisholm of Win Chester recently appointed General Campaign Chairman by Herbert L Connolly, President of Herb Connolly Buick Co. and State Campaign for United Cerebral Palsy announced today 'that the “53 Minute March” will be conducted in Winchester on Sunday
 Daniel F Callahan of 3 Bates Road, Burlington, failed to make the curve, left the road, smashed into a tree and hit an Edison utility pole . No one was injured .
 A ‘Holly Cotillion’ is a semi-formal dance and social sponsored by the Archdiocesan Young Adult Council of Chi Rho Clubs . The event will be held on December 29 at the Imperial Ballroom of the Statler Hilton Hotel .
 There will be dancing from 8:00 to 12:00 a.m. with music furnished by Tom McSharry’s orchestra .
 An automobile driven by Richard E Conrad of 10 Jason Street, Arlington, went out of control and hit a car parked on Highland Avenue . The accident occurred on Christmas Day, about 9:41 m.m.
 Conrad lost control of his car when he hit a patch of ice or snow, police say . Conrad was returning to Arlington when he lost control, he told police . Conrad told police he was returning from Arlington to Arlington .
 Before it actually stopped snowing some time through Sunday night snow estimated by the street clearing crews as about 16 inches deep had blanketed the town .
 Town Engineer Wakefield told the Star he and his workers bad estimated the storm as good for about eight or nine inches . Wakefield said he anticipated no real trouble with the storm . Town engineer said he and workers estimate the storm will only get a few inches of rain .
 The storm commenced during Saturday night, but by 1:00 o’clock Sunday morning the storm did not seem too bad . By noontime Sunday Sunday the worst of the storm seemed over .
 By late afternoon the storm seemed definitely over, and there was nothing in the weather reports available to the town that warned of what impended . During the afternoon the snow increased, but by late afternoon, it seemed to be over .
 Town workers were eager to get home for Christmas Eve, and there seemed no reason for further snow removal at that time . Town workers said they were eager for a good night's sleep .
 The storm, however, was far from over, and by late evening it was snowing hard . By late evening, it had snowed hard .
 Tired plowing crews were called back to work at 3 o’clock Monday morning . Plowing crews had to return to work after a long night of sleep .
 The snow was wet in the middle and hard to handle where it had drifted, though the wind was not as bad as Winchester has often experienced in the past . The storm is expected to last for several days .
 Crews had main streets open by 7 o’clock Monday morning, but it was much later in the day before some of the side streets were plowed .
 Cars left on the street all night all night made the work of men doubly difficult . The work of police officers was difficult to do .
 In some places cars were left in the middle of the road, making it impossible for the plows to get into the streets . The plows were unable to get in the streets because of the snowfall .
 Winchester Mother on Way Home For Holidays Fatally Injured As Truck Rams Car Mrs. Mrs. Smith . Smith was on her way home from work when she was hit by the truck .
 Mary Virginia Laurenti of Williamsville, N. Y., was on her way to Winchester for Christmas with her husband and their two young children . Her car was rammed by a heavy truck on the Massachusetts Turnpike in Hopkinton .
 News of the accident during the pre-Christmas season came as a deep shock to the entire community . The accident happened during the early Christmas season .
 Mrs. Laurenti, the former Virginia Loftus, accompanied by her husband, Jeremiah E., their son Eugene Arthur, 6; and daughter Marguerite Ann, 3; were driving from their home in Williamsville, a suburb of Buffalo, to spend Christmas .
 Laurenti stopped her car in the safety lane of the highway so that her husband could clear the windshield of ice . Laurenti, who was driving, was driving when she was hit by the ice storm .
 Mr Laurenti had just finished and had re-entered the car when it was rammed by a heavy truck . Gaspare Drago, 27, of Malden, was also involved in the crash .
 After the impact the car rolled down an embankment, followed by the truck . After the crash, the truck rolled down the embankments . The driver was killed in the crash .
 Police arrested the driver on charges of manslaughter and driving to endanger . The driver was charged with manslaughter and reckless driving .
 Laurenti was pronounced dead when she arrived at the Framingham Union Hospital and it is believed that her death was instantaneous . Laurenti's death is believed to have been instantaneous .
 Both children were critically injured and their names were placed upon the hospital danger list . Both children are now in critical condition in hospital .
 Mr Laurenti was unconscious for about two hours after the accident but his injuries were not diagnosed as serious .
 The Laurentis lived in Winchester until last September when Mr Laurenti was transferred from Boston to Buffalo . He was transferred to the Buffalo office of the firm with which he is associated .
 Mr Chadwick repeated his statement reported in last week’s Star that the time for finger-pointing and hand-wringing had passed . He said the sensational nature of the T.V. film linking Boston police to known bookie joints had accomplished its primary objective of
 Mr Chadwick made his remarks at the regular Thursday meeting of the Winchester Rotary Club . The speech was generally considered as one of the most forceful speeches he has made .
 Town Lakes Frozen Over Wedge and Winter Ponds have frozen over . According to Mr Symmes, the lakes are safe enough to skate on .
 A Woburn and Medford man were involved in a collision on Highland Avenue Thursday night at 7:20m. about 30 feet north of Fells Road . A Medford resident was also involved in the collision .
 A Morris sedan operated by Warren D Bingham, Jr. of 42 Irving Street, West Medford was in collision with an Oldsmobilc operated by Anthony Derro of 72 North Border Road . A Morris . sedan operated . by Warren . Bingham Jr. was hit by an
 Winchester police officer Roland Roy found Mr Derro lying in the street . Winchester police found him lying lying in a street .
 Both men were taken in the ambulance to Winchester Hospital, Winchester . Mr Derro was treated by Dr. David Derro at Winchester Hospital .
 Winchester firefighters washed down the Highland Avenue Englewood Road area of gas spilled in the accident . Winchester firemen were called in on a stand-by basis by the Melrose Fire Department in Thursday morning’s 6:45 o’clock fire .
 1961 was an extraordinary year in Winchester, with more than the Town’s customary share of controversy, sorrow, high honors, politics, and community activity . 1961 was a year of honor and sorrow for the Town .
 Maribcl Vinson Owen and her two figure-skating daughters died in an airline crash on February 15 . The mother-of-two was killed along with her two daughters in the crash .
 "It was a shock from which not one of us has yet fully recovered and one that will always be with us," says the family . "Not one of them has ever fully recovered from the shock," says father-of-one .
 Police Chief Joseph J Derro urged this week that everyone driving over the New 5 ear s week end observe the most absolute caution, lest through careless driving, they take their own life .
 The Chief’s warning came in the wake of the tragic Thanksgiving Day accident at Symmes Corner . Two teenagers were killed when they lost control of their car and rammed into a wall .
 The Chief has placed the tangled wreckage of the car on the lawn in front of the abandoned Wadleigh School as a dramatic reminder to young people not to speed while driving .
 Deaneries in the Archdiocese will from the Star Market yard on he represented at this dance by j Cambridge Street reporting a hullparish Chi Rho units within each dozer afire .
 Army Engineer Division, New England has awarded a contract to the architect-engineer firm of Alonzo B Reed, Inc. of Boston to carry out the first phase of the National Public Fallout Shelter Survey in many Massachusetts communities .
 Surveys by the Alonzo B Reed concern under this contract are to be curried on in Arlington, Bedford, Lexington, Medford, Somerville and Winchester . Surveyors will curry on surveys in six cities .
 Those communities which are not included in this first phase will he included in later phases . Those communities will be included in future phases .
 It is anticipated that ail communities will he surveyed and acceptable shelters marked by June 1962 .
 Survey calls for locating public shelters which will accommodate a minimum of 50 people . The shelters will be located in public shelters that will accommodate at least 50 persons .
 The old Waterfield Building burned down in May, driving many local business people into temporary locations . Many businesses have temporary locations offered to them, many cases by competitors .
 The Chapin School on Swanton Street was also badly damaged by fire . It was where so many Winchester people first learned their ABC’S . The old wooden Chapin school was also damaged .
 Winchester Representative Harrison Chadwick’s sensational charges on a nationally televised film that organized gambling maintained contacts with Beacon Hill . In the area of controversy, the Johnson Road School over expenditure, which resulted in a special State House hearing, vied with Winchester Representative .
 The subject of fallout shelters, publicized in the Star, put more Winchester pens to paper in a single response to an editorial in the newspaper's history . The response to the Star's editorial was one of the largest in the paper's history.
 By the close of this month, the renovation of the Hevey Building had begun, while the new Waterfield Building was virtually completed .
 Automobiles driven by a Winchester woman and a Stoneham man were in collision at the intersection of Lockeland and Mayflower Roads . Business had begun at the new Parkview Electronics Co. on Lowell Street and work was coming along nicely on the extension to the Winchester Hospital .
 John L Murphy of 91 Summer Street, Stoneham, was proceeding east on Lockeland Road in his Ford station wagon . Jean M Smith of 27 Mayflower Road was proceeding west on Lockelands Road about to make a turn into Mayflower Rd .
 The project was initiated by the American Institute of Approval, a national non-profit organization of American women interested in manufacturing excellence .
 Cape designed by the Wills’ firm is comprised of the basic form and practical interiors of the early American houses combined with a plan which allows the flexibility and yet the privacy of modern day living .
 It has warmth and charm so necessary to make a house a living expression of our way of life . Above all, it has the warmth and charming so necessary .
 The living, dining and multiuse rooms are grouped around the kitchen, all opening directly onto a living terrace and swimming pool area through sliding glass panels . The plan is arranged with the living, . dining, multiuse and living rooms grouped around a kitchen .
 The bedroom wing is separated from the rest of the house, yet is accessible without passing through any other room . It is located in a separate part of the property which is accessible from the other side .
 All three houses will feature the latest scientific and industrial developments in heating, airconditioning, insulation, insulation and roofing, flooring, furnishings and furnishings of every kind, kitchen and bathroom equipment .
 CHADWICK appears before Joint Coiniuiltee on Mtiuicipal Finance at State House iu Joluicou Koatl School cun trove ray* 1901 a leading uewa story .
 Over $1,000 in cash was reported stolen in a housebreak at the .S Cleveland Road home of Joseph and Marie Gagliormella on Christmas Day .
 Entrance was reported made bv a housebreaker believed hy police to have been responsible as well for a number of other housebreaks in Stoneham and Woburn . Possibh a $50,000 rheft was possibh in a home on C hristinas
 Police found a 1x8 inch pane of glass broken in a door at the rear of the house . Police also found a 12x5 inch window on an inner door that leads out to the breezeway .
 The break is believed to have occurred shortly after noon when the Gagliormella's daughter, Linda, left the house to join her parents at a relative’s home in Woburn . Linda's parents are believed to be in their late 80s at the time of
 The housebreaker moved from room to room and dresser to dresser until he had amassed $1,090 . Working neatly and methodically, the housebreaker made $1.090 .
 A neighbor reported seeing a blue and cream car parked nearby did not see the man leave . A neighbor who had reported seeing the car was also not seen .
 Police believe that the housebreaker is the same man responsible for an earlier break at a Stoneham Street, Woburn home . She told police she told police that the man broke into her home .
 A neighbor of the home robbed in Woburn reported seeing a strange man of about 5 feet eight inches acting strangely in the neighbor's hood, lie . He was described as being of heavy build, and having closecropped hair, possibly bald .
 Winchester investigation is still in process . Winchester police are still investigating the incident .
 El Citl El Cid, a $10,000,000 film production portraying the life of the Spanish warrior lord, is now playing at the Astor Theatre in Boston . Year Of Honor And Controversy, a film based on the Spanish death of El Cido, is
 To appreciate and enjoy this movie it is essential to understand the historical events which were taking place in Spain in the eleventh century . The movie is based on historical events in Spain which occurred in the 11th century .
 During the same period in history, independently ruled Spanish kingdoms were emerging and this led to civil war . This led to jealousies, greed and suspicion of one another .
 Christian kingdoms were attempting to wrest their counLiy from the Moslem caliphs . The Christian kingdoms joined with various Moslem kingdom against one another .
 It was into this confusing and conflicting period of history that the Cid was born . The Cid is born into a confusing period of confusion and conflicting history .
 Rodrigo Diaz of the town of Viva r, north of Burgos, Spain, was a title bestowed on Rodrigo Diaz . Cid is a word from the Arabic Seid meaning leader-a warrior with the wisdom to be just and merciful .
 He was destined to be Spain’s epic hero and his deeds, factual and legendary alike alike, were first to be heralded throughout Spain by troubadours . His deeds were later to be recorded in Spain's first important literary work Poema del Cid .
 Rodrigo’s life story, portrayed by Charles Heston with Sophia Loren as his wife, Chimene, recreates, in the greater part of the film, those events which have taken place prior to those preserved in the Poema .
 Essential to most Hollywood pro ductions today is the love element, and thus the central theme, is the dedication of Rodrigo Diaz to his responsibilities for all others around him, for his family .
 "The movie is authentic in every aspect once w'e realize it is not a portrayal of the epic Poema del Cid," says director .
 For a realistic and veridical vista of Spain in the Middle Ages, its moral code, customs, dress and architecture the three hour-plus saga is considered worthwhile .
 Annual Christmas party for animals lust week held at Forest Crest Farm School in the Highlands . Child feeds pony at tin* annual Christmas party .
 Forest Crest farm School’s annual Christmas party for animals . Wendy June Capobianco on “Apache,** the* farm pony.’
 Four fundamental reforms are still awaiting approval by the Legislature . Politically, the Town took a careful look at its referendum and voted for four reforms .
 His Excellency John A Volpe was sworn into office as Governor of Winchester . Winchester man was sworn in as governor of the state .
 There was talk of someone at Town Hall, possibly a “comptroller,” to supervise Town office procedures . And following ;» summer study by un expert on municipal government promt u res .
 January His Excellency, Governor John A Volpe of 10 Everett Avenue, was sworn in as chief executive of lie Commonwealth in State House inauguration ceremonies . Governor John Volpe was sworn into office of Governor of the Commonwealth .
 Andrew Cordier, First Asistant to the late United Nations Secretary General Dag Hamniarskjold, visits Winchester to address First Congregational Church Men’s Club .
 Johnson Road-Ridge Street School Building Committee asks for approximately $33,000 to cover excess expenditures . School building committee asks for about $33k to cover expenditures .
 Winchester Star wins first prize in New England for editorial page in weekly circula tion class and second prize for General Excellence . Winchester Star also wins second prize in General Excellence in general .
 Maribel Vinson Owen and her daughters Maribel and Laurence, all internationally known figure skaters, are killed in airline crash in Belgium . February Town mourns the loss of Maribel, Laurence and Maribel Owen .
 Regular Town Meeting vetoes post of Administrative Assistant to the Selectmen by rescinding salary appropriation . March By a vote of 83 to 73, the Regular Town meeting vetoed the post . March
 Sherman W Saltmarsh, Jr. is nam ed to head the Board of Selectmen . Shailer Avery and John F Sexton are elected Selectmen; Sherman W. Saltmars is head of Board .
 The Town denies equal pay to women teach 2 i*s following a highly spirited exchange of ideas in letters to the editor of the Star .
 Crawford Memorial Memorial Methodist Church celebrates its 90th anni versa ry . Crawford Memorial Methodist Methodist Church is celebrating its 90 year anniversary . The church is located in Crawford County, Texas, on the outskirts of town .
 Town Meeting votes encumbrance accounting system and re-creation study group . Town meeting votes for re-enactment accounting system . Town Meeting also votes for a re creation study group. Town meeting also votes to create a new accounting accounting system.
 Also votes to exempt present heavy industries from light industrial zoning estrictions . Proposal would exempt existing heavy industry from heavy industrial zones .
 May Town Meeting votes three-to-one to approve basic reforms of referendum . 3 per cent of the Town’s re-gistered voters must sign a referendum petition, and 20 per cent . of ill registered voters can rescind an action of Town Meeting .
 C i v i cminded Wincheste rites pitch in to perk up a bedraggled Common . Rose bushes, Chinese crab apple apple trees and new fir trees are among the new trees planted .
 July David Moore of <58 High Street was named to the Peace Corps by President Kennedy . Moore was the first person to be named to Peace Corps . Moore is the son of David Moore, who was born in July 1963 .
 Ground is broken toward the construction of the Parkview Electronics Co. on Lowell Street . It is another in series of campus-type light industrial buildings in Winchester . Parkview is the first of a series of buildings in the area .
 August Old Chapin School on Swanton Street is razed in roaring $25,000 fire . School was razed by a fire that destroyed it in a $25K blaze . School is located in the middle of a busy residential area .
 Winning Farm observes its 00th anniversary as a fresh-air camp for underpriviled city children in Boston slums . Winning Farm, perennially favored among Winchester charities, is a fresh air camp .
 September Wave of vandalism in which cinder block pump house was destroyed and Rotary Chuck Wagon is du^ muged . Winchester, Winchester, precipitates sterner police measures . September wave of vandalism .
 Boodakian’s oriental rug showroom, formerly burned out in costly fire, reopens at new Main Street quarters . The Oriental Rug Showroom is located in a new location on Main Street .
 Milton Quinn, beloved town physician, retires, is feted by friends . Former F.B.L counterspy Herbert Philbrick appears in Winchester, predicts the victory of communism in twelve years .
 Town Meeting votes $27,334 to Lynch Junior High School Building Committee for additional expenses . Town Meeting also votes to approve $27.334 for the school building committee . Town meeting votes to raise money for Lynch Jr. high school .
 Congressman Morse calls for end to John Birch-type panic . Morse urges all Americans to get into politics, clean it up, and realize that heir revolution is still the world’s greatest one . Morse: "I'm not scared. I'm scared to die"
 Rose Kennedy, mother of the President, and Mr Edward Kennedy in Winchester to air views on travel, Latin America . Rose Kennedy and Edward Kennedy were in Winchester, Winchester, to air their views .
 Town Comptroller to coordinate jffice procedures at Town Hall urged in report by consultant studying Town government here . Town comptroller urged to coordinate JFFice procedures with Town Hall . Consultant says Town government needs to be more transparent and more transparent .
 Winchester Star editorial opposing fallout shelters as unrealistic, inadequate precipitates unprecedented response in letters to the editor . Winchester Star op-ed editorial opposes fallout shelters, calls them 'unrealistic, inadequate, inadequate'
 Winchester Representative Harrison Chadwick, charged on nationally televised film that bookies maintained contacts with legislators, precipitates raging controversy over $1 billion-a-year illegal gambling in Bay State .
 Board of Appeal grants light to build two-and-one-half gory nursing home at Swanton Street and Loring Avenue . Board of appeal grants petitioner light to . build two and one-half-gory nursing . home . The nursing home will be located at the intersection
 The Roderick L Bullen Agency is first Winchester firm to occupy Almost-completed new Waterfield Building . Roderick Bullen was first Winchester agency to occupy almost completed Waterfield building .
 Chadwick files bill to sustain service on the B & M under a Man whereby several communities might share the cost of operating a commuter line . Chadwick file bill to maintain service on B &M under a proposal that would allow communities to share the costs .
 Governor Volpe speaks at Winchester High School assembly . He urges greater participation by youth in community and political activities . Volpe: Youth should be encouraged to participate in community activities .
 Community-minded local citizens drive to end litter in Winchester . Winchester residents want to make a difference in litter .
 Attorney General McCormack speaks at Rotary, hits bookie film as unfair to majority of Boston policemen . McCormack: "Bookie film is unfair to most of the Boston police officers" McCormack says bookie movie unfairly portrayed Bostonians .
 Winchester has cold, ' swirling, snowy white Christmas as icy winds usher in the winter season and usher out 19(51) wind gusts . Winchester has a white Christmas . Winchester, Massachusetts, has a very cold Christmas .
 Nineteen Sixty-one was a significant one for the sports arena in Winchester, marking as it did the playing of international matches here . One in field hockey and the other in rugby, both on Manchester Field, both in rugby .
 The Westmount Canadians beat the Boston Rugby Association, 10-0 . The match was the p irst formal playing of this popular English and Canadian game in Winchester .
 The All English Touring Team and the United States Field Hockey squad play each other at Manchester Field . The international field hockey match was also the first of its kind in England .
 A Winchester girl, Alison Hersey, played on the United States team with Eleanor Keady, who is well known here through her former physical education teaching at Winchester High School . Hersey played for the U.S. team .
 Alison Hersey has been selected to play for 'the United States Field Hockey and Touring Team that will go to England and the continent next year . Hersey is also in the field hockey bracket with the U.S. national team .
 J Churchill Hindes, retired dentist and long time supporter of Winchester High School athletic teams, awarded the trophy . The trophy goes to a member of the football team who by his loyality and team spirt is adjudged to have done most for the team .
 Tom Mooney, center on this year's team at high school, was the first winner of the high school's first award . Mooney is a member of this year’s high school team .
 Winchester’s veteran coach and director of athletics, Henry T KnowltOn, was chosen schoolboy footbull coach of the yeur by the Association of New England Football Officials . Winchester's veteran coach was chosen by the association of the officials .
 He was presented with a trophy and fine wrist watch at a testimonial banquet at the New Hotel Brunswick in Boston .
 Coach KnoWlton was chosen to serve on the President's Committee I in charge of the Health and PhyI sical Fitness Fair held in Boston last spring . In addition to his coaching and teaching duties in Winchester, he also served on the Boston Fitness Fair Committee .
 School girl sports stars, Helen Carroll Pratt, Marilyn Chase and Jan Collins, pioneered a tennis camp in Newton last spring along the lines of the hockey and swimming camps for girls .
 Winchester Sachems finished with a record of four wins, four losses and a tie last fall . Winchester finished with four wins and four losses last season . Winchester had a winning streak of four straight wins last year .
 Joe Bellino received the Naval Academy Sword and the Thompson Award ut his graduation from Navy . Bellino is the first cadet in 42 years to win this double honor . Winchester cadet was an All American football star at Navy .
 Winchester has junior high school football teams at McCall and Lynch Junior High Schools . Winchester has two junior high schools for the first time this year .
 Winchester High's cross country team finished third in the Middlesex Cross Country League championship meet . Winchester High finished third at the league championship meet last fall .
 Tom Morse, coach of the Sachem Harriers, retired this year after 13 successful seasons . Morse is a veteran coach of cross country at Sachem .
 His teams won 78 dual meets while losing eight, and his Jay Vees won 74 out of 75 . His Jay Vee team also won 74 of 75 dual meets .
 His teams won seven divisional championships, two Middlesex League championships, seven State championships and two New England championships . His teams also won two state championships and seven state championships .
 Hawks beat Pistons in playoff for senior Police Athletic League basketball championship . Hawks beat the Pistons in the playoff for the senior . Basketball championship .
 Sons of Italy won the championship of the Park Department Softball League . They beat the Shamrocks in the playoff for the title . The Sons won the league by beating the Shrocks .
 In Little League baseball the Dodgers won the National League, .and the Athletics, the American League championships . The Athletics won the American Little League championships in the 1950s .
 The PnnI thers were the American Minor League champions and the GreyI hounds, the Minor League titlists in the National League . The GreyHounds were the minor league champions of the American minor league .
 Winchester Junior Legion baseball team won the Zone 5 playoffs but lost to Needham in the regional competition . Winchester won the regional tournament but lost in Needham's regional competition to the Needham team .
 The Cubs defeated the White Sox to win the Babe Ruth League crown . The Babe Ruth All Stars were eliminated from the district playoffs by Peabody . The Cubs won the league title .
 Carling Intercity League baseball series last summer with the Town Team finishing third place in the league . Town Team finished in third place last summer . Carling intercity League Baseball Series was last summer at Carling Park .
 John Borggaard’s finishing in the top ten in the snipe competition was the best WBC showing . Only a few local skippers made the trip to Marblehead for Race Week last summer .
 Rod Long and his crew, John Berger, won the Governor’s Cup in the Quassapaug Regatta . Tom Legere won the Massachusetts Bay Snipe Regatta in Massachusetts Bay . Rod Long won the governor's cup in the Governor's Cup, and Tom Le
 Both Long and Legere were finalists in the snipe class National Championship Regatta at Old Saybrook, Conn., with Long finishing sixth in the championship bracket . Long finished in sixth place in the final round .
 Winchester Boat Club won Snipe Invitation Regatta Trophy in the big competition held last summer at Mystic Lake . Legere beat the defending champion, Tom St. George, in the competition . The Winchester boat club won the tournament last summer .
 Winchester Swim Trophies for 19(51 went to Rhonda Marotta, (Gladys Putting Memorial Trophy); Julie and Barbara Devaney, (joint winners of the Red Cross girls trophy); Fred Marotta (Thomas P McGowan Memorial boys trophy); and Barbara Bund .
 Bowling on the green was instituted by a group of enthusiasts for this age-old sport . The Winchester Country Club has bowling green bowling on the golf course .
 The club also had its fourth International Bonspiol and its seventh annual i invitational men’s bonspiel, A [Country Club team also won the coveted Mahopac Medal in the (5th j Cuthbertson BonsPiel at West
 Laurence and Maribel Owen won skating championships I at both the United States oham| pjonships at Colorado Springs and I at the North American championI ships just before their ill-fated trip to the International championships iq Europe . Laurence won the U.S
 Laurence Laurence won the women’s singles at both meets . Her sister was second with Dudley Richards in the North American senior pairs .
 12-year-old schoolgirl Tena Noyes of Marycliff Academy wins novice skating crown . She is youngest entry in National Skating Championships .
 Storm Complaints were coming in constantly from these streets . More complaints than usual during and after the storm . Storm complaints are coming in from the streets .
 In spite of the complaints, Winchester's handling of the storm was good, some said . The Star talked with several with whom the Star talked on Tuesday felt Winchester’s handling was good .
 The town’s equipment held up well through the storm with only minor breakdowns through Sunday . The town's equipment was in good condition .
 By late afternoon Monday, several pieces of equipment went by the board, handicapping the work of mopping up . It was practically impossible to hire replacements since it was practically • impossible to . hire replacements .
 NEW: OLD WATERF1ELD BUILDING BUILDERS GUTTED in like, i, deuwiKluM io make room tor new . NEW: The old water tower was gutted to make room for a new building . The new building was built
 NIK DEATH OF I \\ O TEEN-AGERS iu Thanksgiving Day accident al Syinnics Corner stunned town . I Photo by Ryeraon .
 Winchester, Massachusetts, was the scene of a triple homicide . The deaths shocked Winchester . Winchester was the last town to be hit by a single car crash .
 The WINCHESTER STAR, December 28, 1961 (Ptntntuarirs Mrs. Mrs. Robinson, Mrs. Johnson and others have been featured in this week's featured news stories .
 Mrs. Virginia Loftus Laurenti of 36 Hetzell Road, Williamsville, N.Y., wife of Jeremiah Eugene Laurenti and daughter of Mrs. Jeremiah Eugene. Laurenti . She was born in New York City .
 Arthur W Loftus of Ginn Road, was fatally injured Wednesday night, December 20, when her automobile was rammed by a heavy truck on the Massachusetts Turnpike in Hopkinton . The driver of the truck was killed .
 She and her husband and their two children, Eugene Arthur, 0; and Marguerite Ann, 3; were on their way to Winchester to spend the holidays with Mrs. Mrs. Martha's family . She and Mrs. Arthur and their children were traveling to Winchester .
 Laurenti, who was driving, had stoppe'd her car in the safety lane of the highway so that her husband could clear the windshield of ice . Laurenti's husband had to clear the ice from the windshield .
 The Laurenti car rolled down an embankment after the crash followed by the truck . Laurenti rolled down the embankments after the accident .
 The operator of the truck was arrested on charges of manslaughter and driving to endanger . The operator was arrested after the accident . The driver was charged with manslaughter .
 Laurenti was pronounced dead upon her arrival at the Framingham Union Hospital . Laurenti died at the hospital .
 The children were critically injured their names being placed on the danger list . The children's names were placed on a danger list after the incident .
 Mr Laurenti was unconscious for two hours after the accident . He was not believed to be seriously injured though he was unconscious .
 She grew up in Winchester, attending the Winchester schools . She graduated from Win Chester High School in the class of 1940 . She was a member of the Class of 1940 class .
 Laurenti en tered the Boston City Hospital training school for nurses, from which she was graduated with her R.N. in 1944 . Laurenti was born in 1946 .
 She later served on the staff of the Winchester Hos pital, for the most part as a nurse in the operating room . She later worked at the hospital in Winchester .
 In addition to her professional interest, she worked actively in aid of the hospital as a member of the W inton Club and Friends of the Winchester Hospital .
 Her entire life aside from her care of her home and family was devoted to the bet terment of the hospital . She was dedicated to caring for the hospital patients .
 She and her husband were married September 6, 1952, and lived in Winchester until they moved to Williamsville, N. Y., last September . They were married in 1952 and have been together since then .
 Besides her husband and children, her mother is a retired remedial speech teacher in the Boston public schools .
 Frank Knight of 55 Mystic Valley Parkway, died suddenly in her sleep Friday morning, Dec., at her daughter’s home at the age of 97 . Frank H Knight died of a sudden, sudden death .
 She had been in her usual health the day previous and was looking forward to the arrival of family guests for Christmas .
 She was born Apr., 1864, in Port Elgin, N.B., where she grew up and was married to John Lamb who was for many years principal of the high school there .
 Mr Lamb died in 1941, but his widow continued to keep her home in Port Elgin . She had made her home with her daughter in Winchester for several years .
 She was a staunch member and very active in the work of the Trinity United Church of Port Elgin . Her hospitable home was always open for church, civic and social affairs .
 In complete possession of her faculties to the end, she was fond of TV and kept informed of current events . She kept informed on current events and TV .
 William Kenneth MacLeod of Thetford Mines, P.Q., is a great-grandson, William Kenneth . MacLeod, Jr., and two great-grandsons, all live in the same area . The MacLeod family also includes a great grandson, Robert Douglas Mac
 Leslie Settle, pastor of Trinity United Church in Port Elgin, officiated the ceremony .
 Dean Wheatley, 67, of Linden Lane, Sherborn, died in Sherborn . Former Winchester Athlete died at the age of 67 . Wheatley was an Olympic gold medalist .
 Sherborn, general manager of the International Purchasing Company of Wellesley, died suddenly at his home Friday, December 22, following a heart attack . Sherborn was a former football star at Winchester High School .
 Wheatley had been bothered by a heart ailment, which it is believed had been with him for some time . Wheatley spent November abroad and upon his return he had returned to England .
 Mr Wheatley was bom in Halifax, N S. f . He came to Winchester as a boy and lived with his family at 22 Park Avenue . He was born in Halifax .
 He entered Winchester High School with the class of 1913, and as a freshman made the school football team . His sturdy physique and great speed made him an effective line plunger in the old days when fullbacks were used exclusively to buck the line .
 A severe knee injury, which later prevented military service, forced him out of the backfield in his sophomore year . He finished his football career as a tackle . The injury prevented him from doing military service .
 He was also a member of the school track and relay teams, and of the old Phi Delta Society .
 The death of his father caused Mr Wheatley to leave high school in the middle of his junior year . The family moved to a farm in Ashland, Oregon, after the death .
 Mr Wheatley was associated with International Purchasing Co. of Wellesley for 40 years . He was a director and general manager of the firm at the time of his death .
 A noted horseman and a former New England field hunting champion, he was former secretary and whip of the Millwood Hunt .
 He rode with both the Myopia Hunt and the Quonset Hunt in Rhode Island, where he was field master . He was also a member of the Norfolk Hunt and rode with several other hunts .
 Mr Wheatley leaves his wife, Charlotte, a granddaughter of the late war-time Governor Samuel Walker McCall, and Mrs. Mrs. Wheatley .
 Leone McCrillis; and a brother, Harold Geoffrey Wheatley, both of Day tona Beach, Florida, died in June . Leone McCillis; Harold Wheatley; Harold McCillois; and Harold McCallis; died in July .
 Family services were held last Saturday at the late residence with Rev. Rev. William Williams . Rev. Williams' funeral was held at the residence .
 Royalty Visits The North Shore Christmas Pageant . Military or civil defense personnel go in for rescue operations and the degree of radioactivity of casualties .
 The information which they will gather will be sent immediately to the First Army Chemical Section and to the immediate area commander to provide facts upon which to base decisions .
 The First Army Chemical Section is on the job and ready to meert the challenge of a nuclear fallout in northeastern United States . First Army’s “eye on the sky” is an important cog in the overall defense of the nation .
 See the book of j day j n Middleboro, Ky., with burial samples at the Winchester Star. in Knoxville, Tenn. See the photo of j. j. in the photo .
 Wright, 86, died Tuesday morning, December 26, at the West Medford Nursing Home after a long illness . Wright was a resident of Winchester for nearly sixty years .
 She was born August 16, 1875, in Lowell, was graduated from Lowell High School and Smith College, in the class of 1900 .
 She and her husband were married December 24, 1904, coming to Winchester soon after their marriage . She came to Winchester in 1904 .
 She was a member of the First Congregational Church, Society of Mayflower Descendants, Founders and Patriots of America and the Fortnightly Woman’s Club . She also served in the Colonial Clergy of America .
 Wright's husband, retired secretary of the Massachusetts Hospital Life Insurance Company, died January 11, 1947 . Wright’s husband was a retired secretary .
 Funeral services will be held this Thursday afternoon at 1:30 at Ripley Memorial Chapel of the First Congregational Church . Funerals are scheduled to be held in Ripley, Arkansas .
 Burial will be in the Wright family lot in West Parish Cemetery, Andover . Funerals will be held at Wright's funeral home .
 Horace C Martin was president of the Martin Manufacturing Corp. of Middleboro, Ky., who died Wednesday, December 20 . Martin was a former resident of Winchester, Kentucky .
 He lived as a boy in Winchester, Massachusetts, attended Culver Military Academy and Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He lived in Winchester .
 R McKin Browning of Barrington, R I., was a son, Bert T., of Marblehead; a sister, Mrs. Mrs. Browning, a sister-in-law, and a brother-lawyer, also a son .
 Saudi Arabia leaves the famous Towne Lyne House, Lvnn field, after a luiieheoii with two sons and the ambassadors to three countries . Services were held last Saturatur .
 The ladies in the entourage of King SaucL his four wives were served in the afternoon . Dressed in western clothes and without veils they dined on lamb pilaf with grape leaves .
 No wines or cocktails were served as this was forbidden by the Islamic religious tenets . No alcohol was served at the event as it is forbidden in Islam .
 King Snud was King of Germany and U.S. ambassador to West Germany . He was a member of the King of the West .
 U.S. Army Chemical Section stands ready to give fallout predictions if it ever becomes necessary . First United States Army Information Headquarters announced this week . Chemical section is ready to predict fallout predictions .
 The Radiological Center is located in Radiological Division of the Chemical Section . It is the most important part of the First Army Headquarters .
 First Army’s Radiological Center personnel will take one look at wind patterns plotted on their Fallout Prediction Map and be able to tell accurately which area will receive the fallout . The wind patterns will be plotted on the Fallout Prediction map .
 For example, if a detonation of megaton size should occur in Albany, N. Y., on a given day with the winds from the west, fallout in the next fight could be expected over the Fort I meet an even more deadly enemy devens-Boston complex in eastern
 Rad Center would notify Civil Defense and post commanders throughout the area . Immediately the j sure which way the winds blow in Rad Center, the area would be notified .
 All posts within First Army area would bring their fallout maps up to date . At the same time all posts within the First . Army area will bring their . fallout maps .
 Private First Class Marilyn J Brown, 19, of Brazil, Indiana; Master Sergeant Albert Pough, Jr., 34, of Detroit, Michigan, and Sergeant First Class Clarence Hungerford, 38, of Bridgeport, Conn. The other three victims were identified as Sergeant First Sgt. First
 Pough, a paratrooper and veteran of ten battles in Korea, makes the overlays for the Fallout Prediction Map . Pough is a veteran of 10 battles in the Korean War .
 Wellversed in the art of fighting as holder of the First Don Black Belt for karate, Pough understands that order to provide accurate warning to all citizens in the affected area .
 Sergeant Hungerford is a veteran of the invasion at Anzio, Italy, and four other campaigns before being wounded near Mount Belvedere, Italy . Assisting him is Sgt Hungerford, who was wounded in the battle .
 Radiation Sealer is the operation of a radiation sealer . Radiation sealer is one of the daily tasks of the radiation sealers .
 This information is then indicated on the Radiological Background Count Chart located above the machine . The background count is indicated on a Radiological background count chart . This information can be used to help identify a patient .
 In addition to the Prediction Map, there is a Fallout Situation Map of the whole northeastern area of the United States . The Fallout Situation Situation Map is also available .
 Colonel Evan H Lewis, 49, of Seymour, Indiana, is the First United States Army Chemical Officer . He will be in position to keep the Army Commander, the Army Air Defense Commander, and the Civil Defense authorities accurately informed of the danger area .
 Under Colonel Lewis’s direction are eight biological and radiological teams located at various points within First Army area . The teams are located at different points within the First Army Area .
 Radiological Surveys are being trained to be dispatched by local installation commanders to fallout areas to make radiological surveys, assist the Medics and help with decontaminations .
 Every pedestrian and driver should walk and drive carefully during the holidays . Walkers and drivers should be careful during the holiday season .
 The Massachusetts Highway safety committee is doing everything possible to regulate and control traffic . Governor Volpe’s order to remove drinking drivers from behind the wheel will carry out .
 We need the active support and cooperation of responsible members of each family in the common wealth to guarantee that unreasj jpg onable and drinking drivers will not appear on our highways .
 Immaculate Conception School children present their annual Christmas pageant . Pageant was presented to families and friends at 1:30m. December 21 .
 The following program included a number from each grade from one through eight . The program includes a number of students from one to eight .
 The spirit of joy, so appropriate to the season, permeated the entire performance . The spirits of joy was evident throughout the performance, and the audience was joyful .
 John S Andrews of 78 Cleveland Street, Malden, died suddenly Wednesday evening, Dec. 31, at his home . Andrews was a former resident of Winchester, Winchester .
 After his marriage to Abbie D O’Toole of Winchester, he made his home in this town until he moved to Malden 25 years ago . He made his life in Winchester until he left Malden in 1992 .
 Until his retirement he was for many years an employee of the Glendale Coal Company in Charlestown . He was also a coal worker .
 Besides his wife, Andrews leaves a son, A-lst class Oscar LeRoy Andrews of Warner Robbins, Ga., and five grandchildren .
 The funerai was held last Saturday morning from the Lane Funeral Home . Requiem high mass was celebrated at St. Mary's Hospital in Dublin .
 Pierce Imports Burton and Guestier Julius Kayer Duff Gordon Harvey’s Cockburn Cossart Carnbus Mirafiore and others . Wines From France • Germany Portugal Spain Greece Denmark Italy etc. etc.
 The sealing 1 of food, meat in particular, in impermeable flexible plastic containers from which air has been exhausted produces a superior product and package .
 The mechanism is power driven and automatic in action, and it includes a track by which the clips are fed into position for the crimping operation .
 Prior mechanisms of the foregoing type have had the disadvantage that a different crimping head and crimp feeding track have been necessary when substituting one size clip for another .
 The changing of the crimping head and feed track is time consuming, increases labor costs, and involves added expense for equipment . Changing of the head and track is a time consuming process .
 This is accomplished by adjusting a special cam, preferably with four faces, that is mounted rutatably in a dot in the plunger which, by its motions, causes the ( limping jaws to move into or away from their crimping position . The cam is mounted in a
 The invention is made for a clip feeding track that is capable of accomodating up to four or more different sizes of clips without the necessity of changing the track when the clip size is changed . As another feature of the invention, provision is made .
 New at the Star office, three-hole Aecropress genuine ring binders, assorted colors, excellent for theme or thesis, 80 cents each .
 More and more families are greeting the New Year at gay home parties, with friends and neighbors . Gay home parties are becoming more and more popular .
 VANITY FAIR DINNER NAPKINS Extra Large — Extra Soft FINAST with a pkg of 6 with o pkg . of 12 i Ginger Ale OR SPARKLING WATER 1 PT 12 OZ BOTS Home On hn-loudi
 Gaudioso recently completed a 25-week Hawk continuous-wave radar maintenance course at the Air Defence School, Fort Bliss, Texas . He is in Winchester enjoying a furlough with his parents, Mr and Mrs. Mrs .
 Gaudioso was trained to install, test, adjust and perform organizational maintenance on the continuous-wave radar equipment used in the Hawk guided missile system .
 The Air Defense School is the largest military school in the nation . It trains personnel to man and maintain guided missile systems employed in the air defense of the U.S.
 The 20-year-old soldier is a 1900 graduate of Winchester High School . He was employed by High Voltage Engineering Corporation, Burlington, before entering the Army .
 Late of Sanford in the County of York and State of Maine, deceased, deceased .
 Witness: John C I.eggat, Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-sixth day of December 19U1.1.
 Each of the first eight places i were decided by the difference of one game, and which in one instance was decided on pinfalls . California, on top until the final match, was knocked into second place after dropping four | points to Jeff t Gaudioso’s Penn
 California’s Mario Buzzotta had 315, Frank DiMambro 405, and Woozy Giacalone 289 . Woozy also had 315 .
 Notre Dame team climbs from second to first by beating Bates 4-0 . Notre Dame takes over Bates from second place to first place .
 Tony was high scorer in this match with 294, and Tony Bavuso was close behind with 291 . Tony was the highest scorer in the match with 291. Tony was also high scorer with 294. Bavususo scored 291.
 Babe Tofuri, achieved third place as the result of its 4-0 victory over last-place St. Louis St. Mary's St. Paul's 4-1 victory over St. Pete's .
 The second half starts tonight, and with so many bowlers finding the range, it should be an exciting half . The match starts at 8.30pm on Saturday .
 Attendance-prize winners were Emile Doucette and Tony Lucci, who won turkeys which definitely found themselves on their Christmas tables . The event was held in a bid to celebrate the end of the year .
 Elizabeth A Ilecht is a new teacher this year in the fourth giade of the Mystic School . She is the fourth teacher at the Mystic school .
 Notre Dame 35 17 21,626 . California 34 18 21,652 . Maryland 33 19 21,231 . Harvard 32 20 21,380 Penn 31 21 21 21,076 Holy Cross 30 22 21,370 . Alabama 29 23 21,536 Navy 26 26 21,034 Boston
 Surely every one is fervently hoping that the coming year will he a happy one, tor us individually and for the strife ridden world .
 We can start toward making the world happier by genuinely trying to be happier ourselves in our relations with each other . We need to try to make ourselves happier by trying to make our relations happier .
 When we say “Happy New Year” we can mean it, and we can try to live through the year in the spirit that prompted the greeting . We can also try to remember the spirit of the New Year .
 Among our friends are many whose new year isn’t likely to he happy unless we do something to help make it so . Among them are many who are not likely to be happy if we help them .
 Wishing these friends a “Happy New Year” can be just a mockery, if that is as far as our effort goes in their behalf . Wishing them a ‘Happy New Years’ can be a mockery .
 Most of us must depend on our relationships with others for our happiness anyhow . Most people depend on their relationships with other people for their happiness, says CNN.com's Robin Williams .
 Few of us are so all sufficient as to find satisfaction wholly within ourselves . Few are more satisfied with themselves than they are with others .
 We can all help to make the world happier and better by actually living our New Years greeting through the entire year, by doing what we can to make those with whom we come in contact happier .
 Life is a cooperative venture and those who arc most cooperative, who are most tolerant, friendly and who give most of themselves to others arc the happiest . Those who are tolerant, tolerant and friendly are most likely to be the happiest people .
 The Star through the year has tried to he helpful, to fulfill its obligations as a responsible weekly newspaper . The Star has been in touch with the community for a year .
 We have tried to print the sort of paper to which we feel the inchestcr is entitled . This is the kind of paper we feel are entitled to .
 If we have succeeded, it is in large measure because of the friendliness and support of our readers, advertisers and friends . If you have helped us to succeed, we thank you for your kindness .
 We arc grateful for this hacking as 19(51) draws to a close and we await the coming of another year .
 H educational radio and T.V. station is good news to that station's many admirers . It's good news for those who have long admired the station's music .
 This brings the rebuilding account to a more hopeful $550,000, aj/proximately one-third of the money needed to rebuild . The rebuilding account is more than a third of the funds needed for the rebuild .
 Winchester Rotary Club has voted unanimously to donate $200 to the rebuilding fund . Winchester Rotarians also voted to donate a $200 donation to the town hall's rebuilding fund. Winchester Rotaries will also donate a donation of $200 .
 Rotary is hopeful that other service organizations will follow suit . Rotary hopes that Winchester Rotary will lead Winchester service organizations in the future .
 B.I. L get a new home, hut also that generous grants from other foundations will push the fundraising drive way over the top .
 It would seem to us that no organization could contribute to a cause more worthy . Here, indeed, is an educational cause that is the proper concern of all public and private organizations, we say .
 If we can spend over a million dollars on a single missile without hatting an eyelash, we should be able to raise a million and one half dollars for education, which remains our final defense and the soundest basis for peace .
 W.G.B.H. should not have to go a-begging for assistance in Massachusetts . It is a non-commercial town dependent on the generosity of people .
 Winchester's cultural life would he immeasurably poorer . Winchester’s life would be immeasedly poorer. C hannel 2 and F.M. radio would have been vital to Winchester .
 We would suppose that Winchester shared our admiration for the Robert Herridge Theatre and for the utterly wonderful Open Knd. Theatre . Winchester is home to the wonderful open-theater and the wonderful Robert Herriges Theatre .
 We would also say that our day i> enriched by newscaster Louis Lyons’ I larvardized twang reporting on world affairs, by William Fierce’s sophisticated comments on the symphony, and by Bill Cavness’ polished reading of such classics as �
 "Symphohic " music" satisfies a sophisticated interest in the classical jazz idiom, as well as classical jazz . Its programming of music, although decidedly “sophisticated “ in emphasis, is decidedly ‘symphoh’
 II. II. is a source of enlightenment and pride to everyone who respects culture . II. "I'm proud to be part of this generation of people who respect culture," she says .
 The Star again urges everyone who believes in education to give as much as he can to help the station rebuild .
 Office parties where liquor is served freely are becoming a serious problem, especially where many who have over-indulged themselves seek to make their way home in an automobile .
 Governor showed good judgment in asking those on Beacon Hill not to subject themselves to the risks that over-indulgence presents . Governor asked those in Beacon Hill to avoid indulging .
 The Governor’s request for no drinking at the State I louse parties is good advice for all gatherings from which guests will he driving . The Governor's request to no drinking should be good advice from all gatherings .
 Whatever may he one’s feeling about liquor and the desirability of serving it at social functions, no sensible person can deny that any one who is going to drive a motor ear should not dull his reflexes with intoxicants .
 In the good old days such indulgence was pretty much an individual matter . Any adverse affect was limited to the iudulgcr. In the old days, indulgence had to be individual .
 A horse-drawn cab got him home safely without endangering any one else who happened to be on the highway . The driver was unable to get home under his own power .
 An automobile with a drunken driver and possibly several passengers in a state of intoxication is a fearful menace on the road . An automobile capable of bringing death or serious injury to those riding in it and others, perhaps completely sober, who chance to he in the path of the drunken driver’
 "What an awful experience it would he lor any one to have his automobile kill or maim some one because, through over-indulgence, he was unable to drive safely," says author .
 The Star says pass up the ‘flowing howl’ if you are going to drive afterward . If you can not make arrangements for some one who has eschewed the cup that cheers to drive you home .
 New Year's is coining up and New Year’srsrsrs synonymous with gay parties where abstemiousness is not the rule . Gay parties are no longer the rule, but they’re often more fun than usual .
 Police Chief Derro was upset that motorists had taken advantage of his department’s attempt to he nice to them over the holidays . Derro says motorists in that time took advantage of the department's attempt to be nice to motorists .
 Police affixed off ending ears cards with reminder that the ear was parked in violation of the law . Offending ears cards were used to tag drivers into court for violating the law, police say .
 The owner of the offending ear was asked to cooperate with the Police by parking properly in the future and the cards were signed by Cief Derro .
 Chief Derro hoped that the idea was a friendly one and hoped that its response from offending motorists would be equally friendly . The idea was an idea that police would respond with a friendly response from motorists .
 Many uioluri*>te took advantage of ui polio leniency to break the law with impunity, especially in the center some merchants were again parking their ears in front of their establishments .
 Chief Derro has asked the Star to warn its readers that the honeymoon is definitely over . After January 2 registration numbers <>l illegally parked cars will he taken for court action .
 All night parkers prevent the proper plowing of the town’s highways . This goes especially for the all-night parkers, whose ears in the event of a big snowstorm .
 Chief Derro and his men tried to exemplify the Christmas spirit by making a friendly gesture to local motorists . The gesture was captured on camera by a local police officer .
 Commencing after New Year’s all bets are oil and we can all tell it to the judge . All bets are on oil and the rest of the world will be made on the oil .
 Winchester Republican National Committeeman. Sees Congressman Visits Capital . Winchester Republican national committeeman . Sees congressman Visits Washington .
 Ralph Bonnell visited W ashington in 1961 to talk with Congressman Brad Morse, who visited W inches ter in November . Congressman Morse visited the town in November to talk about his visit to W inches Ter .
 This week’s picture is of the old Brown and Stanton Block at the corner of Main and Mt. Mount Mt. Mt. St. Brown . This week's Remember When series features a photo of the block at its corner of the intersection .
 C Stanton, two Winchester business men, moved their businesses into it when it was completed . C Stanton and C Stanton were among those who moved into it .
 Dr. Brown’s drug store was established in the Lyceum Building by David Youngman, at one time town clerk of Winchester . Mr Youngman was succeeded by Dr. .losiah llovey .
 Brown’s drug store was the tirst drug store in the new Brown and Stanton block and he ran it there in the eighties . Brown's drug store is located on the corner of the block .
 Coveil's Pharmacy was known as Coveil’s Pharmacy when the picture was taken . Later his clerk, Frank Covtdl, took over the business and it was known . The picture in this week's Star was taken by the owner of the business .
 Abair, and Allen’s Pharmacy were among the successors to Co veil, to be followed by William H Hevey William F Sheehan .
 Stanton grocery store was in the Brown and Stanton block on Main Street substantially where Winchester Provision has been located . Winchester Provision was the Winchester Provision grocery store in the area .
 It had a completely covered drive-in beside the store where delivery teams could Ih* loaded off the street . It had what few groceries could boast of, it had a covered drive in beside a store .
 Mr Stanton succeeded Mr Stanton and there were others before the Winchester Provision, including Carter & Young .
 On the second floor of the old block, about where the Masonic flail is now located was what was then known as Harmony Hall . Harmony Hall was a popular gathering place .
 Winchester Post Office, distributor of UuoLou papers, publisher for a short time of old "Winchester News" Fred Scales, watchmaker and jeweler . Winchester News Company distributor of papers and publisher .
 Adjoining the Brown and Stanton block on the Mount Vernon Street side, (it was Pleasant Street then), was the White Block, a part of which shows in the picture . The White Block was the part of the original White Block on Mount Vernon St.
 Bowser Dry (foods Store, later G Raymond Bancroft; and Jimmy Gargas’ fruit store and peanut roasting stand) Bowser Dry was later G. Raymond Banchroft’s Fruit Store and Peanut Roasting Stand .
 On the second floor of the block, now occupied by the Studio Guild, was the old YMCA headquarters with its band-box gymnasium . Some of the best basketball players hereabouts got their grounding in the game .
 Photo shows the old overhead incandescent street lights in use at the time of the picture was taken . It is interesting to sec the street lights and also the oil-burning lamps .
 People who insist that you can prove ANYTHING with statistics are usually disturbed about something statistics HAVE proved . The tree limbs in the picture are from the big tree that stood in the middle of the center in the old days .
 Admittedly, a statistic torn out of context or unrelated to certain variables can be deceptive . The statistics can be misleading, but can be taken into account for context .
 The U.S. spends one-third of a billion dollars on dog food every year . This statistic would be only mildly alarming if it were true .
 The figure is in excess of Haiti’s total national income, and that there are 10,000 homeless children in Hong Kong . The dog food statistic assumes greater significance .
 It is in contrast with the second and third facts that the first becomes important. The first is important, and the second is important .
 The U.S. spends more on liquor than on education or churches, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it's a reliable indication that the national heart lies .
 2 per cent of Venezuela's rural population owns 74 per cent the land . 500,000 farmers remain landless, and 2% of their rural population own land .
 If Haiti’s per capita income is a paltry $85 per year, you understand better why Haiti is not always enchanted with our dollar diplomacy, in which we finance the people who keep Haiti poor . Similarly, if I report that Haiti's per capita incomes are a p
 U.S. spends $10 billion a year creating needs for martini-mixers and nine-shade toasters . Two thirds of the world is hungry, ill clothed and ill housed, while the United States grinds up one-half of world’s natural resources
 In all of Latin America there are only 3,719,99G telephones as opposed to 4.541.000 in Illinois . In Latin America, only 3.719G phones are used in the U.S.
 This is not to argue the intrinsic value of either autos or telephones . It is to say that both are reliable indices of relative wealth and technological progress . Both give rise to growing anger among less favored people, and growing sense of rebellion against the system .
 Foreign policy should encourage political and economic reform before the tyranny of the right bows to that of the left . But these statistics do indicate that .
 For the world’s poor people no longer accept the shamanistic nonsense that hunger and tyranny are ‘divinely’ decreed . The world's poor people do not accept ‘shamanistic nonsense’ that hunger is divinely” decreed.
 They know they can he fed and free if given the proper government and economy, they say . They know that they can be fed and . free if . given the right government and . economy .
 At the end of 1961, with Mr Castro’s passage into Marxism before us, it should be plain to all that we either help these people in the ways of evolutionary democracy or they will help themselves to revolution . It is suggested frequently that “if only” America could
 America is dependent on the rest of the world for its natural resources, but this ignores unpleasant realities that exist within America itself . Besides the fact that we are utterly dependent on rest of world for our natural resources .
 This free land of the fast buck and the ""everybody's doing it’s doing it" ethic now leads the world in alcoholism arid homicide . This free country now leads world in world of alcoholism and homicide, says author .
 We spend $300 million per year on tranquillizers to make life more bearable . We spend more than $1 billion a year on tranquilizers . The cost of tranquillisers is estimated to be $1.5 billion .
 We send 400,000 of our one million juvenile delinquents to court every year . We have a juvenile delinquency rate of 1,400,000 . We are proud of our efforts to educate the public about the dangers of delinquency .
 We spend four times as much on advertising to create consumer needs than we do on basic research . Despite the heavy claims of ‘public service’ over T.V. it is known that we spend more on advertising than on research .
 In •the drug industry, for example, merchandise is marked up 7,000 per cent to absorb the high cost of national advertising . The drug industry has been marked up by more than a billion dollars a year .
 Richard A Hakim son, Publisher James H Penaligan, Editor Paul Wilson Sullivan. Richard H. Hakimson son, James H. Penaligan son, Paul H. Sullivan. Paul Wilson .
 The Winchester Star assumes no financial responsibility for typograhpical errors in advertisements . Will publish without charge a correction in the next issue, or republish that portion of the advertisement which is incorrect .
 OLDEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED in WINCHESTER, serving the Community 81 years . Largest Sworn Circulation . Telephone PArkview 9-0029 OLDest Newspaper .
 A delightful "box from home" has been received by all of Winchesters’ servicemen .
 It is a wonderful thing to be remembered by people and even more gratifying by a whole town . It's a wonderful place to remember by people, she says. It's more gratified to be known by people who remember her .
 Every year when I receive my Christmas package from you my shipmates are amazed that a town can be so thoughtful . Every year, I'm amazed that I received a package from a town so thoughtful, says the shipmates .
 "I have never met another serviceman who's hometown sent him a Christmas package," he says . Perhaps other towns are just as thoughtful, but he says he's never met someone who's sent a package .
 Photographer Bill Hycrson, his wife, Beverly, and their small daughter, Karen, having her first Christman . Karen is attending St. Mary’s School in New Jersey .
 Peter Hurley, 12; Janice O’Neil, 11; Bobby O'Neil, 10; and Cynthia Kenney, 10 . Janice, 11, Bobby, 10, and Bobby, 12, are among the children at the center of the story .
 Would anyone interested drop them off at my home, 39 Ridge Street, or call PA 9-1130 and I will pick them up .
 Goodwin Traffic Deaths Higher compared with last year . Registrar Clement A Riley reminds public that fifty-two were killed in traffic accidents as of December 25 compared with fortyeight last year.
 Every pedestrian ami driver should walk and drive carefully during the New Year’s holidays . Walkers should walk carefully during New Year's holidays .
 If your car is not registered for 1952 it must be off the road by midnight Sunday, December 31 . If you have a 1952 registered car, you can't keep it on the road .
 Registry inspectors will be looking for unregistered and uninsured cars . Registry inspectors are looking for uninsured and unregistered cars .
 Christmas spirit was well in evidence at Winchester’s Duplicate Bridge Club . Winchester Duplicates Bridge Club held last week .
 Our hats oft* to Walter and Trudy Mainberger and all those who worked on the refreshments . The event was held in honor of the Mainberger family .
 Eggnog was the order of the evening and the excellent food that accompanied it was not only tastetempting but eye-appealing .
 The consensus of opinion was <me of extreme appreciation for this attractive, well-served, and delicious snack, provided by the entertainment committee and its chairwoman .
 11 tables in Section A and 10 tables in . Section B participated, producing average scores of 11U and 03 respectively . The turnout was excellent as 11 tables produced an average score of 11 U and 03 .
 Toys Games Hobbies Vs Markdowns V2 and more on H0 TRAIN SETS GUN and HOLSTER SETS TOOL SETS .
 Nancy Atkinson and Greta Hawley were dealt a hand in a recent rubber bridge game . The pair dealt a number of interesting hands that developed during the evening's play .
 The bidding was of minor importance and the final contract was 0 spades by south . The bid was not a big deal and the contract was signed by the south .
 The opening lead is the heart king — before reading further, see if you can spot the correct line of play . Check out the opening lead in the opening play .
 North A K Q x x V None ♦ 10 xx A A K xxxxx Xxxxx . West East A J 10 x Ax V Xxx V xxxxx ♦ K J x ♦ xxxx A xx A Q J 10 . South A A xxxxx V Q J
 The opening heart lead is ruffed in dummy, the club ace is cashed and the club king is  cashed . Declarer discards a heart — declarer discarding a heart . The club ace and club king are cashed in dummy .
 A small club is led, ruffed by the declarer and a spade is led to the dummy . A spade leads a small club, ruffing by the Declarer, and a club ruffles by the player .
 The west hand has 2 spades, the dummy with one and the east hand with none . This leaves the west hand with two spades . This, of course, leaves the dummy and the dummy .
 An established club is played and declarer’s last heart is discarded . Now, an established club has played and declared its last heart .
 The west hand can ruff if he cares to, but no return he makes can hurt the declarer . All of his diamonds are thrown on the established clubs - all of them are thrown in .
 $175,000 is the goal for the annual ‘*53 Minute March” in aid of the fight against the crippling disease on January 14 . The annual march will be held in support of the United Cerebral Palsy of Greater Boston .
 United Cerebral Palsy of Greater Boston needs to provide the necessary habilitation services for the more than 15,000 cerebral palsied in the community during the coming year . This figure represents the realistic sum that must be reached if the organization succeeds .
 Charles L Haggerty, Inc. of Winchester will be the local sponsor for this area . John H Harris, President-Producer of Ice Capades, opening Boston Garden December 27 through January 7, announced .
 Youngsters that are accepted will be trained by Rosemarie Stewart and Bob Dench, former Olympic Pair Champions . Youngsters will be coached by three of the greatest coaches in the world .
 Nate Walley, former star skater with Ice Capades and for many years a skating instructor of high repute, will be at the center of the show . The show will be held at 8 p.m. ET .
 Mr Harris stated, ""Auditions will be held each Friday the show is in Boston, the auditions are open to any youngster that knows how to ice skate" Mr Harris said, "Auditions are . open to anyone that knows . how to . ice skate".
 Any young men or women who have ice skating ability and a strong interest in skating should audition . Regardless of present ability or present ability, a youngster’s personal opinion, should audition, says the author .
 Olympic Champion Avery Brundage called, ""The greatest skater who ever lived"" and World Champion Kathy Machado, both of whom hold the highest award in skating . The accepted youngster is exposed to the example of such skating greats as Ronnie Robertson .
 Ice Capades Skating School graduates may have the opportunity of going on in amateur competitions leading to possible Olympic participation . Graduates may also have the chance of joining Ice Capade Skating Team USA .
 As a direct result of the auditions, there is also the possibility of joining Ice Capades, touring the United States, Canada and world tours . The auditions will take place in the U.S.
 The Senior Forum of the First Congregational Church will have its December Forum at Church service this Sunday at the 11:00 m. worship service .
 All Forum alumni are invited to attend this i Homecoming service . Forum alumni will attend the service . The service will be held at the Forum's Homecoming Center .
 There will be an informal I professional skills in the treatment | coffee hour in Chidley Hall at 10:00 o’clock .
 Forum alumni an only in the upgrading of services I invited to meet members of their and professional skills but also in classes there and also to greet 1 an increased need for funds to supi Forum’s present officers and mem port these services und skills. burs. Forum alumni .
 Let this Co-operative Bank add dividends to YOUR ORGANIZATION S FUNDS SAFEGUARD the nest egg of your social, fraternal or church organization . SAVE CONVERSE REGISTER TAPES $2.00,h Page Eight .
 Your club's funds will earn a nice profit, be fully insured and readily available . Club's funds are fully insured, fully available and fully available .
 Eugene Bishop Hotchkiss of New Canaan, Connecticut, married Saturday, Dec. 31 . Richard James Clark, Jr., son of Dr. and Mrs. Mrs. Clark, was married Saturday . Eugene Bishop and Richard James Hotachkiss were married in December .
 According to a Census Study in Winchester, marriage is a more permanent institution than it is in most sections of the United States . Marital Ties Stronger Locally Locally According to the Census Study In Winchester .
 Census data shows the ratio of divorced men and women in the local population is below average . Census data gathered by the Census Bureau shows that the ratio is below the national average .
 It has not increased the way it has done nationally, where the ratio has more than doubled in the last ten years . The ratio has also increased in the past decade .
 The importance of an examination of our divorce vate was brought out last month at the 50th anniversary meeting of the Family Service Association of America .
 The association called family breakdown the number-one social problem in the United States. Family breakdown is the number one social problem for the U.S.
 At the present time, there is one divorce for every four new marriages . At the moment, it pointed out, there are one divorces for each new marriage .
 "We now have a delinquency rate that is triple what it was in 1040. And, along with it, we now have an unemployment rate of triple that it was before 1040," he says .
 In Winchester, 14 out of every 1,000 people over the age of 14 are divorced or separated . Census Bureau figures reveal that in Winchester, the figures show, are even more common in the city .
 The rate compares favorably with that in the rest of the United States, where it amounts to 43 per 1,000 . The rate is higher than in the U.S.
 The actual count shows, for Winchester, a total of 01 divorced women and 41 divorced men . Winchester, Virginia, is a city that has a population of 1,000 .
 Census Bureau lists 40 women and 17 men separated from their spouses, legally or otherwise, because of marital discord . Census Bureau: 40 women, 17 men split from spouses, 17 women separated from spouses because of discord .
 Department of Health, Education and Welfare has a fund of .$350,000 at its disposal . Just such a program will be undertaken shortly .
 Richard M Clifton of 4 Summit Avenue is undergoing nine weeks of recruit training at the Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois . Richard M. Cliften is undergoing a nine weeks recruit training .
 David A Bates has been awarded his cross-country letter by coach Hal Chalmers . Bates is a freshman at Nichols College of Business Admi nistration in Dudley, Mass., . Bates was awarded the letter of honor by coach Chalmers.
 Bates formerly attended Maine Central Inst., Pittsfield, Maine, and is the son of Mr and Mrs. Bates . Bates was born in Maine, Maine . Bates is a former high school student .
 Barbara Chaulk of 12 Park Avenue reported to police that the glove compartment in her Chevro let was ransacked on Converse Place .
 Police say that the locked glove compartment was ransacked by way of a hole slit in the cardboard back of the compartment . Police say the locked compartment was accessed by a hole cut in a cardboard back .
 Paul W Goddu is at guided Missiles school at Fort Sill, Oklahoma . He flew east to spend the holidays with his parents, Mr and Mrs. Goddu .
 John Elliott of 35 Water Street assumed her duties as a clerk in the Town Clerk’s office on Tuesday morning . John Elliott took over the duties of a clerk at 35 Water St. John Elliott .
 Firemen cleared Pulli residence at 27 Florence Street of smoke on Sunday afternoon . Pot of stew set to burning when a pot of stew was set to burn .
 Silfskin January Special Save 20 per cent on Girdles, Panty Girdle, Extra-long-leg Panty girdle .
 Fred Doyle of Madison Avenue West has returned home from a Boston hospital where he recently underwent surgery . Doyle has been in the hospital since undergoing surgery .
 David Mitchell, a student at Thompson Academy, was at home over Christmas to spend the holidays with his parents . When you plan to replace your present car with a new Chevrolet or Corvair, or a good used car Dlease call Harry Bean, PA 9-0167 >r
 Winchester firefighters respond to burning stuffed chair at 10 Skillings Road . Winchester firefighters were called to the scene about 9:15 o’clock Monday .
 The burning chair resulted in a goodly measure of smoke in the house, damaging the rug near the chair as well as the chair .
 Rhona M French, former clerk in the Town Clerk’s office, assumed her duties as secretary of the First Baptist Church on Tuesday, December 26 .
 Allan Buros, Jr., Jr., a junior at New Hampton School, New Hampton, N.H., is at home for the Christmas vacation . He is at school in New Hampton .
 At the annual Fall Sports Banquet held recently at the school Buros was awarded a tie clip as he has been a member of the winning intra-mural Club Soccer team . At the school's annual sports Banquet he won a tie .
 Treo’s Anniversary Sale Substantial Savings on Stvles Number 9-10-410-411 . Treo's Anniversary Sale .
 One of the most interesting cards the Star received through the holiday season was the one from its former employee, Geoff Johnson, who is now in the Marine Corps at Okinawa .
 Colver Payson Dyer, of 11 Grove Street, announces the engagement of her daughter . The engagement of Colver Dyer is announced .
 We wish to sincerely thank our many friends, relatives, neighbors, for their many acts of kindness, and messages of sympathy, . sympathy, spiritual bouquets, religious articles, and flowers .
 The ceremony was performed in the Congregational Church of New Canaan . The Reverend Loring Chase performed the ceremony .
 Given in marriage by her father, Miss Hotchkiss wore a gown of light ivory satin with Alencon lace bodice, scoop neckline and bracelet sleeves .
 Leonard Wheeler, Jr., of Denver, Col., was matron of honor . His sister, sister of the bride, was matrons of honor.
 Misses Susan, Charlotte and Anne Clark of Winchester, sisters of the bridegroom; Miss Jane Roberts of Englewood, N.J.; and Miss Margaret Hobbs of Newton . Ernst Knobil of Pitts burgh, Penn., another sister of bride; . Miss Jane
 They wore red velvet dresses with matching headpieces . They carried bouquets of white camellias and holly . They wore matching headgear and matching headpiece .
 Clark graduated from Low Heywood School in Stamford, Conn, in 1956, and Wheaton College in Norton in 1960 . He graduated from Wheaton in 1960, and attended the school in Stamford .
 Denton of Portland, Me. the late Mr Denton and of the late Dr. and Mrs. Frederick Denton . Denton was married to Dr. Denton, Dr. Frederick and Dr. George Denton Jr. the . late Dr Denton died in August .
 Mr Clark prepared at Belmont Hill School and is a graduate of Amherst College, class of 1960 . He is also a graduate from Belmont Hills School .
 Miss Ann Monro, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Clark, will make their home in Arlington . Miss Monro will be named Miss Clark .
 John Usher Monro of Cambridge, formerly of Winchester, united in marriage with Robert Addison Becker, son of Mr and Mrs. Becker . Monro is married to Becker, who was born in Winchester, Winchester .
 Miss Dyer graduated from Winchester High School in 1960 . She is a medical secretarial major at Ca zenovia College in California .
 Mr Hooper graduated from Win Chester High School in 1957 and Dartmouth College in 1961 . He graduated from high school and college in Dartmouth .
 He will receive the M.B.A. degree from the Amos Tuck School of Business Ad ministration in 1962 . Admits he will receive an M.I. degree .
 La ura nee D Sibley of 15 Cambridge Street, announced on Christmas eve the engagement of their daughter, Jill Elaine, to Mr Sidney Rodgers Bixler, son of Mr and Mrs. Bixlers . Jill Elaine is engaged to Mr. Sidney Rodgers . Bix
 She is apprentice teaching in music at Shady Hill School in Cambridge . She is a 9 ed Mr and Mrs. Arthur E Sibley of Braintree .
 Thomas E Curran of 77 Pickering Street, Danvers, and the late Mr Curran. Thomas E. Curran .
 He is now a member of the class of 1963 at Cornell Law School . He is a legal fraternity Phi Delta Phi and Delta Kappa Epsilon .
 Winchester’s Roger DeMinieo, OD.-lin., 18.“>-ll’ll» physical education major in tin* da** of 1964 . Winchester's Roger Deminieo was a student at Winchester University in Ohio .
 Roger is highly respected on the Kedmen coaching staff for his rugged, determined play . Roger is a highly respected member of the coaching staff . He has been in charge of the Swedish national side since 1995 .
 Mr Bixler is the grandson of Mrs. Bixlers . Parkview Taxi PA 9-0666 Long's Auto School WeIIs .
 Rodgers of Buffalo, N.Y., and the late Mr Rodgers, and of the late Dr. and Mrs. CL Rodgers, are among those who have died .
 He prepared at Phillips Exeter Academy and graduated in the class of 1961 from Amherst College . He was a member of the Theta Delta Chi .
 Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore a gown of white dulcette satin on princess lines . The high scoop neckline and long sleeves were the traditional long sleeves .
 A scalloped edge at the neck was effected with reembroidered Alencon lace . The same lace was used in a Vshaped pattern to add detail to the full skirt . The full skirt was finished with a pattern of re-arranged patterns .
 Her waist-length veil of silk illusion fell from a matching headpiece . She carried a crescent cascade of phalaenopsis orchids, white carnations and sprays of silvered holly .
 Miss Monro wore a ballerina-length gown of emerald velveteen fashioned with a fitted bodice and a slim skirt featuring flat pleats which gave extra fullness .
 She carried a cascade of white carnations, garnet sweetheart roses, and silvered holly . She was accompanied by a collection of flowers and flowers .
 The bridemaids, Miss Ellen Becker, sister of the bridegroom, and Miss Marguerite LeVro of Waltham, wore dresses identical to that of the maid of honor and carried cascades of white carnations and silvered holly .
 Monro chose a cerise peau-de-soie sheath with matching accessories . Monro wore a corsage of green cypripedium orchids .
 Becker wore a beige sheath embroidered with seed pearls and had matching accessories . Becker wore an embroidered embroidered sheath and matching accessories to the event .
 Both the bride and bridegroom are 1956 graduates of Winchester High School . Both are Winchester graduates of the school .
 Becker graduat(1 from Colby College in I960 and Katharine Gibbs School in 1961 . Becker graduated from Katharine . Gibbs School . Becker was born in Denver, Colorado, and graduated from the Katharine. Gibbs .
 The bridegroom graduated from Dartmouth College in I960 . He graduated from the Amos Tuck School of Business Administration in 1961 . The couple will be married for the first time .
 Linda Joan Viarengo is engaged to Timothy M Hennessey, son of Mr. Dino E Viarcngo of New Canaan, Conn., . The couple announce the engagement of their daughter to Mr. Timothy M. Hennsey .
 An instructor in history at Wilbraham Academy, he is a member of Theta Delta Chi and the Sphynx .
 Arthur Crossley Smith III, III, of Elkins Park, Pa. and Catherine Elizabeth Tonon of 53 Lawson Road. The couple have been married for more than 20 years .
 Jack Everett Moore of Vermilion, Ohio, and Martha Louise Fish of 20 Myrtle Street. Moore and Fish were married at the time of their wedding . Moore was married to Fish, Fish, and Moore was the father of one of the couple's children . Moore, Fish and
 Eaton’s Ko-Rec-Type lets you correct mistakes in typing without erasing . The Ko-rec-Type can also be used to correct mistakes without errowing . Eaton: "Ko-Rec Type" is a way to correct errors in typing .
 Alexander J Fay of 18 Winslow Road are the parents of a seventh child, Paul Gerard . Paul Gerard is the third son of Alexander Fay and Paul Fay . Alexander Fay is the father of seven children .
 Joseph A Knight Jr. of Watertown announce the birth of their first child . Laurie Anne Knight was born on December 22 .
 Rudolph E Castelli, Jr., of Avon, Connecticut, announce the birth of their fourth child, third son . Daniel Jennings Castelli was born December 15 at the Hartford Hospital . The couple's third son was born at the hospital December 15 .
 Irving E Jennings of New Durham, New Hampshire, formerly of Winchester . Jennings was born in Winchester, NH . Jennings is a married father of two children . Jennings died at the age of 92 .
 Each home will include a 2-car garage and a terrace or patio to emphasize outdoor living, with especially designed swimming pools, gardens and landscaping throughout the grounds . Wills Wills
 The price range of the homes is from $25,000 to $40,000 . Adaptations may be made to conform with the individual budget . The homes can be adapted to suit individual budgets .
 Benton J wish to express our sincere thanhs to our mam nj. customers and friends for the patronage of the past gear, an d to extent l to aid our hest wishes .
 This ‘dime board’ project will be a part of the local Legion Post’s participation in and will coincide with the 1962 Annual March of Dimes . Legion Post will participate in the project .
 A specially designed “dime board’s” picturing the 1962 National Postor Child, Debbie Sue Brown, will be set up at the Post during all of January to receive special dime contributions .
 Across the top of the “score board” will be a banner, carrying the message, “Her Battle Is Ours,” so that all Legionnaires will see it . The message will be carried across the top .
 The local drive for funds is in cooperation with a nation-wide ‘dime board’ campaign in assistance to the National Foundation . Debbie Sue Brown was selected as the 1962 National Poster Child .
 The American Legion, its auxiliary and the Fight and Forty spent a total of $7,778,715.61 on child welfare during the year 1960 .
 Mt. Head Stevens Class of '65 wishes everyone a happy, healthy, happy New Year .
 Steven M Cochran is son of Mr and Mrs. Cochran . He was born in Winchester, Winchester, VA .
 He is also a member of the student council, honor board representative, and the class captain of the Interclass Swimming Team . He also is also member of student council and student board representative .
 Several hundred state employees are expected to take the course, Northeastern says . Northeastern in cooperation with the state .
 Dr. Asa S Knowles, 25 Arlington Street, is located in the U.S. Census Bureau .
 Joseph E Flaherty of 38 Lebanon Street has been appointed as a deputy collector of taxes . Mr Flaherty has been named Winchester Collector and Treasurer E Abbott Bradlee .
 The plants produce cotton, rayon and nylon fabric for use in Firestone tire manufacturing and for sale to outside consumers . The plants are located in Texas and Texas .
 Mr Sawyer was assigned to the company’s textile mill in New Bedford, Mass. A member of the 1929 college class, Mr Sawyer worked for Firestone .
 In 1935 he was named comptroller of the Gastonia plant . He remained there until 1943 when he transferred to a textile plant in Fort Worth, Tex., which Firestone then owned .
 From 1945 to 1957 he served as plant manager of the textile plant in Sao Paulo, Brazil . He was also plant manager at the Sao Paulo textile plant .
 Mr Sawyer was born in Salem and graduated from Lowell Textile Institute . Mr Sawyer graduated with a bachelor of textile engineering degree .
 Ho earned his master’s degree in textile research from Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Ho earned a master's degree from the M.I.T. Ho .
 NEW: MAIL THIS COUPON TO THE WINCHESTER STAR 3 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. MAIL this COUPon to the WINTERSTERS 3 Church St. Mass. The WINTERING STAR is published in 1981 .
 With two weeks left of the half, the standings could still change a little . Then* are a couple of teams that are close and, with two weeks to go, there's still a lot to go .
 B Kelley almost broke the high triple with a 3511 . Detire II almost did the same to the high single with a 142. B Kelley also broke the record for the highest single .
 Gelatin 80 40 21,106 Gelatin . Post Office 72 48 20,840 K of C 69 51 20,499 49’er.s 66 54 21,070 Bros. -inLaw 47 73 20,227 St. Lawyer's name is the name of a
 State of the Union MESSAGE by President KOCH . President: We stand on the threshold of a new age . President says we stand on threshold of new age. President: "We are in a new world of politics"
 "I want you all to know that whatever joy the new year brings to you, it shall remain niv purpose to give you that financial security that can come only when your money is safe with me"
 1962 Koch Vacation Fund, (rive generously to this fund; help stamp out my bills) Blit's message today is non-political, which is to say your dollars are all green and equally welcome .
 Willi the winter snow upon us, let East and West have one big snowball light . Willi: "Let's have a snowball light. Let's have one snowball light"
 This will not only relieve “cold war tensions but also clean up the streets as well. This will also relieve ‘cold’ war tensions,’ says CNN.com correspondent .
 In this spirit, I, therefore, decree the beginning of a new year of prosperity for Maggie and me, with the hope that you will rise to the occasion .
 Given on Church Street on this 2Blh day of December, 1961, Charles Koch, President WINCHESTER SPORT SHOP 43 Church Street, Winchester, Mass. Given on December 2, 1961 .
 PArkview 9-1931 "" Quality Js Our Wost Preciouj . Teaching first grade at the Noonan School this year .
 Laila Voung has had previous teaching experience in the elementary schools of Newport, U. I., and Philadelphia .
 Winchester and Watertown finished in a 2-2 stalemate in a Middlesex League hockey game last Saturday afternoon at the North Shore Sports Center .
 Melrose defeated Wakefield, 6-2, to go into first place in the league standing . Melrose went iptu first place after defeating Wakefield .
 Winchester is in fifth place with a win, two losses and a tie for three points . Winchester is currently in fifth with two wins and two losses . Winchester has won and lost three of the last five games .
 Watertown had a 2-1 lead in last Saturday’s game with only 26 seconds remaining . Watertown led the game with 26 seconds to go .
 Coach Frank Finigan took out his goaler, Bob Joyce, and sent in an extra forward for a power drive at the Watertown net . In an effort to pull the game out of the fire Coach Finigan sent in the extra forward .
 Barry Johnson scored the equalizer with a 10-foot screen shot . The strategy paid ofF as Barry Johnson scores the equaliser . Barry Johnson's goal was the only goal scored in the game .
 Watertown — G, Ernst; Id, Id, Kattlemoir; r<J, McCarthy : c, Morahan : Iw, Dennis Williams; rw, Dick Williams. Watertown .
 Watertown defeats Winchester 1-0 in two periods . Goals from Morahan, Reardon, Dick liarns, Morahan and Reardon . Winchester scores only one goal each .
 Winchester High School's basketball team has two dates listed for New Year’s week . Winchester turned display of power to a 13-0 victory over WilWilHoop Dates .
 Tuesday afternoon, January 2, the Sachems travel to Concord for a Middlesex game with Concord High . Tuesday afternoon's game will be at Middlesex High . The game is scheduled to take place at 6 p.m.
 Winchester plays at Wakefield in another league game on January 5 . Winchester will play Wakefield at the end of the week . Winchester is looking forward to a win over Wakefield .
 Breeze through snow removal with this rugged 3 Va HP. snow thrower that handles even slush and . h6avily packed snow .
 Remote control chute chute handle directs the itream of snow 25 feet in the direction you want . The chute can be used to send 25 feet of snow in 25 feet .
 St. Hockey j strength with Jim Devaney, sharp League. j shooting forward back in action . Moran opened the scoring after being shelved with a groin injury in the first period .
 Seven different players put themselves on the score sheet for Lexington . St. Mary’s skaters Lexington were in complete control of the game .
 Jim Moran, Dennis Griffin, Jim Moran and Pepper Cunningham also on the scoring parade . Jim Moran scored a hat trick; Dennis Griffin scored two goals . Pepper Cunningham scored two more goals for the club .
 George Nowell, John Moran, and Jackie Cullen collected a goal apiece . John Moran and Jackie Culligan also scored for the team .
 Winchester club's best defensive game of the year as they allowed the opposition only one shot on goal . Winchester club’s best defensive performance of the season as they allow the opposition just one shot .
 Dennis Griffin fired a forty foot shot from the right wing boards into the upper left hand corner of the Peabody cage in the first frame of the game . This singular effort came in a thirty foot shot that deflected off of the goalie Jack Falla’s glove and was
 The Saint Mary’s blueline corps accounted for three of the Winchester goals . Altogether, the Saint Mary's bluelines account for three goals .
 The Saint Mary’s third and fourth units saw considerable action in the last two periods and probably would have finished the game were it not for the Peabody goaltender . A three stitch cut to left winger Frank Hession resulted in several minor injuries to other Saint Mary's players .
 This prompted coach Falla to close the proverbial gates of mercy and return his power play unit to the ice . Coach Falla returned the team to the game after the loss .
 The strategy produced a pair of goals and boosted the Saint Mary’s score into the teens . The Saint Mary's score was also boosted by a goal each .
 Next Sunday’s encounter with Charlestown in a game which will decide first place .
 Winchester’s combination play and covering left a lot to be desired against Woburn . Coach Phillips has been working his boys with the idea of strengthening these two apparent weaknesses . Lexington is supposed to be a league powerhouse this year and the Sachems will have to play their best
 A win over Lexington would establish the Sachems as one of the teams to beat for league honors . A win against the Lexington team would give them the chance to win the league .
 Sachem JayveeS, perennial winners of the Middlesex Jayvees crown will he out to continue their winning ways at the expense of the Lexington seconds . Lexington seconds are the second fastest team in the world .
 A dictionary built right into your three-ring notebook, plus five subject dividers all in one neat package for back-to-school . The dictionary is built right in your three ring notebook .
 Winter term classes begin next Wednesday, January 3, at the Cambridge Center for Adult Education . Adult Glasses Winter Term classes begin January 3 at the center for adult education .
 At 42 Brattle Street, Cambridge, near Harvard Square, offers a wide variety of daytime and evening courses . Topics include philosophy, philosophy, literature, music, music and languages .
 Openings still remain in many of the discussion groups, art workshops and craft courses .
 “A History of Science” is a survey of the factors, including religion, economics, warfare, and the arts, which influence scientific development . The winter program at the Adult Center features a history of science .
 A course in ‘Minority Problems’ will examine the social psychology of prejudice, discrimination and exploitation . The course is designed to examine prejudice and exploitation of minorities .
 Young was born in Grosso Pointo, Mich., and graduated from high school there in 1954 . Young was also born in Michigan and attended high school .
 Mr Young is in his first year at Harvard Law School . Mr Young, a native of East Lansing, Mich., is in Harvard Law .
 Mr Young was a supply officer in the Navy for three years with the rank of lieutenant . He served both in Newport, R.I., and Philadelphia, Rhode Island .
 Previous to coming to Winchester, she practice taught elementary classes in the Belmont and Brookline Schools . She also taught at the Buckingham School .
 First Eight End scored in major competition this Curling season occurred on November 30 at the Seigniory Club in Montebello, Quebec, during the 22nd International Invitational Friendly Bonspiel .
 The skipper was Stan Neill, mate Dave Shean, sec-, ond, Tom Downes, lead Rod Bullen . The skippers were on board at the end of the trip .
 The Eight End occurred on the Six End while playing the Toronto Granites . The Granites were playing in the Toronto area .
 The victorious team were skippled by Keith Fulton, with mate Walter Wilcox, second stone, Stanley Neill, and lead, James Wilcox . Keith Fulton was captain of the victorious team .
 Winchester triumphed over a field which included The Country Club, Weston Country Club and Brae Burn Country Club . Petersham Curling Club . Winchester won the event over a four-team field .
 Charles Tinkham skippered, mate John O’Day, second, J Pietz, and lead, H Chilton . Charles . Chilton was the first-place finisher in the world in the race .
 The third place was a tie with Petersham Curling Club of Athol, Mass., and the Highlands Curled Club of Harrisburg, Rhode Island . Petersham and Highlands Curling Clubs tied for third place .
 In the fourth quarter, the Sachems fought buck as the Alumni were tiring, but their surge oajne I too late .
 Boh Watson scored 18 points for the Sachems . Charlie Tofuri scored 15 for the Saints . Boh Watson was the highest scorer for Boh Watson with 18 points .
 The Alumni were led by Phil Nichols with 10 and Vandy French and George Neville with eight and seven, respectively . Phil Nichols led the Alumni with 10 . George Neville and Phil Nichols had seven .
 The Sachems were without the services of their good shooting forward, Jim Devaney who was on the injured list . The Sachesms won their first game of the season in a straight away victory .
 The whites were led by Chuck Anderson, while Vie Papadinis and Ron Eriksen were high scorer for the blacks . The blacks were high scoring for the whites . The whites led the blacks to victory in the first half of the game .
 If 2 2 e, Devaney. rf 0 I i (lay) rf 1 0 2 Mac Kay. r 2 0 4 White, r 2 2 0 Cnlluban, lr 1 1 :s DeMiniro. r K 1 7 French, r
 Valence is the wife of Philp Valence and she and her husband are making their home at 17 Linden Street in Winchester . She and Philp are currently living in Winchester, England .
 Both were born in Needham and graduated from Needham High School, he in 1956, and she a year later . Both graduated high school and high school before moving to college .
 Mr Valence graduated from Tufts Engineering School in 1960, nd is an electrical engineer with the New England Power Co.
 Miss Jean Caldwell, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Donald S Abbott of 1 Forest Circle; Miss. Jean Caldwell of 1 . Forest Circle, 1 Forest . Circle . Miss Abbott is daughter of Donald Abbott, Donald Abbott and Miss Caldwell of Forest Circle .
 Miss Susan Nanry, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Lindsay H Caldwell of 16 Brooks Street, was named Miss Nanry . Lindsay Caldwell, daughter-of-two Lindsay Caldwell and Miss Susan N. Nanry were also present .
 Robert M Mulford of 29 | Pierrepont Road, are members of the Orphean Club, choral society of Lasell Junior College . They participated in the Christmas candlelighting vesper service on December 17 and took part in an outdoor enactment .
 "The WINCHESTER STARMONOPOLY" w Parker Bros. To— PHARMACY GIRL INC., LABS Fifth Avenue, Brookfield, Conn. "The Winchter Starmonopoly" w "The Star of the Star"
 Some players rook© fortunes, some go bankrupt, in the course of play . Splendid fun for every family I. Some players go bankrupt in course of playing .
 The WINCHESTER STAR, Dec. 28, 1961, features cut flowers, flowers and flowers . Eves. 28th-century flower shop features floral arrangements .
 Very’s For T V Radio Sales and Service 1203 Mass. PArkview 9-4363 after 6m. augl 2 -tt PHOTOGRAPHY by RYERSON P.Arkview .
 The Story of the Tactical Air Command, by Leverett A Richards The United States Air Force in Korea, 1950-1953, by Robert Frank Futrell This Sunday In The Churches .
 The Senior High Department will not meet today ivnd the Youth Program in the Morning Worship Service will take the place of the evening M.Y.F. meeting . 11:00m.
 The service will he very simple Saturday, Jnnunry 6.6. and devotional in nature, with emphasis on the Ritual and Sacrament .
 The Tucker Autobridge is a bridge game that lets you play bridge any time by yourself . World champions as partners can play bridge with world champions . The game is now available in the U.S.
 Winchester Star features the official aluminum duplicate bridge boards and the advanced coursb in contract bridge . Winchester Star also has the official duplicate bridge board boards and advanced bridge boards .
 This service will be of the same devotional nature as the one on New Year’s Fve.su . Service will be a devotional service .
 Winchester Winchester PArkview 9-3000 mar 2 -tf Tuesday, January 2. Phone or come in 36 Church Street Winchester PArview 9.30am .
 Freedom from sin, sickness, and limitation is available to all through the power of Spirit, God .
 This i* i* was an encouraging message to he emphasized at Christian Science services Sunday . Christian Science is Christian Science .
 These proofs consist solely in the destruction of sin, sickness, and death by the power of Spirit, as Jesus destroyed them, says Jesus .
 Rev. Roy W Horn, Prop. july'JOtf New Hope BAPTIST CHURCH CHurcher, will be held at Cross Street, near Washington Street .
 William M Jackson, 6 Sunny sidt* Avenue, Everett, Everett Tel.4-3408 Senior Deacon, Mr Hiz-iah Griffin Ch. Ch. H. J. Jackson, is a senior Deacon of the Episcopal Church .
 Christmas musir which was to have been sung Inst Sunday was postponed because of the inclement weather, ami will be sung this Sunday, December 31 .
 Torrielli, who resides at 30 Plymouth Avenue, Belmont, is President and General Manager of the Eaton Press in Watertown .
 He is a graduate of Harvard College with high honors . He received his Ph.D from the Harvard Graduate School . He is also a Harvard College graduate .
 Mr Hall is one of the leading attorneys of Middlesex County . He is a partner in the Lowell law firm of Qua, Hall, Harvey, and Walsh .
 The Academy Advisory Board will make final recommendations to the Congressman for appointment to the service military academies . The Academy advisory board makes final recommendations .
 Those young men who have successfully completed the preliminary aptitude examination, and have met the stringent physical standards, will be interviewed by the Board in the Congressman’s Lowell office .
 Rico DeFeo of Revere; Miss Consary of Paul and John De Feo, twin nie DeFeeo, Miss Gilda Defeo of Wakefield; and the twins’ sister, Carol Ann. Rico deFeo . Miss Consaries of Paul
 The twins received gifts and refreshments including a decorated birthday cake .
 Mr Chadwick told Rotary that this was not simply a matter of partisan politics . He said that this is not simply the matter of politics .
 James H Kelly’s letter of January 7, 1959 in which Mr Kelly, Democrat, urged the election of Democrat Rep. Rep. Jim Kelly . Rep. Kelly was elected in 1959 .
 You were the witness to the destruction of tradition for the sake of propulsion and expedience . You were a witness to . the destruction . of tradition . For more information, visit CNN iReport.com .
 Mr Chadwick said he did not view this possibility with alarm with alarm . Mr Thompson said that certain members of the Legislature were lawyers who had bookies* among their clients .
 Crime Commission issued its famed report, it was unahle to obtain reprints of it, he said . Reprints of such documents is common practice, he added .
 Chadwick repeated his earlier statement that no innocent person need feel sensitive in connection with the investigation .
 Bookies did contribute to political campaigns and thus could exert pressure for or against a candidate in terms of his stand on illegal gambling . He also repeated his statement that although their contributions were not recorded officially, bookies contributed to campaigns . He said bookies could influence a candidate's stand on
 Mr Chadwick said that more than one legislator who served as an attorney had told him that he had bookies as clients . He said he has clients of more than a dozen legislators .
 Mr Chadwick said that in fact one legislator had opposed the establishment of the commission on these grounds .
 Winchester Representative at the same time said that it had never been his intention to hurt anyone, that he was by nature a man who liked peace and harmony . Winchester Representative said that he did not feel he could remain silent when such wrongdoing existed .
 Mr Chadwick said he had a stack of mail about one foot high expressing the ""anguished frustration"" of the citizens of the state in this matter . He said he also had a pile of mail that was one foot tall .
 Mr Chadwick dealt once again with gambling in its moral, economic and political dimensions, as reported earlier in the Star .
 Morally, he said, he did not presume to usurp a function properly exercised by the churches . Morally he said he would not usurp the function of the churches.
 He said he did consider gambling foolhardy, however, when it required participants to go into debt to make ends meet, work a hardship on their dependents, or mortgage their homes .
 State losing millions of dollars worth of taxes that could be collected if the money were being passed in legitimate enterprises, he said . He said that over one billion dollars passed under the table every year in organized gambling .
 Normal taxes on $1 billion worth of business would net the state $100 million when all taxes and surtaxes were taken into consideration . He said the state would be netting $100m if all taxes, surcharges and taxes are taken into account . The state is expected to
 Mr Joseph E O’Donnell, Jr., pastor of the First Baptist Church, will be assisted by Miss Carol Ann Chute of Baldwin Wallace College, Miss Judith Donovan of the Connecticut College for Women, Pvt. Pvt . Judith Donovan .
 David M Rush, Jr. of Fort Devens, and Robert W Carlson, Jr., of the Citadel, were honored Sunday . Rush and Carlson were part of a student recognition ceremony at the Citadel .
 Music Director Raymond Shannon prepared for this service by the Music Director, Mr Raymond Shannon . Special music is prepared for the service .
 Crawford Memorial Methodist Church will he oh served this Sunday at the Morning Worship Service at 11:00 o’clock .
 All of the young people of he church who are home from college, preparatory school, nurses’ training, or tip* armed forces have been invited especially . Several jf them will participate in the conducting of the service .
 The sermon, ""The Remnant Today"" will be delivered by Calvin Keeler who holds a Local Preacher’s License and who has completed two years at Harvard Divinity School .
 Secretary of Student Work and her Committee will serve coffee for students and armed forces personnel who are at home for the holidays . Coffee will be served at 10:15 o’clock, preceding the Morning Worship Service .
 Susan Douglas, Geoffrey Rivinius, Rose Mary Wolf, Thomas James, Jean Fay, Jacqueline Pcrotti, David Craven, Louise Mears, Susan Hillman . Susan Douglas was Susan Douglas' first female designer, Susan Merenda .
 In front, Janies Rich, Joseph Mozzicato, Richard Clark, Sarah Bates, John Butterfield, Michael Dello Russo, Ronald Wilkinson . The cast of the show, which airs tonight at 8.30pm on PBS .
 Crawford Memorial Couples’ Club of the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church will hold their regular January event on Tuesday evening . The first course of supper and a gab-fest will take place at 6:30 o’clock with the first of the first course at 6.30 o
 The Couples’ Club at the Crawford Memorial Methodist Church is not an ""age group"" but is open for all who enjoy its informal fellowship . The club is not a "age group"
 Couples of every age in the church are invited and any of the young people who are still at home for the holidays will be welcome to come and join in the fun . Couples are invited to join in with each other .
 Robert W MacArthur of 42 Cabot Street, is serving aboard the icebreaker, USS Burton Island, which smashed a path through Antarctic ice four to eight feet thick to open McMurdo Sound to sea traffic a month earlier than had ever been done before .
 Burton Island led a special group of ships consisting of two other icebreakers, a cargo ship and a tanker to deliver aviation gasoline, supplies and equipment for Operation Deepfreeze ’62 . The Burton Island was part of the group that arrived at the McMurdo station on November 28
 Dwight E Bellows, 2 Lantern Lane; Herbert Black, 7 Seneca Road; Richard F Clark, 3 Old Lyme Road; Frederick L Hicks, Jr., 21 Ginn Road; Albert A Kajander, 4 Alden Lane; Franklin J Lane, 4 Drexel Avenue
 Ambrose Burton, 18 Sheffield Road, Wakefield; Phillips C Davis, 2 Pine Ridge Road, Greenwood; Kenneth Currie, 26 Chestnut Street, and John M Devlin, Jr. of 5 Hill Street, Stoneham; John J Heneghan of 40 Greenwood Road, Burlington
 1 Mt. Mt. PA 9-1693 novS-tf John B. MERCURIO “ INSURANCE FOR EVERY NEED ” Homeowner’s Package Policy .
 Registrar Clement A Riley warns the motoring public that our record indicates thirty-eight killed in traffic, accidents as of December 17 compared with thirty-six last year . Vernon Street PA 9-3,400 novlO-tf December Traffic Deaths . Vernon St. PA 9/3
 Massachusetts Highway safety committee is doing everything possible to regulate and control traffic . Governor Volpe’s order to remoye drinking drivers from behind the wheel .
 Wc need the active support and cooperation of responsible members of each family in the commonwealth to guarantee that unreasonable and drinking drivers will not appear on our highways during the holiday season .
 Christmas Pageant given as a memorial tribute to Miso Salice, late member of the Mystic teaching staff . Harry Gilson and representatives from the School Department attended the pageant .
 Ganson Taggart, president of the Mystic School Mothers Association, read a trihute to Miss Salice written by a Mystic School mother, Mrs. Ganson .
 Traditional music was under the direction of Miss Jean Loudon and Mr Theodore Janner . Traditional music under direction by Miss Loudon .
 W Dinn & Co. is a local and long distance packing company . Local and Long Distance Packing — Crating 4 Linden Street P.
 Located on a one-half-acre lot of exceptional privacy and beauty, the house boasts a modern kitchen, four bedrooms, two baths, two living rooms with fireplaces, and a den, one-car garage and is convenient to schools .
 Home on Kverett Avenue near the Mystic Lakes . Buyer can purchase a home on K Everett Avenue .
 One-and-a-half baths, garage, kitchen with countertop stove and many huiltI ins not found in the average home .
 Ruth C PORTER CO., Realtors 33 THOMPSON STREET PArkview 9-1310 Evening phone numbers . Gertrude H Murphy, PA, 9-6213, Richard H Murphy and Marion Ferrimon 9-4136 .
 A real antiquesque colonial charm, sums up this new listing . For appointment call exclusive broker, BIXBY & NORTHRUP 24 Thompson Street .
 The newly completed Wedgewood Apartments are located on the shore of Wedge Pond in Winchester Center . For rent, you may enjoy simplified, luxurious, all-electric living .
 Ranch with three bedrooms, living room, dining room, kitchen, kitchen and fireplaced family room plus den or fourth bedroom . Call PA 9-580U Monday through Friday . Ranch has three bedrooms .
 Home Repairs & Remodeling Carpentry, Complete Additions, Kitchens, Roofs, Gutters, Painting, Plastering & Masonry. Woburn au*10-tf FLOORS CARPENTERS .
 CarpENTRY Weatherstrip Outside Doors, $5 Windows Ueff lazed Ceilings Installed Reasonable Rates ( all PA 9-5042. Call PA 9 -0323. septl4-tf CARPENTRY .
 FRANK REEGO and SONS CONTRACTORS have been working together since 1914 . Landscaping is a major contractor in the U.S.
 ANGELO A AM1C0 Master Electrician 28 Crescent Hill Avenue Arlington, Mass. Arlington, is a master electrician . Shoveldozer Cellar Excavating — Grading PArkview 9-5067 .
 ST0CKW00D Master Electrician Commercial Residential Wiring PA 9-5540 2312 decl 6-tf . Fireplace Wood well-seasoned Oak & Maple .
 Two pairs girl’s professional ice skates, siv.es 6 and b x ->, new lost year. $25 for a pair, excellent condition, will sell $10 each pair . $10 per pair, Gall PA 9-3827.
 Winchester and Woburn JUNK DEALER highest prices paid for rags . Winchester and . WobURN JUNk Dealinger highest ever prices for Rags. Winchester .
 FAY’s PLUMBING HEATING PA 9-3193 — EX 6-7300 Est.21 DON’T BE A LITTER BUG KEEP OUR TOWN CLEAN nov2-tf RUBBISH REMOVAL .
 PArkview 9-3516 Weekly Pick-Up If Desired . Call us 3-6069 BR 2-3437 augL 2 -tf WALTER J JOHNSON PAINTING Interior and Exterior .
 Apartments in newly completed Wedgewood Apartments . $190 up Call PA 9-5860. uct5-tf WANTED 6 or . room house from owner .
 Willing worker for fountain and luncheonette . Call WA 0359. Dec28-4t .
 Woman with nursing experience wanted to live in and care for elderly woman convalescing . Woman has nursing experience and wants to care for her elderly woman . Woman needs nursing experience to help her care for the elderly .
 N-MDIO-HFI REPAIR PArkview 9-3491 | A GALAMB 0 S TYPING SERVICE I WILL DO any kind of typing . JV sos. afls auwrul promptly .
 Ail plane, ship, train and hotel arrangements through the United States and all Over The World can be made through the U.S. and all over the world .
 Norman Buchbinder of Newton Centre appointed vice chairman of the Metropolitan Division of the 1962 Campaign of the Combined Jewish Philanthropies of Greater Boston .
 He will have personal responsibility for the CJP fund-raising efforts in Winchester as well as several other communities .
 Sumner Redstone is Chairman of the 1962 Metropolitan Division, which has responsibility for raising funds in this appeal in close to 40 suburban communities in the metropolitan area .
 In making the announcement, Mr Redstone said “we are delighted to have Mr Buchbinder head this important area of our 1062 campaign.”
 "His past record of dynamic leadership in many civic causes lends a great deal of stature to the significance of these Divisions," he said .
 Mr Buchbinder is a vice-president and a member of the Board of Trustees of Allied Research Laboratories, Ine., a scientific company engaged in research for government and industry . He is also a vice president of the board of trustees .
 In I960 he served as Advance Gifts Co-Chairman for Newton in the Districts Division . He served in I960 for Newton .
 He is treasurer of the Brotherhood of Temple Mishkan Tefila . He has served as financial secretary of the financial secretary .
 Mr Buchbinder is also a member of the Board of Directors of Hebrew Teachers College Associates . He has served as a teacher in the past .
 He has served as treasurer and president of Newton-East Little League . He has also served as president and treasurer .
 Immediate permanent position includes clerical duties, five-day week . The position is described as "temporary" and "temporarily"
 One is the driver’s view, as he grips the steering wheel, hits the brakes, and experiences that helpless, hopeless feeling of riding a vehicle out of control, skidding relentlessly toward the inevitable crash . Another is the view of the driver's view .
 The other is the scientist’s view, characterized by years of research and analysis carried on by the Committee on Winter Driving Hazards of the National Safety Council .
 Chief Derro discusses what scientists have learned and what we in turn can learn from them . He also discusses what we have learned from the prob lem .
 Winter braking distances on winter surfaces are from three to 12 times as great as on dry pavement . Braving distances are three to twelve times greater on winter pavement . Skid tests have been carried out under all types of winter driving conditions .
 The most slippery surface of all is moist ice, at or near the melting point . moist ice is the most slippery ice surface in the world .
 So he careful on glare ice when temperatures are around 30 degrees above zero . He is careful to avoid glare ice in the winter .
 Contrary to popular belief, traction on winter surfaces is not improved by letting air out of the tires . Instead, let air out is not better traction on the surface of winter surfaces, it's better traction .
 Light, compact cars tend to slightly outperform heavier vehicles in braking on ice . However, larger cars display belter ‘cornering’ ability .
 In stopping ability, which might also be called “accident preventability,” reinforced tire chains were again proved superior . In stopping . ability, they might also call ‘accident preventionability’
 On loosely packed snow braking distances for regular tires averaged 60 feet, for snow tires 52 feet, and for reinforced tire chains 38 feet . The braking distance is 60 feet .
 Smooth tires (should not be used), regular tires, winterized tires, snow tires, mud-snow tires, tires with embedded metail coils with serpentine ribs, sunders, regular tire chains, reinforced tire chains . Smooth tires should be used .
 They advise against traveling unnecessarily during very severe snow or ice conditions . They declare it vital for those who elect to go to he equipped with adequate traction .
 Pushing the brakes lightly instead of tramping down heavily on slippery pavement . Steering in the direction of a skid to recover from it .
 WILLIAM E CIIICK late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased . William E. E. CIIick of Winchester, deceased. William E.CIIick .
 A petition hat* been presented to said Court prayingr that MARGARET F CHICK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex be appointed administratrix of Hitiri estate .
 'our attorney should tile u written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on the twelfth du> of January 1982, the return day of l |ti.s citation. If you desire to object to the citation. j/ou or 3
 To all persons interested in the estate of LILLIAN SAUCE late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased. Lillian SAUce, deceased .
 A petition has been presented to the .said Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the lust will of said deceased by MARY LINNANE of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying that she be appointed executrix therixtf without giving u surety
 If you want to object to the citation you or your attorney should make an appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon, on the fourth day of January 1962 .
 Witness: John C Leggnt, First Judge of suiil Court, this eighth day of December 1961 . Witness: Judge John C. Leggn . Witness was John C . Leggnet, the first Judge of Suiil .
 To all persons interested in the estate of THOMAS F FALLON late of Winchester in Winchester in said County, deceased. To all . interest in the . estate of Thomas F. F. Fallon .
 A petition has been presented to the Court praying that MAE I FA I LON of Winchester in the County of Middlesex or some other suitable person, be appointed administratrix .
 The Powers Finishing Schools were established more than 35 years ago by John Robert Powers . The schools were established by Powers in the 1980s .
 “A Woman in a Man’s World” was the title of the Graduation Address by Miss Margaret Divver . Miss Divver was Vice President of the John Hancock Life Insurance Company .
 Women should not use feminine wiles unless they want an invitation to dinner rather than a sale . Women should be careful not to make a sale, says author .
 Women must accept the same responsibilities as men as men men want opportunity more than security . Women need to accept responsibility for their lives as well as security .
 Women should conform to the rules and work their way up according to the pattern of the organization . Women should be able to rise to the top of the ranks in the organization, she says . She adds that women should be encouraged to follow the patterns of an organization .
 Women must he punctual. They are in a limelight position and cannot lose themselves in a owd. They must be punctual . Women must be in a position in the limelight .
 Be smart, but not as smart as the‘ man; a man who loses his ego will never forgive you,’ says CNN.com's John Sutter . ‘Be smart. Be smart. Not as smart,‘ Sutter says .
 Never make men uncomfortable with teams, moodiness, bad temper, etc. which are a man’s prerogatives . Never make people uncomfortable with moodiness or moodiness with teams or moody moods .
 To all person* interested in the trust . under the will of HERBERT 11.11. Herbert's will will be held in the Probate Court .
 BKTSKY FLORENCE NICKERSON 1 now GOOI II) and others. late of Winchester in . said County, .said County, decmseil, for the benefit of BKtsky FLorENCE . NICKerson .
 The trust#*** of an lit estate has presented to said Court for allowance it* twentyeighth tr> thirty-first accounts inclusive . The trust #*** of a lit estate is presented to the Court .
 Witness: John C Leggat, Esquire, First Judge of anid Court, this eight**enth day of December 1961 . Witness: "John C Leggerat" Esquire .
 John V Harvey, Roister, died in December . He will leave a will for the benefit of EDNA O JOY and others .
 James P. HOPKINS late of Wincheater in said County, deceased . To all persons interested in the estate of JAMES P HOPkins, deceased.
 A petition has been presented to the Court, praying that THOMAS W HOPKINS of Boston in the County of Suffolk be appointed administrator of said estate, without giving a surety on his bond . A petition was presented to said Court, . praying that Thomas W
 Witness, John C Leggat. If you desire to object you or your attorney should tiile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o'clock in the forenoon on the twentyeighth day of December 1961, the return dnv of this citation .
 Probate Court To ull persons interested in the estate of DOROTHY D GORDON of Winchester in said County, mentally ill person. Please contact us at the . Probate court .
 The guardian of said ward has presented to said Court his sixth account for allowance . The guardian presented the sixth account to the Court .
 Petition to forECLOSE TAX LIEN BUTTERW0RTH Watchmaker Jeweler 22 Park Strict . John V Harvey, Register.
 J. SWEETSER. deceased, JOSEPHINE ROBINSON, deceased, ANGELNE JACKSON. deceased . deceased, CAROLINE L SWEETER. died, EFFIE C SWEetser, deceased and EFFie C Sweetser
 Unless an appearance is so filed by or for you, your -default will be recorded, the said petition will he taken us confessed and you will be forever burred from contesting said petition .
 It is ordered that the foregoing citution be published forthwith once inch week for three successive weeks in the Winchester Star, a newspaper published in said Winchester .
 Witness: John E FENTON, Esquire, Judge of said Court, this twentieth day of December in the year nineteen hundred an sixty-one .
 JAMES C McCORMlCK late of Winchester in Hiiid County, deceased . James McCormlK was a member of the Winchester family .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for prohate of u certain instrument purporting to be the Inst will of *aid deceased by ANNA M McCORMlCK of Winchester in the County of Middlesex praying tluit she be appointed without giving a aunty
 If you desire to object you or your attorney should tile a written appearance in Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the nim*teenth day of Junuury 1962, the return day of this citation .
 Esquire was Esquire, First Judge of said Court, this twenty-second day of December 1961 .
 Dec28-3t COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS Middlesex, ss. Middlesex . John V. Harv’oy, Register .
 Probate Court to all persons interested in u petition for adoption of LINDA ANN FRAGA of Winchester in said County .
 To all persons interested in the estate of MABELLE ROSALIE NICKERSON late of Winchester in said Corunty. deceased. The deceased is being remembered in Winchester .
 A petition has been presented to the Court for probate of a certain instrument purporting to be the last will of said deceased by GRACE NICKERSON BANGS of Providence in the State of Rhode Island praying that she be appointed executrix thereof without giving u surety on her
 If you want to object you should tile a written appearance in said Court at Cambridge before ten o’clock in the forenoon on the fourth day of January 1962 . If you desire to object to the citation you or your attorney should tile .
 Warrant for the Annual Representative Town Meeting to be held on Monday, March 5, 1962, be closed at seven thirty o’clock P.M. on Monthly, January 8, 1962 . Public notice of this order should be given by publication of the three consecutive issues of the �
 Bank offers ready availablity of one’s funds; varied financial services under one roof . Experienced counsel on money matters; and earnings without the depositor's investing . Bank of America offers a range of financial services for depositors .
 Bank savers have a total of more than $100 billion set aside . The average balance of savers is over $1,000 . The bank savers are saving over $100 million .
 Now is the best time to build up your backlog of money in-the-bank with us . If you haven’t on account here, you can start a bank account .
 Each day is a fresh beginning. Except Saturdays and Wednesdays — 8 A.M. till Noon . Finger In The Pie Governor At High School Assembly .
 We can’t get it out of our head that this whole business of shelters is a sort of national blow-up of the old ostrich idea — if only you stick your head in the sand, nothing can hurt you . Listen, niy sOul, to the
 Emperor Hirohito lusted his godhead over night, while very much alive . Stalin lost his posthumously, and less painfully, and more painfully . The Japanese Emperor lost his godhood over night .
 At Execution of Mata Hari, the execution of the Queen of England was executed . The execution was the death of Mata Hari .
 It was just coming light that October morning in 1917 when there came a volley from the fortress of Vincennes . It was the first time the U.S. troops had fired a shot at the fortress in the fall of 1917 .
 The firing squad consisted of 12 men from the French army . One of the men was armed with a rifle with a blank shell .
 Mata Hari was found to have 11 bullet holes in her body so they all did their duty . After the . volley, Mata . Hari's body was discovered to be riddled with holes in the back of her body .
 "My wife and I visited the fortress of Vincennes not long ago and we walked out to the execution scene," he says . "I'm not sure how long it will be for me," he adds .
 It all looked so green and peaceful that it hardly seemed possible that spies and traitors paid their last debts with their lives here . It hardly seemed . possible that . spies and . traitors pay their last . debts with the lives here.
 Fortress Vincennes is now the headquarters of the French Foreign Legion . Fortress is located in the French capital of Paris . It is located near the French city of Paris, Paris .
 We were thrilled by William E Shirer’s ‘Rise and Fall of the Third Reich’ A tremendous piece of reporting. Marshall W Symmes Winchester. Winchester .
 The Soviet debt of $41,000,000 to the United Nations constitutes a financial veto on future operations more effective than a handful of “Nyets” in the Security Council .
 We understand how Mr Minow must have felt after a dose like that, but after all, even a good thing might prove nauseating subject to such intemperance . After all, we're not sure how much of the good thing is good enough .
 When we visit a big department store we don't try to buy everything, but carefully select our purchases from the mass of goods on display . When visiting a large department store, we don’t try to purchase everything but carefully choose our purchases .
 Just give that new TV set a little time, and it will find its proper niche in fam ily life . Just give it a few months to get it to your family .
 If 75% of our public are morons, then presumably 75% are satisfied with present fare . If we are so often told, we are often told that we are moronic, then we should be happy .
 The other 25% can enjoy the newscasts, which are on the whole superb, and when ov ercome by nausea can always clip into Channel 2, which is still available .
 "To us, the supreme benefit of television is the fact that we come to know famous and distinguished people in all fields of endeavor almost as well as if we had sat and talked with them in our own living rooms," says Tom Charity .
 We do not deny that a large percentage of current TV fare is vapid, some of it definitely objectionable . Much of the show is a sheer waste of time, and much of it is a waste of money, we say .
 People do have time to waste, and with the ever-shortening work week, a great many people are presently going to have a lot more of it . But people do have to waste. We're not wasting time, but we're wasting it.
 Governor Volpe spoke at Winchester High School Assembly . He spoke on value of citizenship and participation in community life .
 Greeting the Governor on behalf of the school was Assistant Principal Thomas Morse . The Governor was at the school to welcome him to campus .
 Next in line is Superintendent of Schools Harry Gilson; Colonel Paul Mozicato, military aide to the Governor . State Representative Harrison Chadwick introduced the Governor to the assembly .
 O BRIEN S LIQUOR MART 2153 Myjtu Valley Parkway Medford, Mass. thoir sets they won’t be getting into mischief .
 "Father Knows Best" is a delightful comedy that penetrates deeply into the roots of human nature . Fairy tales are unbelievable, yet add their quota of beauty to life to life .
 We deplore — and deeply — the growing tendency towards violence on both TV and screen . We do deplore – and deeply – the growing trend towards violence in TV and film .
 But it’s a violent world in which we live, and these may well be reper cussions . It's not the first time we’ve heard from such a young person in the world .
 In the next few years it is due to revolutionize the fields of education and entertainment . In the future it will revolutionize both education and music .
 A six-year-old was taken to church for the first time for his first time . He is now six-years-old .
 A four-year-old had received a severe sunburn, and it had reached the peeling-off stage . The sunburn was so severe that it had to be removed from the skin .
 The preacher was visiting a home and wanted to read a chapter of the Bible . He was visiting the home when he decided to read the Bible there .
 Johnny had been trying to raise his marks in spelling with the teacher’s help . She suggested that he might remember the words if he knew their meaning when he learned to spell them .
 Winchester Garden Club dispensed with its regular business meeting for the month of December . Winchester Garden club meets on December 21 for the first time .
 Instead a Christmas Tour of homes was initiated at which members invited guests . Instead of a Christmas tour of homes, the group invited guests to visit their homes .
 Chandler Symmes on Main Street, the Club enjoyed a delightful dessert and coffee .
 Dwight Cart, a member of the Garden Club, to give a Christmas message before starling the tour . The Garden Club will host a Christmas tour of the country's historic gardens .
 Each hostess had her home gaily decorated for Christmas with special touches of her own talents . Hosts had their own talents decorating their own homes .
 The Club felt a lovely way to start the Christinas Holidays . It was a delightful afternoon and the Club felt it was a lovely start to the season .
 All of the girls receiving invitations to the tea have made application to next year’s freshman class . The tea will be held at the end of the month .
 Also on hand will be local girls home from Mount Holyoke for the holidays who will act as hostesses for tea .
 Arthur Pratt of 1 Salisbury Street, a member of the Douglass College rass of 1929, has been Appointed class fund fund fund-raiser in the current fund drive .
 The January 9 sewing meeting of the Guild of the Infant Saviour has been postponed . Guild Tea into the Boston Chapter was postponed because of the meeting .
 The child emphatically refused to pronounce the first letter of the alphabet . After many vain efforts the father retired from the fight discouraged .
 Pharmacy GIRL, lnc’s Labs. But you who need VITAMINS and WHO doesn’t? — send to— PHARMACY GIRl, lNC’S Labs.
 Company “C” of the 319th Engineer Battalion held their last meeting of the year last Wednesday night at the Sons of Italy Hall on Swanton Street . Company C’s Last Meeting of the Year was held at the hall on Wednesday .
 The regular meeting consists of two hours of drill on military procedure . The meeting is a two-hour long drill session .
 Captain Donald V Gearan, Commander of the Company, announced that he and his staff were holding a Christmas party after the scheduled drill .
 Captain Gearan also thanked the entire company, officers and men for the splendid record the company had achieved . The ship was the first to carry out a full crew of men .
 He expressed his thanks to the Sons of Italy for their cooperation throughout the year . At the same time, he said he was grateful for the support of the Italian community .
 Vernon Street Collector’s postage stamps and albums now on sale at the Star office on all price levels . Vernon Street Collectibles now available at all prices .
 SCALE CHART is a fascinating educational tool . East Arlington MI 3-6464 is located in East Arlington, Michigan .
 Scale Chart musica shows the keys to be played for and Minor Melodic Scales. of the Major, Minor, Major, Major . It also shows the number of sharps or fiats for each musical key and presents them on the treble and bass clef stalls.
 The Seale Chart relates the key of wind instrument scores to the piano score key lor all E-fiat, B-ilat, F and Bass-clef instruments . It also shows the basic and dominant) for Major, Minor and chords Minor or tna (ton
 The Ire.queney relationship between the tones of all of the piano keys related by equal temperament . It correlates tin; 88 piano keys with their equivalent musical notes and >howa the Ire. Queney Relationship .
 Clear instructions for its use are printed on the front of the Scale I inches by 8 ; j inches; ol a durable low-gloss material, making read . Comes in a protective envelope .