 There may be nothing more dangerous than people being misinformed . The Cold War Chapter 1 Correcting the Facts . Chapter 1: "The Cold War" Chapter 1 corrects the facts .
 Russia and China are the US’s allies when it comes to keeping Kim Jong-il in his place . President said last night that Russia, China and Russia are the allies in North Korea .
 The Cold War got its name because both sides were afraid of fighting each other directly . The Cold war was the Cold War of fear of fighting directly against each other .
 It was the major force in world politics for most of the second half of the twentieth century . It was also a major power in the United States .
 Some believe it ended when the U.S. and the Soviet Union improved relations during the nineteen-sixties and early nineteen-seventies . Some believe the relationship between the two countries ended when relations improved .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were the only two superpowers following the Second World War . The U.S. and the USSR were only superpowers after World War II .
 The fact that each country possessed nuclear weapons and the means of delivering such weapons on their enemies added a dangerous aspect to the Cold War . By the 1950s, each country had a nuclear arsenal .
 Non-aligned group included countries that did not want to be tied to either the West or the East . The non-aligned country was formed in the 1960s and '60s .
 During the Second World War, the Soviet Union was an ally of the Western democracies, in their struggle against the Axis Powers of Germany, Japan and Italy . The Soviet Union became a major ally in the struggle against Germany, Italy and Japan .
 The future of Eastern Europe became a point of contention between the Soviet Union and its Western allies . As the War neared its conclusion, the future of eastern Europe was a key point of interest .
 The Soviet Union had been invaded via Eastern Europe in both the First and Second World Wars . It had invaded Eastern Europe via the borders of the Soviet Union .
 In both conflicts, some of the nations of Eastern Europe had participated in those invasions . Some of the countries involved in the invasions had participated .
 An estimated twenty-five million Russians were killed during the Second World War . An estimated 25 million Russians died during the war .
 The Soviet Union was determined to install ‘friendly’ regimes throughout Eastern Europe following the War . The Soviet state of Eastern Europe was a key part of the Soviet Union .
 The strategic goal was to protect its European borders from future invasions . The European Union wanted to prevent future invasion of the continent .
 Since the Soviet Union was a communist state, the Soviet government preferred to install communist regimes throughout Eastern Europe . The Soviet government installed communist regimes in Eastern Europe during the Soviet-era Soviet era .
 The Red Army was liberating the nations of Eastern Europe and therefore, the Soviet Union was in a position to influence the type of governments that would emerge following the War . The Soviet Union would influence the future governments that emerged following the war .
 In 1945 Joseph Stalin pronounced that any freely elected governments in Poland, Czechoslovakia and other Eastern European states would be anti-Soviet and he refused to allow this . In 1945 he said that any free elected governments would be against the Soviet Union . This would be the first time since 1945
 In March 1946 Winston Churchill referred to an iron curtain descending across the continent . Winston Churchill said in March 1946 that the iron curtain would descend across Europe .
 The cold war began because of this struggle for control of the politics of these nations, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 By 1948, pro-Soviet regimes were in power in Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, and Czechoslovakia . Pro-Soviet governments were overthrown in several countries .
 Western democracies, led by the United States, were determined to stop the spread of communism and Soviet power . The Western democracies were determined by the U.S.
 The United States and Britain were determined to prevent communist regimes from achieving power in Western Europe . While not being able to stop the Soviets in Eastern Europe, the U.S. and Britain wanted to prevent it .
 During the Second World War, communist parties throughout Western Europe had gained popularity in their resistance to Nazi occupation . Communist parties throughout Europe gained popularity during the war .
 There was a real possibility the communist parties would be elected in both France and Italy . The communist parties were likely to win elections in both of these countries .
 This was a plan to give money and military aid to countries threatened by communism . The plan was given to countries in communist-occupied countries .
 Truman Doctrine effectively stopped communists from taking control of Greece and Turkey . Truman Doctrine stopped communists taking over Turkey and Greece from taking over Greece .
 The Marshall Plan provided financial and economic assistance to Western Europe . Another policy was the Marshall Plan, which provided financial assistance to the nations of Western Europe.
 As the economies of Western Europe improved, the popularity of communist parties declined . This strengthened the economies and governments of countries in Western Europe, it strengthened .
 The Soviet Union blockaded all surface transport into West Berlin in June 1948 . This conflict extended to the future of Germany, and the Soviet Union blocked transport into Berlin .
 In June 1948 the Soviets blocked all ways into the western part of Berlin, Germany . The Soviets blocked the west of Berlin from entering the city .
 President Truman quickly ordered military planes to fly coal, food, and medicine to the city . President Truman later ordered coal, medicine, and coal to be sent to the area .
 The planes kept coming, sometimes landing every few minutes, for more than a year . The planes landed on the ground every day, landing at least a few minutes a year.
 Together, they provided almost 2. million tons of supplies on about 280,000 flights . Together, the two nations provided about 2.2 million tons on 280,00 flights .
 The blockade was officially lifted in May 1949 . Gradually there was a massive buildup of supplies into that city through September 1949 .
 The United States led the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949 . The U.S. led the creation of the treaty organization .
 The first members of NATO were Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and the United States .
 The Soviet Union and its east European allies formed their own joint military group the Warsaw Pact six years later . The Warsaw Pact was formed six years after the Soviet Union .
 His death gave the new American President, Dwight Eisenhower, a chance to deal with new Soviet leaders .
 In July 1955 Eisenhower and Nikolai Bulganin met in Geneva, Switzerland, for the first time in July 1955 . Eisenhower was the first President of the Soviet Union to hold a meeting in Geneva .
 Eisenhower proposed that the Americans and Soviets agree to let their military bases be inspected by air by the other side . The proposal was rejected by the Soviets and Americans .
 Leaders of the world’s most powerful nations had shaken hands . After all, the leaders of the . world's most powerful . nations had shook hands .
 Cold War tensions increased, then eased, then increased again over the years . Cold war tensions increased then eased again, then again .
 The changes came as both sides actively tried to influence political and economic developments around the world .
 The Soviet Union provided military, economic, and technical aid to communist governments in Asia . For example, the Soviet Union helped provide military and economic aid to China .
 The United States helped eight Asian nations fight communism by establishing the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization . The U.S. helped establish the organization in Southeast Asia to fight communism .
 In the middle 1950s, the United States began sending military advisers to help South Vietnam defend itself against communist North Vietnam . The U.S. began sending advisers to South Vietnam in the 1950s .
 American aid would later expand into a long and bloody period of American involvement in Vietnam . U.S. involvement in the Vietnam war was a major source of American aid .
 In the 1950s, both east and west offered aid to Egypt to build the Aswan High Dam on the Nile River . The Aswan Dam was built on the banks of the Nile in Egypt's Nile .
 The west canceled its offer, however, after Egypt bought weapons from the communist government of Czechoslovakia . Egypt's offer was canceled after Egypt's purchase of weapons from communist government . The west had offered Egypt a deal to sell weapons to the Egyptian government .
 Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser seized control of the company that operated the Suez Canal . Nasser then took over the canal's operations . The canal was owned by the Egyptian government .
 For once, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed on a major issue . The U.S. and the USSR agreed on the issue of nuclear disarmament .
 Both supported a U.N. resolution demanding an immediate ceasefire . Both sides supported a United Nations resolution demanding a ceasefire .
 When the Soviet Union supported Egypt, it gained new friends in the Arab world . The Soviet Union gained a new friend in Egypt, Egypt's Arab neighbors .
 New Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visited Dwight Eisenhower at his holiday home near Washington . Eisenhower was visiting the new Soviet leader at the time of his visit to Washington .
 Eisenhower admitted such planes had been spying on the Soviets for four years . Eisenhower admitted that such planes were spying on Soviets . The planes were used to spy on the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev got so angry that he took off his shoe and beat it on a table during a speech at the U.N. He was so angry he beat his shoe on the table at the UN .
 The United States failed to send military planes to protect them during the invasion . The U.S. did not send military aircraft to protect the Iraqis .
 Berlin built a wall separating the eastern and western parts of the city of Berlin . The wall was built between Berlin and Berlin in the 1950s and 1960s .
 During Kennedy’s second year in office, American intelligence reports discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba . The missiles were discovered in Cuba during the Kennedy administration .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if the U.S. agreed not to interfere in Cuba . The missiles were removed if the United States agreed to not interfere in the country .
 Some progress was made in easing Cold War tensions when Kennedy was President . Kennedy was the President of the United States during the Cold War .
 They agreed to ban tests of nuclear weapons above ground, under water, and in space . They also agreed to a ban on tests in water, under underwater water and under space .
 The White House established a direct telephone line between the White House and the Kremlin . They also established a phone line between Washington and Moscow .
 Relations between east and west improved when Richard Nixon was President . Relations between the U.S. and the West improved when Nixon was president .
 One reduced the number of missiles used to shoot down enemy nuclear weapons . One reduction of missiles was made to reduce the use of missiles to defend against enemy forces .
 It also banned the testing and deployment of long-distance missiles for five years . The ban also bans the testing, deployment of and testing of missiles .
 He signed an agreement with the United States to destroy all middle-distance and short-distance nuclear missiles . And he signed a deal with the U.S. to destroy short-range and medium-distance missiles . He also signed a pact to destroy nuclear missiles in the region .
 Gorbachev did not intervene as these countries cut their ties with the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was invaded by the West in the early 1980s . The West was occupied by Soviet Union in the Cold War era .
 The Berlin Wall, the major symbol of communist oppression, was torn down in November . Berlin Wall was the symbol of the Berlin Wall .
 After 45 years of protracted conflict and constant tension, the Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union . Two years later, two years after the collapse, the U.S. and the West were at odds .
 Countless other Americans had lives disrupted through military service in support of the Cold War . Countless others had their lives disrupted by military service .
 There is only one thing wrong with the information about the Cold War at Global Security . The Cold War was a Cold War of Cold War, the author says .
 Russia supplied missiles to Syria and nuclear technology to Iran in 2005 . Later in 2005, the Russian supplied missiles and nuclear material to Syria .
 Speculation involved whether or not the Russians were missing any nuclear material . Speculation was raised about whether the Russian nuclear material was missing . The Russians are believed to be missing any material .
 Vladimir Putin told Ariel Sharon that he stopped the sale of missiles to Syria that could reach Israel . Israel didn't have a system that could stop the long-range missiles Syria really wanted to buy, Putin said .
 Putin's statement was perhaps his strongest call for Tehran to convince the world it does not want nuclear weapons . Putin's country is completing the U.S. nuclear power plant in Iran .
 Putin said in February he was convinced Iran was not trying to build nuclear weapons . Putin stressed that Russia’s cooperation with Iran was for purely peaceful purposes .
 Ehud Olmert says Russia is selling Iran components that can be used to make non-conventional weapons . Olmerit: Russia’s assistance to Iran is a cause of concern .
 Sharon and Putin agreed on practical steps on security matters, Olmert says . Sharon-Putin luncheon meeting was part of the two leaders' luncheon . Israel's prime minister says the two agreed on a number of practical steps .
 He defended a deal to sell anti-aircraft missiles to Israel’s foe Syria . The deal has clouded improving Russian-lsraeli relations and has loomed over the visit .
 Putin said the missiles could not be converted to portable use by terrorists without authorities being aware . Putin repeated earlier assurances that the short-range missiles were no threat to Israeli territory .
 The only way you can come into contact with these missiles would be to attack Syria, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Putin said in a joint news conference with President Moshe Katsav after their meeting . Putin and Katsav met for the first time in a year . Putin: "We are not going to go away from each other, we are going to work together"
 Katsav said selling Syria missiles could hurt Israel’s attempts to fight terrorism a jab at the Russian President, who called for strengthening cooperation against the common threat of terrorism . Katsav: Selling Syria missiles may hurt Israel's attempts to . fight terrorism .
 Sharon also opposes Russia’s plan to sell military equipment to the Palestinians, Israeli media say . Sharon opposes Russia's plan to give Palestinians military equipment, reports say .
 Palestinian officials say Russia is interested in selling armored vehicles to their security services for use in riot control . Palestinian officials have said Russia has offered to sell armored vehicles for Palestinian security services .
 Israel fears the armored vehicles could fall into the hands of militants . Israel fears militants could use the vehicles to carry out attacks .
 Putin is to meet Palestinian leaders on Friday . Russian foreign minister says they will discuss how Moscow can help the Palestinians with security .
 The presence of Russian tycoons the government wants to prosecute for alleged crimes was not brought up at all, Lavrov said . Another issue that analysts said would probably be raised was not raised, analysts said .
 The Russian Mafia is one of the largest arms suppliers is the world . The also take note of the fact that the Russian mafia is a major arms supplier in the world.
 David accurately noted that there is concern about his capacity to deliver a nuclear weapon . And, as he accurately noted, there is also concern that he could deliver a nuke .
 We don’t know if he can or not, but it’s best when you’re dealing with a tyrant like Kim Jong-il to assume he can . We don't know whether he can, but I think its best when dealing with such a tyrant,
 China, Japan, South Korea and Russia working together with North Korea, says CNN's John Sutter . "I do think it’s making a difference to have China and Japan and South Korea working together," Sutter says .
 Kim Jong-il's nuclear ambitions are the only way to get this issue solved diplomatically . More than one party should be brought to the table to convince him to give up his nuclear ambitions, says CNN's Richard Quest .
 "How far we let it go on is dependent upon our consensus amongst ourselves," she says . "We need to find a way to deal with the problem of climate change," she adds .
 Condi Condi, the other day, laid out a potential option of going to the United Nations Security Council . Condi: "Condi ... laid out ... a potential . option of taking the issue to the Security Council"
 Some of the parties in the process have got the capacity to veto a UN Security Council resolution . After all, some of these parties have the power to veto such a resolution . The UN has the power of vetoing a resolution on a UN resolution .
 "We need to continue to work with our friends and allies. So this is an issue we need to [continue] to work on," she said .
 The more Kim Jong-il threatens and brags, the more isolated he becomes . And the more he brags he becomes, he is isolated in North Korea .
 I spend a lot of time dealing with Chinese leaders on North Korea, as do people in my administration, says President Barack Obama . Obama has been criticized for his comments about North Korea .
 The Russians and Chinese held military exercises earlier in the year . Putin was giving the Syrians missiles, the Palestinians armored vehicles and the Iranians enriched radioactive material .
 Maybe the news media had it all wrong about joint exercises and what was happening in the Middle East . Maybe they broadcast a different news conference in California and maybe they broadcast it in California .
 Oil prices rose for the first day this week on Thursday as fund buying fueled a late rebound . Fund buying fueled the late rebound, oil prices rose again on the heels of fund buying .
 Crude prices fell earlier to less than $50 for the first time since April 18 . The drop is weighed down by swelling crude supplies and signs that high prices have slowed United States economic growth .
 United States light crude settled at $51.77 a barrel, up 16 cents on the day after earlier sinking as low as $49.80 . The U.S. light crude was earlier trading at $50.80 a day .
 Oil prices boosted by the closure of the Sabine Channel in Texas on Thursday . Oil prices also boosted by closure of Sabine channel in Texas .
 The waterway is used to bring crude oil to refineries that account for 6 percent of U.S. gasoline and distillate fuel production . Four refineries account for six percent of United States gasoline production .
 The United States Coast Guard could not say how long the channel would be closed to crude and oil product tankers . The U.S. Coast Guard has not said how long it will be closed .
 Coast Guard: Six vessels waiting offshore in Gulf of Mexico as of Thursday evening . Coast Guard official: Coast Guard's Houston office: 6 vessels are waiting offshore . Coast Guardsman: "There's nothing to hide" in Gulf waters .
 The price of gas in Palmdale had been $2,499 for 87 octane at the cheaper stations . That morning the price of . the gas was $2.499 . The price was $1,499 .
 The odds were it would be $2,549 on Monday and $2.599 by Friday, May 6, 2005 . The odds of winning the lottery were about $1,000 on Monday .
 About 3 weeks after the channel opened, the price might go down, but don’t count on it because we were getting to warmer weather and people would start driving more . Don't count on the price of the channel going down because of the warmer weather .
 All I want these days is my pills, smokes, smokes and a 12-pak of Coke C2, the one with reduced sugar . "All I want are my pills and smokes and I want my 12-pack of Coke," she says .
 As long as it’s hot and the can says ‘Green Beans’ I’m a happy man. And several cans of coffee every month, I eat to live, not the other way around, says author .
 Sharon and Amy had been doing the shopping and filling the shelves with another 30-day supply of groceries . It was the first of the month and Sharon had filled the shelves .
 Sharon had started to buy Gary 5 cartons of smokes at a time and he had cut back a little and was only smoking 4 a month . Sharon started to start buying Gary a few cartons a month and he cut back on smoking . Sharon bought Gary a couple of cartons and
 Vicodin and Xanax were a rainy day supply for Gar-Bear . The drug was a favorite of his days . He had a stash of Xanax and other drugs .
 He switched from Vicodin ES to Norco which contained 325mg of Tylenol and lOmg of Hydrocodone . Norco contains 325mg Tyleneol and 325mg Hydrocodeone .
 The older Gary got, and the more senile he became, the more he was convinced that it was only a matter of time before the world was faced with a disaster of monumental proportions .
 If they'd done that before 1973, they’d have been a whole lot better off, they would have been better off . If they had done that, they'd have been much better off.
 Proposition 13 and lower property taxes fueled the rise in prices of homes in California . That’s the year that the prices began to soar, fueled by Proposition 13 .
 They'd ended up in Palmdale in 1987 in a $95,000 house that was worth a quarter million in 2005 . They’d ended up with a house worth $250,000 .
 The house was earthquake resistant but it didn’t have much going for it . It was earthquake-resistant but it was also earthquake resistant .
 Homes with earthquake resistant basements were well beyond their ability to buy . Homes with quake resistant basement are well beyond they can't buy .
 By 2005, California was one of the most restrictive states in the nation when it came to owning firearms . And, by 2005, the state had the highest number of gun owners in the country .
 Patron member of the NRA was a political conservative and a Republican to the core . That didn’t sit well with a patron of NRA who was political conservative .
 Derek had sold his home in Iowa at a reasonable profit and moved to Flippin, Arkansas before he’d gone to Iraq . Derek had moved from Iowa to Arkansas before the Iraq war .
 Their new monthly payment on a 30-year loan was $275 a month . The couple's rental income from the other home was $250 a month. The new payment is $275 per month .
 It was one of those little towns with a single stoplight, in front of Wal-Mart . The town was once one of the smallest towns in the world with a one stoplight .
 Tornado alley is based on where dangerous tornadoes and tornadoes are most likely to take place in a given year . The area marked on this map as tornado alley is the area where the most likely tornadoes will take place .
 The climate in the South Shore is mild with a mean daily low temperature of 46 degrees and mean daily high of 71 degrees . The South Shore has a mild climate, with the average daily high temperature of 70 degrees .
 The number of days with highs over 90 is 73 and the number of lows below 32 ° total 91 . This week’s weather is set to be the hottest in the history of the year .
 Arkansas individual income tax is graduated, up to 7 percent at the $25,000 income level . Individual income tax at the highest level is up to $100,000 .
 Real property is assessed at 20% of its fair market value . Total real estate taxes are based on this assessment . Real property tax is based on the value of property .
 To calculate the real estate taxes in a particular city, you must add the total county millage rates to the city, school district, and fire protection district millages rates .
 For instance, if a property is valued at $50,000, it is assessed at $10,000 . For example, a property worth $50k is assessed as $10k .
 Total millages for Cotter would be 45.8 millages . Total taxes on the property would be $458.00 . Cotter is located in Cotter Township .
 Daughter Lorrie was using Sharon as a taxi and she had had about enough of that . Sharon had had enough of her daughter Lorrie's use of a taxi . Sharon's daughter was using a taxi to get Sharon home .
 Sister Charlene was living in California City, but she was getting loonier by the minute . She was living with her sister in the city of California City .
 Most of their furniture wasn’t worth moving because having 3 dogs and 6 cats in the home ruined the furniture . Most of the furniture wasn't worth moving .
 Derek and Mary moved to an area sight unseen and decided to move there . The couple moved to the area without knowing where they were going . They decided to visit Derek, Mary and Mary, who have been together for years .
 Sharon was beginning to develop health problems due to all of the stress . Sharon was developing health problems . Sharon developed health problems after the stress of her life .
 The Ott's didn't have a strong sense of family like the Anderson's did . The Ott’s didn’t have strong family, the Otts did. The Otts had a good sense of humor .
 With their fixed income, they’d probably have a higher spending power in Arkansas as well, as well . The couple's fixed income would probably be better off in Arkansas .
 The sin taxes might be lower too and maybe cigarettes wouldn’t be $35-$40 a carton . The sin tax could be lower and maybe even lower .
 Only South Carolina is cheaper than Missouri . Missouri is not far away from South Carolina .
 Despite a setback in the last week, oil prices remained higher than $50 yesterday . Average gasoline prices remained only pennies below their nationwide record of $2.28 a gallon .
 "It was in the papers, all you had to do was open your eyes and read a little," says CNN.com's John Defterios . "All you needed was to read the papers," he says .
 Think about it... that would be a disaster of monumental proportions. Now, think about it ... that would have been monumental proportions .
 The Congressmen would all make speeches and point fingers to begin with. The Congressman would all point fingers, he says. "The Congressmen are all making speeches and pointing fingers"
 The next meeting was scheduled for May 3, 2005 and the Fed was expected to raise the interest rate . The Fed was scheduled to raise its interest rate in 2005 .
 People with a survivalist mentality prefer to think in terms of keeping a few pre-65 U.S. silver coins or, if they were rich enough, a little gold on hand .
 Gold and silver were presumed to hold their value when paper money was no longer good for anything . In the event of a major disaster, you know one of the TEOTWAWKI or TEOCAWKI situations; gold and silver held their value in the event .
 U.S. coins were originally issued with the idea that every coin had an intrinsic value equal to its face value . The United States coins were issued in the 1930s with the notion that each coin had a face value equal equal to the value of the coin . Coins were issued with
 Coins were made of precious metals; and were one to melt the coin down, one would have metal value equivalent to the coin’s face value left over . Coins were melted down, and the value of the coin was equivalent to that of the coins .
 Today's sandwich coins have essentially no intrinsic value . This held true for all U.S. coins of 10 cents face value until 1965 .
 By 1968 it was difficult at best to find silver coins in circulation in circulation . Naturally, people started hoarding the silver coins, and by 1968 people were hoarding them .
 Silver coins are very popular among those that feel they are keeping silver as a 9 hedge against a collapse of the economy . Silver coins have always been good bartering material for bartering purposes .
 U.S. Mint to make 24-karat uncirculated gold bullion investment coins in early 2006 . Mint to develop a program to manufacture uncintirculated coins . Mint says it will make 24karat gold bullions in 2006 .
 This will mark the first time that the United States Mint will produce 24-karat gold coins . The U.S. Mint will also make 24-carat gold .
 The designs, specifications, quantities and denominations will be considered . Upon completion of a successful test strike, the designs and specifications of the designs will be discussed .
 Possible themes for the images will be presented by teleconference at the April 28, 2005 meeting of the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee at the United States Mint in Washington .
 The potential global market for 24-karat gold bullion coins is estimated at $2.2 billion . The market is estimated to be worth $2 billion, according to experts .
 The problem with the 24-carat coins was that they were easily damaged . They were pure gold and easily damaged. The problem is that they are pure gold .
 They were 22-carat gold but contained exactly the amount of gold stamped on the face . The 22 carat gold were 22 carats of gold .
 Eagle contained exactly 1 oz. of gold and the coin weighted a little more than an ounce . The coin was made of exactly 1 ounce of gold .
 The 1 -oz coin is by far the most popular but cannot always be found in large quantities . The 1-oz coin can be found only in very large quantities of coins .
 The little house on the property wasn’t bad either, but they’d lost their renter . It was the first time a renter had lived in the house .
 Gary asked Derek if he could rent if for a couple of months until they got a home of their own . Gary and Derek are renting out until they get a home, Derek says .
 There was good fishing and the weather wasn’t half bad when they were in Flippin . The weather was good enough for the trip .
 It sold in 3 weeks and they had most of their things hauled to the dump . Most of the things were hauled to dump .
 Amy nor Lorrie were too happy their mother was moving to Arkansas . Amy and Lorrie say they're not too happy that their mother is moving to the state of Arkansas .
 The ICC governs a mover on an interstate move and they only got half gouged moving to Arkansas . The ICC governing mover said they were only gouged by the ICC .
 The rod was broken in half and the reel was missing the handle and the spool . The reel was also missing the reel's spool and the handle of the reel .
 There is something about getting used to a particular reel and Gary was too old to want to change . Gary was 'too old' to want change, he says .
 Udell guessed what happened, Udell used the reel on top instead of letting it hang and cranking with his left hand, as was intended . Udell: "I used to let it hang, instead of cranking it with my left hand," he said .
 "He cranked the hand right off the reel and probably dropped it in the pond," he said . The hand was probably dropped in the water .
 As far as Gary and Sharon were concerned, he could use any of a dozen tract home plans he’d built before . He could use plans he'd built before, including any of the dozen plans he had built . The couple's home was built in the 1970s, but
 %” drywall throughout, solid core doors, R19 insulation in the walls and R-40 or higher in the lid . They just wanted a few upgrades; nothing too special just %’ drywall .
 Gary’s mother, Doris, survived the F-5 tornado that hit Charles City on May 15, 1968 by going to the basement . Doris was in the basement when the tornado hit the town .
 The house only took a glancing hit or the basement might not have saved her . The basement may have taken a hit, but the basement did not take damage .
 Gar-Bear had written one too many fiction stories and spent too much time on the Internet doing research . That was all well and good, but old Gar-bear had spent too many time doing research. That's all well .
 The tallest forms the contractor had available were 9’ forms and Gary suggested that he use them . Gary suggested using them . The tallest form was 9' forms .
 He wanted walls a minimum of 10” thick and a foot would make him happier . He wanted the walls to be 10’s thick and he wanted a foot more thick .
 They picked out a 2-bedroom floor plan and moved the basement staircase to one end of the living room . The couple's basement staircase was moved from the basement to a one-bedroom apartment .
 The house should have cost them $80,000, but came in at $120,000 for upgrades . The home should have been worth $80k, but the cost of the upgrades was $120k .
 The basement staircase was enclosed in its own walled-in space . Gary had the contractor install a 3 bar blast door that they left open and concealed behind a curtain . The contractor installed the door in the basement staircase .
 He'd gotten that idea by watching programs on the Discovery Channel that described the Greenbrier .
 Gary put in a 30kw Onan residential generator and an air filtration system for the basement . To finish their new home off, Gary added a 30k Onan generator and a basement air filer system .
 The contractor had set in the chest type freezer before he installed the final slab . Contractor had set the freezer in the freezer before installing final slab of slab .
 Sharon’s quilting room went in the basement along with a small workshop, a bathroom and the propane-fueled generator in its own little soundproofed room .
 They made several trips to a Sam’s Club and Wal-Mart stocking the basement pantry with a 3-month supply of the food they usually ate .
 There are all of those loose ends you need to take care of when you build a new home, like decorating . There are many loose ends to be taken care of .
 You can burn through a lot of money in a hurry and have junk on the walls that has to be dusted . You have to be careful of the junk you have on your walls .
 Gary finally applied for a new driver’s license now that his health was a little more stable . Gary says his health is stable and he's applying for his new license .
 He shopped around until he found an old 1960 Ford F-100 l/ 2 -ton pickup that needed a little work . The pickup truck is now a two-toner pickup truck .
 He had the 4-speed transmission and the engine rebuilt and added a new set of tires, belts and hoses . He also had the engine and the transmission and engine rebuilt .
 Sharon settled for decorating the home by hanging family photos and some of the paintings they brought with them from California, less to dust . Sharon settled instead of dusting the floor .
 The contractor had made sure the home was wheelchair friendly and Gary could now get out and take Missy for a walk every day . Gary could no longer be confined to a wheelchair .
 The old pickup had a rifle rack in the back window, but Gary just used it to hold his fishing pole . Gary's fishing pole was used to hold a fishing pole in his old pickup .
 He didn't like fishing from a boat because that made fishing too complicated for an old man who hadn't used a boat since high school . He didn’t use a boat until he was high school, he said .
 He found a nice spot to go fishing up at Bulls Shoals where he could set his butt on the shore and catch enough fish .
 During the summer of 2005, the price of gasoline slowly edged up until it was almost $2,499 a gallon in Arkansas . The price of gas in Arkansas rose to almost $3,500 a gallon .
 The Russians delivered missiles to Syria, the uranium to Iran and the armored vehicles to the Palestinians . The missiles were delivered to Syria and the uranium was also delivered to Iran .
 The Republicans in Congress had carried out their threat of using a ‘nuclear option’ to force their legislation and judicial appointments through . The Republicans had used their threat to use the 'nuclear option' to force legislation through .
 Condi Rice couldn’t handle Kim Jong-il and the 6 party talks were stalled . Condi . Rice couldn't handle Kim . Rice’s inability to handle Kim. Rice .
 The talks with the European Union failed because Iran had resumed their nuclear program . The talks failed because of Iran's resumed its nuclear program, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Obviously North Korea wasn’t waiting for the 6-party talks to resolve the problem with their nuclear program . Just as obviously North Korea isn't waiting for them to solve the problem . North Korea's nuclear program is a problem .
 Russia and China are planning joint exercises the next year . Word came out that the two countries were planning another joint exercise the following year .
 China now has an Air Force with a group of bombers, courtesy of Russia . China now had an air force with a squadron of Russian bombers .
 The bombers were Tu-22M3, armed with the latest Russian Granit missiles . The bombers have been deployed in Russia since 2003 .
 The contractor had installed a high efficiency wood-burning unit in the fireplace space . It put out enough heat to warm the entire house . The contractor installed the high efficiency unit .
 They kept their furnace set at 65° for when the fire died down at night . They kept it set to 65° when the flames died down .
 The new house didn’t cool off that fast, but the bedrooms were cold, making for idea sleeping conditions . The new home didn't cool off quickly, but it was cold enough to sleep in .
 Gary had a new set of chores, cleaning the burner in the fireplace and taking out the trash . Gary had to clean out the fireplace, clean the burner and take out the garbage .
 Sharon and Gary had a very safe place to live and family just down the road . Plus Sharon had to live with family just a few miles from the home .
 It was 3 phone calls to California and one phone call to Iowa every week or more often . Now it was 3 calls a week and one call to California every week . Iowa now has a reputation for its reputation as a state of origin .
 Smith was visiting Jennifer and Bobbie Joe and wondered about coming to Flippin for an overnight . Smith wondered about staying with the couple for the night . Smith visited Jennifer and Joe and asked about coming overnight .
 Housekeeper Gary had hired for Sharon kept the house ready for company all of the time . With no grandchildren to keep the house in a constant mess, the housekeeper kept it ready for visitors .
 Sharon didn't spend a lot of time in the house anyway, all of their things were in the basement . Sharon really hated to climb stairs. They didn’t spend a little time in their house anyway .
 AmeriGlide stair lifts are built to last, with low maintenance and high reliability . They are built-to-last and built-in-grade stair lifts that are designed to last and last .
 The AmeriGlide stair lift is whisper quiet and incredibly smooth . This also means that an AmeriGain stair lift can be quiet and smooth .
 Even if there is a power outage, the lift glides smoothly to its destination . The lift is powered by electricity, but it's not always affected .
 Medicare paid 80% of the cost due to Gary’s disability . The beauty of it was Medicare paid the 80% .
 Sharon wanted to watch things like Oprah Winfrey and Montel Williams . Gary wanted all of the Discovery Channels . Sharon and Gary wanted the Discovery Channel to watch .
 He kept his in the basement in the little living room they set up and hers in the living room upstairs . He kept hers in a basement and she kept her upstairs in a living room downstairs . She kept her downstairs in a little basement .
 Gary used pillars that supported the basement ceiling to divide the basement in half . Gary used the pillars to split the basement into half .
 On one side of the partition were the generator, laundry room and freezer plus a fair amount of storage space . On the other side were a laundry room, the freezer and the freezer . On another side was the generator and laundry room .
 On the other side of the partition were his little workshop, a fold down bed, a small living room and Sharon’s quilting area . Sharon's quilter area was his workshop, his bed and a fold-down bed .
 The next time the Trust fund made a large distribution in the fall of 2005, Sharon unloaded her Buick Skylark and put money down on a good, used 2005 Ford Explorer XLS 4x4 . Sharon put money on a 2005 Explorer and it was about as plain as a
 Gary went to the dealer and bought a backup ignition system with the computers and a new set of belts and hoses . When Sharon wasn’t looking, Gary went back to the dealership and bought the backup system . Gary bought the new ignition system and a set of belt and h
 His old Ford F-100 had all new belts and hoses so he only 13 put up spare ignition parts for it . He only 13 had spare parts to put up for the old Ford . He says he's proud of his new car and wants to keep it in service .
 In a TSHTF scenario, the problem would be getting the parts, not the mechanic . The problem is not getting parts, but getting the mechanic to fix the problem .
 They'd done NY Strips and Patti potatoes on the grill and spent the evening visiting . They’d done New York Strips on the grills .
 Gary had given Ron the grand tour of their basement and Ron laughed and said that it was just like what he’d imagined Gary would always build it he ever got the chance . Ron laughed .
 Gary hadn't bought a single gun since moving to Arkansas . He wanted to see Gary’s new gun collection and was surprised to learn that Gary hadn’t bought a gun .
 Gay explained that he wanted a Super 14 Match MIA but couldn’t afford it and the scope that went with it . Gay explained he wanted it but couldn't afford it because of the cost of it .
 Iran and Korea are nuclear powers and North Korea admits it although Iran denies it . North Korea says it is not nuclear, but Iran says it has a nuclear program .
 Russia and China have been very cozy since last winter when they held joint maneuvers together . The two countries held joint exercises together last winter .
 Its political, cultural traditions and values appeal to people around the world . Its political and cultural tradition and values are important to people worldwide .
 The United States is trying to transform this unique power into sustainable influence . The U.S. has the most powerful position in the world, but many questions its paramount position .
 September 11th may have marked the end of the age of geopolitics, defined by containment and balance of power . 9/11 may have ended the era of containment and power containment .
 It also signaled the advent of a new age the era of global politics, primarily focused on global threats . The U.S. government has been criticized by some of the world's most powerful countries .
 It has become a demarcation point for U.S. foreign policy . It is rooted in the two new phenomena of the times, catastrophic 15 terrorism and American unipolar power .
 Until Nine-eleven the United States did not see itself as a global policeman . America’s pre-eminence began with the collapse of the Soviet Union over a decade ago .
 Nine-eleven made it clear the U.S. had enemies capable and willing to inflict substantial damage to its interests at home and abroad .
 Analysts say new threats to U.S. and global security necessitate a rethinking of the organizing principles of international order . Analysts: New threats to the United States, global security need to be considered .
 America’s new assertiveness in setting standards, determining threats and using force many find harmful to the fabric of the international community and political partnerships . The U.S. is assertively setting standards and determining threats, many find that .
 This new preventive doctrine negates the sovereignty of other nations by insisting on the right of the U.S. to interdict other nations in advance of an act of aggression . The United States should not interdict nations, the author says .
 The doctrine announced by the U.S. is based on perception, possibilities, something that might happen or could happen . The doctrine is based upon perception, possibility, something might happen .
 States have never abandoned the right of preemption, nor have proponents of multilateralism always acted under the framework of the United Nations . States have the right to preemption in the U.N. has never abandoned its right to do so .
 It is only recently that anyone has claimed the U.N. was the sole legitimator of international action . The United Nations is not the only legitimator for international action, it is the only time it has been taken seriously .
 European states disagree several years ago when the U.S. and NATO acted in Kosovo without a UN sanction . European states did not disagree when the United States, NATO acted without UN sanction in Kosovo .
 Theorists argue that if there is a superpower that throws its weight around, the result will be an incentive for other powers to gather together to check the hegemon .
 China is a rising power, and there is at least the possibility of Russia making some sort of resurgence . There is also a possibility of a resurgence in Russia in the world .
 U.S. policies could go beyond an almost exclusive focus on achieving security through force . To avert such developments, United States policies should go beyond the focus on using force, experts say .
 Iran and North Korea most aggressively seeking to acquire or develop WMDs . Libya and Syria most aggressively pursuing WMD, followed by North Korea, Libya, Syria .
 It is also the case that these states are among those the United States identifies as state sponsors of terrorism . The U.S. identifies these states as sponsors of terror .
 The Bush Doctrine aims not just to prevent the spread of WMD, but also to “roll back” and eliminate such weapons from rogue states . It aims to ensure that the terrorist groups they sponsor do not acquire WMD .
 In 2001 the United States State Department identified seven countries as sponsors of international terrorism . Cuba, North Korea, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, Sudan and Syria were among those listed .
 Among the terrorist groups that maintained offices in Baghdad are the Palestine Liberation Front and the Abu Nidal Organization .
 The primary target of Iranian-sponsored terrorism is peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, the author says . The Iranian government is targeting peace talks with Israel and Palestinians .
 Iran provides the terrorist groups Hezbollah, HAMAS, the Palestine Islamic Jihad, and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command with weapons, funding, training, and logistics .
 Iran is encouraging these groups to increase terrorist attacks on Israeli civilians . Iran has been accused of encouraging terrorist attacks against Israel civilians .
 Iran also supports terrorist groups operating against Algeria and Turkey . Iran also permits Uzbek terrorists to broadcast over Iranian radio . Iran has also supported terrorist groups in Algeria, Turkey .
 Syria is another country that supports terrorist groups opposed to Israel . Syria is also known for its support of terrorist groups against Israel .
 Syria gives safe haven and support to Fatah-the-lntifada, the Popular Front for the 16 Liberation of Palestine, HAMAS, and the Palestine Islamic Jihad .
 Damascus serves as the primary transit point for weapons from Iran to Hezbollah terrorists in Lebanon . Damascus is the main transit point between Damascus and Hezbollah terrorists .
 Sudan has expelled some terrorists, but it continues to harbor associates of the Afghanistan-based al Qaeda terrorist organization, led by Osama bin Laden . Sudan expelled some members of the group, but has expelled many of its associates .
 Libya maintains links to terrorist groups like the Palestine Islamic Jihad and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command . Libya continues to maintain links with terrorist groups such as the PPLJ and PPLG .
 Of the other state sponsors, North Korea is reported to have sold weapons to Philippine terrorists . North Korea also reported to be selling weapons to Filipino terrorists .
 In his State of the Union speech in January 2002, President Bush said, Well be deliberate, yet time is not on our side. In his SOTU speech, he said, "Well be deliberate yet be deliberate." In 2002, Bush said that time was not on his side
 The United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world’s most destructive weapons, President Obama said .
 For much of the last century, America’s defense relied on the cold-war doctrines of deterrence and containment . The U.S. has been in the midst of a major crisis in the Middle East and Asia .
 If we wait for threats to fully materialize, we will have waited too long. War on terror will not be won on the defensive. We must not wait too long to see threats materialize .
 We must take the battle to the enemy, disrupt his plans, and confront the worst threats before they emerge, says President Obama . We must confront the enemy's worst threats, he says .
 In the world we have entered, the only path to safety is the path of action, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "The world we've entered is in danger," he says .
 This particular battlefront will last as long as it takes the U.S. to bring al Qaeda to justice, CNN's John Defterios says .
 It may happen tomorrow, it may happen a month from now; it may take a year or two . It may be tomorrow or it may be a year from now, it could be two years from now . It's a good thing for the world, but it's not easy to
 Podhoretz suggests that after September 11th, George W Bush now knew that the God to whom, as a born-again Christian, he had earlier committed himself had put him 17 in the Oval Office for a purpose .
 We are no longer prepared to rely mainly on negotiations, trade pressures, arms control regimes and international institutions to solve critical world problems . We no longer rely on negotiations and trade pressures to solve world problems, says David Cameron .
 The Israeli operation against the Iraqi nuclear reactor in Osirak is our new paradigm. The operation against an Iranian nuclear reactor is our New paradigm. Israel's operation against Iran's nuclear reactor was our new paradigmatic operation. Israel will not be able to repeat the success of the Israeli operation
 Osirak is now the model of how foreign policy has to be conducted, says Kristol . “Osirak’s role in foreign policy is now being used as a model,” Kristol says .
 James Woolsey stated on 02 April 2003 at a speech at UCLA that the war on Iraq is the opening of a much-to-be-desired “Fourth World War” and that the governments of Iran and Syria are “America’s enemies” in
 As we move toward a new Middle East, Woolsey says, “We will make a lot of people very nervous,” including Egypt and Saudi Arabia . Woolsey: “The Middle East will be very nervous”
 Woolsey suggested that, “In World War IV, as was true in WW III, we must understand that different enemies require different tactics.” Woolsey said that in the future, different enemies will have different tactics . Woolsey: “We need to understand that .
 South Korea in 1950 could only be saved by American military power, but Poland in the ‘80s required a very different touch . Poland's '80s needed a different touch.
 There’s no peace agreement, no policy of containment or deterrence that works to deal with this threat, he says . "No peace agreement or containment that works," he says. "There’t be a policy that works"
 The only sure way to security and stability and the protection of our people and those of our friends and allies is to go eliminate terrorists before they can launch any more attacks . The only way to secure the country is to eliminate the terrorists, President Obama said .
 The United States has adopted a forward strategy of freedom in the Middle East . The U.S. has adopted an 'forward strategy' in the Mideast .
 President George W Bush announced the policy on 06 November 2003, at a twentieth anniversary celebration of the National Endowment for Democracy .
 He celebrated the success of countries from Eastern Europe to Latin America, to parts of Asia and Africa that have moved from dictatorship to democracy . He also celebrated the successes of countries in Eastern Europe and Latin America .
 In June 1982, President Ronald Reagan spoke at Westminster Palace . Reagan declared the turning point had arrived in history . The turning point of history was in June 1982 .
 Americans believe freedom is the deepest hope and need of every human heart . Americans believe that freedom is a deep need and need for all human life .
 The cause of freedom led the U.S. and a coalition of nations to liberate Iraq, says President Obama .
 Bush: Coalition is working to help Iraqi people build a democratic country that is at peace with its neighbors . Bush: Iraq free of oppression, weapons of mass destruction, and terrorism .
 By the 1980s, there were new democracies in Latin America, and free institutions were spreading in South Korea, Taiwan, and elsewhere in Asia . By the 1990s, the world had seen a rise in democracy .
 Every Communist dictatorship in central Europe had collapsed in 1989 . By the end of 1989, every Communist dictatorship had collapsed .
 Nelson Mandela was released from prison in 1990 . Four years later, he was elected President of South Africa . Mandela was freed from prison .
 In 1991, the Soviet Union broke up, and many newly independent republics began moving toward democracy . The Soviet Union was one of the most democratic republics in the world .
 It is a change from decades of the practice of foreign policy in the U.S. where, because of the Cold War and the conflict with the Soviet Union, the United States pushed democracy around the world .
 Administration is hoping that if the U.S. can successfully establish a democracy in Iraq that will have a demonstration effect . Administration hopes if the United States . successfully establishes a democracy, it will have an effect on Iraq's future .
 "The people in the next-door countries who are in similar circumstances would feel that they deserve the same kind of thing. The people in such a similar circumstances, they should be proud of their actions," she said .
 When there is local ferment and pressure, the U.S. can come in and insist that the government not fire on crowds, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: When there are local ferment, pressure, pressure is on the government . The United States can come
 This would begin the movement internally in all of these countries towards democracy . This would be the first step in the democratic revolution in the world's history, says the BBC .
 The sources of U.S. unilateralism and its military manifestation of “preemption” are rooted in the logic of unipolarism . Unhinged from the containment of Soviet power, the sources of unilateralism are .
 Leaders in countries ranging from China, Russia and Iran to many European capitals share anxieties about the emergence of the U.S. as a “benevolent hegemon” instead of a ‘rogue superpower”
 The outlines of a counter-veiling bloc are seen in the convergence of threat perceptions . Short of joining forces formally, the outlines of the bloc are not clear .
 China is fixing at a “new Silk Road” allowing unfettered access to the Middle East and Eurasia . China remains uneasy over the Korean Peninsula and Taiwan, while fixing at the ‘new silk Road’
 The Islamic Republic of Iran is emerging, as a frontline state in their global lineup against U.S. hegemony . Iran is prevalent in the Chinese and Russian foreign-policy community . China and Russia are keen to see Iran as a key player in the world's anti-U.S
 We had World War III; we just called it by a different name, the Cold War . The Cold War was a Cold War, but it wasn't World War II, it was Cold War II .
 The predominant influence, as of a state, region, or group, over another or others, is the predominant influence . The dominant influence is the dominant influence of the state or region .
 The United States became the de facto World policeman when it won the Cold War . The U.S. became the world's de facto policeman in the wake of the Second World War .
 If this country won the Cold War then it was all Ronald Reagan’s fault, it was his fault, he said . If Reagan won it would be all Reagan's fault .
 Freedom of speech should be responsible, not some of the crap you’ll find about our President, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Freedom of speech is responsible," says Sutter. "It's responsible for what's happening in the U.S.
 He’d already passed on 3 offers made by the Sudan to take Osama bin Laden into custody .
 I do not know with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be won't be fought with sticks and stones . World War I will not know what weapons will be used against each other, says David Cameron .
 World War IV would have been fought with nuclear weapons and World War V would be fought with sticks and stones . Close but no cigar, World War I would have seen nuclear weapons . World War III would be the end of the war, but World War II was the end result .
 The answer should be obvious, there wouldn’t be any winners, only losers . The answer to the question is obvious, but there would be no winners, no losers .
 The Civil War or the War Between the States is also known as the War of Northern Aggression . The war is known in some circles as the Civil War . It was also known in other circles as War of Southern Aggression.
 The phrase ‘world war’ was first noted in use in the 8 April 1909 edition of the Westminster Gazette .
 The conflict that erupted in August 1914, and that ended at the 11 th hour of the 11th day of the month of 1918, was known at the time simply as the Great War .
 It was also called “The War to End All Wars,” but this optimism proved unjustified . The U.S. ended the war in 1945, but it was called the War to end all wars .
 Some would suggest that this War was just the first phase of the Second 30 Years War, spanning the period 1914-1945 . The Second 30 years War was also the First phase of World War One .
 The term ‘First World War’ was used in 1920 by Lt-Col a Court Repington, in his book The First World War 1914-18 . Lt. Repington used the term in his 1920 book .
 The phrase “World War 2” was first noted in use in Manchester Guardian on 18 February 1919 . World War 2 was published in the Manchester Guardian in February 1919.
 It seems that World Wars I & II were named together for the first time by Time magazine on 11 September 1938 . Time magazine published the date of the first mention of the conflict in 1938 .
 Gallup Poll indicated that people preferred the term World War II for the ongoing global war . People preferred to the term 'World War II' on the basis of the ongoing war in the world .
 President Truman officially named the war in September 1945 . The term "World War II" had been used in at least seven public laws to designate this period of hostilities .
 During the Cold War the term “World War III” was widely used to denote the anticipated and dreaded final conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union . Herman Kahn termed “an insensate wargasm” that would shatter modern civilization, if not destroy life
 After a severe economic crisis the world submitted to the World Controllers who took over and redefined the social order . After a . severe economic . crisis the . world subbed to the world . Controllers . took over the world and took over .
 This global disaster made the rulers of civilization so nervous that they decided that individual freedoms must be sacrificed to communal well-being . Contentment is enforced at all costs, says the ruler of civilization .
 The Nine Years War, which ushered in the era of Ford, ensured stability through dictatorship . The 9 Years War was the only war to end in a decade of dictatorship .
 Huxley's Nine Year’s War should not be confused with the War of 1688-1697 . War of the League of Augsburg or War of Grand Alliance is also known as the war of the Grand Alliance . The war was also called the Nine Year's War
 Operation Enduring Freedom is the name assigned by the military to operations conducted in support of the Global War on Terrorism . The name is used to refer to operations carried out during the war on terrorism .
 The various campaigns of the war on terrorism tend to be described as sub-operations of Operation Enduring Freedom . Operation Endure Freedom is a key part of the U.S. military campaign against terrorism .
 During the build-up of military forces prior to the initiation of combat operations against Iraq in March 2003, deployments were announced as being in support of OEF or the Global War on Terrorism .
 Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told the Senate that Iraq was not separate from the global war on terrorism, but rather it is part of it . Iraq is now a major source of support for the Iraq War .
 Secretary of State and Joint Chiefs of Staff return to Capitol Hill for second time in two days to discuss Iraq . Joint chiefs of Staff, secretary of state and secretary of defense, discuss Iraq policy on Iraq .
 Rumsfeld said stopping rogue states from developing and using weapons of mass destruction is a key aspect of the global war on terrorism . He said the U.S. is committed to stopping rogue nations from developing WMD .
 On 17 September 2003 President George W Bush submitted a proposal for $87 billion in supplemental appropriations to Congress for funding the War on Terrorism . Bush submitted the proposal in September 2003 .
 The request would provide critical funds for military and intelligence operations in Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries . It would also provide resources for the reconstruction and economic development of Iraq and Afghanistan .
 This theme has continued among the strongest proponents of the War, however, however it is named . The War is named.
 The GWOT was just a continuation of the Cold War only this time they were shooting real bullets instead of threatening each other . "The GWOT" will be just the continuation of that Cold War, only with real bullets .
 "All I know is that I’m getting darned tired of my 22 boy going off to fight another war," says President Obama . "I’s getting pretty tired of this war," she says .
 I'm beginning to think that the plan is to just keep sending him to wars until someone kills him off . I’m beginning to believe that this is the plan to kill him .
 Ron and Linda had to leave and Gary couldn't decide what to do about a rifle . Gary couldn’t decide what he wanted to do with the rifle . Ron and his wife were forced to leave .
 He settled on the Super Match rifle, deferring the purchase, and bought a Mini-14 for Sharon . Sharon's father decided to buy the Mini-15 for her .
 Sharon didn't really need a handgun and if she did, she could use the .32 auto . Sharon didn’t really need to use a handgun . If you did, you could use a .32 .
 It used anywhere from 1.9gph to 4.2gph depending on whether it was running at 25% power or 100% power . The device was powered by either 25gph or 100gph .
 The largest propane tank he could get the dealer to put in was a 1,100-gallon tank . The dealer could only put in a small 1,200-pound tank .
 Flippin was a nice little town. So, they bought their own 3,300-gallon tank . The town bought its own own .
 There is an unlimited supply of water since the water comes from Bull Shoals Lake . Water comes from the lake . Water is unlimited since the lake is located in Bull Shoals .
 Flippin’s water system can pump more than a half million gallons a day and has storage of 400,000 gallons . The water system pumps more than half a million gallons per day .
 Flippin’s rural water rates are $12.95 for the first 2,000 gallons plus $3.32 for any additional part of 1,000 gallon . Rural water rates start at 12.95 per gallon .
 Rates are $9 for the first 2,000 gallons plus $1 for an additional part of 1,000 gallon . Rates start at $9 per part of a gallon .
 Trash Trash pickup service is provided to commercial customers by the company . The company receives the bid for city trash pickup .
 Entergy Corporation serves the Flippin area with transmission voltages of 161,000 volts . Entergy provides electricity to the area with a wide range of power systems .
 Arkansas Western Gas provides natural gas service with 1,000 BTUs of heat value . Arkansas Western gas provides service with . 1,500 BTUs .
 Internet NATCO Technologies offers DSL & ISDN as well as 56K Internet access . NATCO provides DSL and ISDN service for 56K customers .
 3,000-gallons of propane could last for as long as 52 days, depending upon usage . The propane can last for up to 52 days depending on usage .
 Gar-Bear had written about how to set one of those generators up to take both natural gas and propane . But he couldn’t remember which story explained the process .
 The generator came with everything for both propane and propane . All you have to do is switch it over when you go propane to get propane or use it for the propane generator .
 This unit is manufactured to operate on Natural Gas as it leaves our factory . This unit was manufactured to . operate on . Natural Gas . The unit was designed to operate . on natural gas .
 Remove the cap from the “LP” marked outlet on the Brass Tee located on the upper right side of the Gas Regulator . The cap is removed from the "LP" marked outlet . The leak is a result of the leak from the bottom of the tank .
 Unscrew the fuel line that leads to the carburetor from the “NG” side of the tee and reinstall the hose . Re-install the hose to the "LP’s side" side .
 Be sure that no leaks exist in any connection by using thread sealant to seal the connection . Be sure no leaks are in any of the connections .
 Do not use excessive amounts of thread sealant taking care to keep it from entering the gas lines . Take care not to use too much of the sealant .
 "It was easier just to insert a value and use a line from both sides of the Brass Tee to the Valve," says the author .
 You also had to put a valve in front of the Brass Tee to switch the source of the gas . The Brass Tee can be used to blow out the gas from the air .
 "If there was one thing you learned when you got old, it was your limitations," says Bob Greene . Greene .
 With only the inaccurate Mini-14, Gary, Gary didn't feel bad buying surplus ammo . Gary bought surplus ammo from surplus ammo stores . Gary: "I'm not ashamed of what I've done, I'm not afraid to buy surplus ammo"
 He also had 5.56 Lake City M855 Green Tip 5.56062 Grain Steel Penetrator Packed Loose 1000 Rounds per case . $399-2000 rounds delivered. $45 Federal 230gr. 230gr .
 If anyone got close enough to require Gary to use the PT1911, a suppressor wasn’t needed . A suppressor was not needed for anyone to get close to Gary .
 His last preparation was to get Rambo I and Rambo III sharpened, top and bottom, to a shaving edge . Rambo's last preparation for the film is to get the films sharpened .
 The price of gold went over $500 on the London market yesterday . Gas is $2,749 a gallon and the price of a gallon is almost $3,000 .
 "I called Texaco and told them we needed a 300gallon gas tank on a stand," she says . "I told Texaco that we needed to have a 300 gallon tank," she recalls .
 Brenda and John have a new project to guard since JAG had its last season . They have been working on a new show for the couple .
 Russia and China aren't very happy with us over North Korea, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I have no idea, but Russia is very unhappy with us"
 The French and Germans are getting more vo25 cal over Iraq every day . Plus the French and the Germans are also getting more than 25 cal a day over Iraq .
 The Israelis are mad at the U.S. because we didn’t block the sales of missiles to Syria, armor to the Palestinians and enriched uranium to the Iranians, he says . Israel is mad at us for not blocking missile sales to Syria and armor to Palestinians .
 The first intercept attempt of the THAAD system will take place in late 2004 or 2005 . First intercept attempt will be in late 2005 or late 2004, 2005 .
 In July 2004 THAAD testing moved from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico to the Pacific Missile Range for block 6 and 8 flight tests . The move was part of a plan to move the missile defense system from the White Sands missile range to a range in California .
 THAAD reduces the number of missiles that the lower-tier systems must engage and provides a shoot-look-shoot capability- the ability to engage incoming missiles more efficiently . ThAAD also reduces the need to engage missiles that must be fired at lower levels .
 The overall procurement objective of 1,159 PAC-3 missiles remains unchanged . The procurement objective remains unchanged. The overall procure objective is still unchanged .
 The larger purchases in FY03 and FY04 may be offset by lower production in FY08 and FY09, the government says . The purchases are expected to increase in FY09 and FY12 .
 The only thing the U.S. has going for it is the most powerful Navy in the world . The U.N. has the world's most powerful naval power .
 Russian fighters are well trained and their only problem is their tactical approach . Don't kid yourself about those Russian fighters and Russian pilots, they’re well trained . Don’t kid yourself, Russia’s well-trained pilots are very good pilots .
 I've always wondered what would happen if they changed their policy and fought like we do. I’ve always wondered . What would happen to the U.S. military if they were to change their policy?
 The last time we went head-to-head with Russian pilots was in Vietnam, Vietnam . I think that the last time I've seen Russian pilots were in Vietnam was Vietnam . The Russian pilots have been involved in the conflict in the past .
 POWs and defectors also told stories about Soviet jet pilots in dogfights against the Americans over North Vietnam’s skies . The POWs told stories of dogfights between the Americans and Soviet pilots .
 The Soviet pilots, as well as the North Koreans, always flew warplanes bearing North Vietnam colors . The Soviet and North Vietnamese pilots always flew planes bearing North Vietnamese colors .
 Rumors, later confirmed, ran that the Americans shot down some Soviet pilots’ jets and they landed safely by parachutes on the ground . Rumors later confirmed that the pilots landed safely .
 Soviet pilots never wore insignias or marks to tell that they were from the Soviet Union . The Soviet pilots were never wearing insignias .
 They were arrested and beaten to pulp by militiamen in the area, most of whom didn’t understand Russian . They were immediately arrested and beat to pulp . Most of them didn't understand Russian, so they were beaten by militia members .
 Some who could tell that the downed pilots were Russians usually beat them more brutally as if they had mistaken them for the Americans . Some of the pilots were beaten more brutally if they were mistaken for Americans .
 From 1964 to 1973, 6,359 Soviet generals and other officers “visited” Vietnam . From 1964-73, more than 6,000 Soviet officers visited the country .
 Soviet-guided surface-to-air missile regiments were deployed to encounter U.S. warplanes . They were deployed against the United States .
 In Indochina, the United States lost almost 60,000 men and 8,612 aircraft . The U.S. also lost almost 6,000 aircraft and almost 8,600 men in the war .
 The Russian military studied the first Gulf War very carefully and modified the combat procedures . They reduced their reliance on ground forces and emphasized the use of air power .
 Russian air force might have been in disarray in 2000 that was changing very rapidly . While the Russian Air Force might have had problems in 2000, it was changing rapidly .
 Predictions that if the U.S. went up against Russian airframes in the future they would learn that they were flying against Chinese pilots were correct at the time, but now dated .
 The Chinese could supply massive numbers of ground troops but they lacked transport system . The Chinese lacked a transport system to transport their troops to the battlefield .
 The Russians built some of the best aircraft in the world . They were mainly designed to counter threats they perceived the United States military aviation represented .
 They didn't have the Raptor, but neither did the Americans in any great number . The Raptor is a Raptor . The Raptors are the first team in the NBA history to win a championship .
 The American plan called for a limited number of F22’s and a far larger number of the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter . The U.S. plan calls for the F22's and the F35's .
 The Air Force traded off F-35’s to get the Raptors they couldn’t afford . The Raptors are the Air Force's first in a series of F-15s .
 In simulated combat tests, a single F-22 had taken out an attacking force of 10 F15-C’s in simulated combat . The F22 has taken out 10 attacking forces in a single attack .
 In early December, she had added a full six-month supply of food from Sam’s Club .
 Gary called Ron in December to see how he was feeling and how their house was coming . Ron and Gary's house is coming, Gary says . Gary calls Ron to say how he's feeling, but Ron says he's not worried .
 Ron had more or less duplicated their home but had built a 5-bedroom 2-story affair . Ron's home is now a 5,000-plus-room affair .
 Robert and he had reloaded all of his empty brass and he’d made some purchases . Robert and Robert had loaded up all of their empty brass . Robert had made a few purchases .
 Fle’d contacted the people in Gonzales, Texas, and bought the package deal plus extra Kl and a CD V-717 . Fle'd also bought the deal for extra Kl, a CD and extra extra Kl .
 You can probably figure $1,000 by the time we buy the package deal, a CD V-717 and extra Potassium Iodide . The package deal includes a CD, extra potassium iodide and an extra CD CD .
 The only weapon missing from the arsenal is the Springfield Armory Super Match and .22 rifle and ammo .
 Sharon got her Pfaff long-arm quilting machine . Gary bought a used Winchester model 9422 and an assortment of ammo . Sharon got a Pfaff machine and Gary got a Winchester gun .
 Unless you raise your own beef, it isn’t any cheaper to buy a whole steer and have it butchered . It isn't any cheaper than buying a whole stein and butchering .
 If you watch the sales at Sam’s Club and only buy what they have on sale, you can stock a freezer in a reasonable amount of time . If you vacuum pack the meat, it will hold longer .
 Russia and China held joint maneuvers but nothing came of it, this time . Russia, China held the joint maneuvers this time, but this time they did not .
 Under appropriate operating conditions, neutrons given off by fission reactions can “breed” more fuel from otherwise non-fissionable isotopes . Under appropriate conditions, the neutrons can "breed" more fuel . The neutrons from fission can ‘bre
 Most common breeding reaction is that of plutonium-239 from non-fissionable uranium-238 . The most common reaction to fission is the creation of plutonium from uranium-239 .
 France has made the largest implementation of breeder reactors with its large Super-Phenix reactor and an intermediate scale reactor on the Caspian Sea for electric power and desalinization .
 The government has indicated that it plans to continue building new nuclear reactors in Iran . U.S. officials have warned that the reactors could be used to develop nuclear weapons .
 Russia’s assistance in building a nuclear plant in Bushehr, near the Persian Gulf, has been a nagging irritant in relations with the U.S. for years . Russia has agreed to build the nuclear plant .
 The Iranian Revolutionary Guards carried out a series of military maneuvers to test Shahab 3 rockets . The tests are part of a plan that the government devised to respond to any threat .
 Israeli media said that Israel also did some new tests on missiles, in order to respond to any attack from the Iranian Shahab 3 and 4 rockets . In return, Israel also said that it also did new tests of missiles in response to any Iranian attack .
 Ha’aretz: Iran’s intention is to promote its security conditions and ameliorate the morale of its people . A military analyst said that Iran is trying to promote security conditions .
 Iran does not need missiles in order to target Israel, because its weapons are long enough in Lebanon and Syria . Iran is capable of targeting military civilian bases through these countries deep inside the Hebrew state, he said .
 Tony Blair's government is trying to diminish the fears from Sharon’s plans of attacking the Iranian nuclear reactors . Sharon's plans will only increase animosity against Israel and the US, and weaken the hope of achieving a historical reconciliation through direct negotiations .
 The continuation of the Israeli polices of oppressing the Palestinians will destroy peace, the British say . The occupation of Iraq and the destruction of Iranian nuclear reactors will destroy the chances for peace, they say .
 Sharon bases his programs on military might and the possession of a nuclear arsenal . Whoever knows Sharon’s history, would see that Sharon does not cooperate with his neighbors, he says . Sharon has a history of not cooperating with neighbors .
 So-called natural theology is a doctrine that can be traced back to the Bible . It shaped the thinking of such early Christian philosophers as Thomas Aquinas .
 Ray’s cataloguing of mammals, birds, fish, insects and plants inspired subsequent naturalists to collect and classify organisms as a reflection of the divine order of creation . Ray's cataloguing led to the creation of the world's first classifications .
 He paved the way for studies of adaptation by looking at an organism’s form in relation to its function .
 Just as the watch’s complexity provides evidence of a watchmaker, Paley reasoned, so the natural world provides evidence . Paley: 'Just like the watch's complexity provides proof of a world maker, the world maker'
 Charles Darwin published his “Origin of Species” in 1859, shattering the existing paradigm . This “argument from design” prevailed until Charles Darwin’s ‘Origin of the Species’ was published . Charles Darwin was published in "The Origin of Species"
 Agassiz, whose vast private collection of fossils formed the nucleus for Harvard’s Museum of Comparative Zoology, openly opposed Darwinism . The museum is now housed at Harvard's Museum .
 He believed that the study of natural history was ultimately analogous to the analysis of God’s thoughts . He said that natural history is analogous to God's thoughts .
 Many of today’s proponents of intelligent design echo the fundamental philosophy of the pre-Darwinian thinkers . The arguments have evolved, but many of the arguments for intelligent design have evolved in the past . The argument has evolved, and many of today's intelligent design proponents echo the
 Evolutionary scientists point to powerful evidence to demonstrate that the mechanisms described by Darwin are capable of explaining the complexity of life .
 How God handled the 10 plagues that Moses brought down on the Egyptians was easy to see . Moses' Moses was Moses' main reason for the plagues .
 That was obviously retribution for the Pharaoh killing the first born of the Hebrews . Pharaoh killed first born Hebrews. Pharaoh's death was retribution for Pharaoh killing first born . Pharaoh's killing was punishment for the killing of the first Hebrews, Pharaoh said .
 No one can explain How it happened without simply attributing the Act to God . The Act of God is said to be responsible for what happened .
 The Chinese had a new program of building freighters so they could deliver the goods to Wal-Mart . The Chinese also had plans to build freighters to deliver goods to the stores .
 They were using the proceeds of their American sales to do 2 things, improve their military and build more ships . The U.S. was using proceeds of the sale to improve its military, build ships .
 The Russians had refurbished several of their nuclear submarines . They participated in the joint-exercise . The Russians were taking part .
 Rumsfeld was talking about troop reductions beginning in the middle of 2006 . He says troop reductions began in 2006 .
 The first operation tests of the THAAD Missile system were completed . They needed to do more software revisions to the system .
 The Russians had a solution to their inability to put an ABM on target; they equipped it with a nuclear warhead . The Russians were able to put a bomb on target .
 The Russians removed refueling systems from the Backfire C bombers . The Russians had removed the refueling system from the bombers .
 When the Chinese bought an additional 40 Tu-23M bombers from Russia in 2006, they also bought 80+ refueling systems and contracted with the Russians to reinstall them . The Chinese also contracted with Russia to re-install the systems .
 Airliners secretly converted to tanker aircraft . Purportedly for airline use, the airliners were secretly converted . Airliners used to be airliners .
 Russia quickly confirmed that the Iranians had returned the depleted uranium as agreed . Russia also confirmed that Iran had returned depleted uranium to Russia as agreed.
 Iranians deny any knowledge of the test and North Koreans refuse to comment . North Korea also refused to comment on the test . Iran and North Korea have not commented on the matter .
 The next time Sharon went to Sam’s Club, Gary strongly suggested that she buy a whole case of the 57 ounce cans of Folgers coffee . Gary suggested that Sharon buy a case of 57 ounces cans of coffee .
 She usually buys a case every three months, but this time she bought 2 cases . She usually bought a case once a month, but she bought two cases .
 Before they moved from California in 2005, Gary had gotten an Rx for all of his prescriptions, including the drugs that Dr. Gary had taken from California . Gary had to get a prescription for all his prescriptions before they moved .
 It was a shame that they lost those prescriptions, they had to make another trip to LA to pick up duplicates . They had to go back to Los Angeles to get duplicates of the prescriptions .
 The prescriptions were for a 2-month supply of the drugs at a time and they had 5 refills . They were for 2 months and had 5 refillable prescriptions .
 When they got to Flippin, they filled the prescriptions at a local pharmacy and duplicate prescriptions at Mountain Flome pharmacy . They filled them at a different pharmacy and at a separate pharmacy .
 Gary's parents had to find a doctor in the Flippin area to monitor Gary’s diabetes . The doctor wrote the same set of prescriptions for Gary .
 Every other month, they bought a 6-month supply of their prescriptions . They bought them every other month for a month . The family is now raising money to raise money for a new generation .
 When the following year came, they intended on filling the local Rx at the pharmacy in Flippin . The following year, they wanted to fill the local prescription at the Pharmacy . The next year they intended to fill it up .
 You are very lucky if the canned goods you buy have a shelf life of over a year . Cansans are lucky to have canned goods that last for more than a year, say experts .
 A 2-year backlog of prescriptions was pushing it, but over the years, Dr. Dr. John Defterios has been able to get through the backlog .
 J had figured out what worked and what didn't, and there really wasn’t any reason to change their prescriptions . J had no reason to go to the doctor every month or to go every month .
 They debated whether or not to accept Ron and Linda’s invitation to come to Cedar Hill, but in the end, decided to make the trip . The couple decided to visit Cedar Hill and spend time with friends .
 The drive to Cedar Hill is 1,047 miles and takes the average person 17 hours, 22 minutes . The average person takes 17 hours and 22 minutes to drive .
 In a true TSHTF scenario, I doubt the FCC will be coming around checking licenses . I doubt it will be checking licenses for licenses . The FCC will not check licenses .
 These days he went fishing during warm weather and sat in the basement during cold weather and watched one of the Discovery Channels . These days, he sat in his basement and watched a Discovery Channel .
 Gary and Sharon had only left California a year before, but sitting around waiting for Derek to get home from Iraq made the time seem to pass very slowly . The time seemed to pass slowly .
 Sharon and Gary stayed for 3 nights and 2 days . They didn’t have any place they had to rush back to so Sharon stayed . Sharon stayed at home for 3 days .
 Amy had taken over Sharon’s chore of getting Lorrie to baby steps with Jeffrey . Amy had been helping Sharon get Lorrie ready to take baby steps .
 Gary was pretty certain that Sharon was helping Amy out with gas money to the tune of about $100 a month . Gary was sure that Sharon would help Amy out of gas money .
 Sharon managed the money and as long has everything was paid for in cash and they had enough to live on, he didn’t really care . Sharon managed to pay for everything in cash .
 They had zero bills, except for monthly utility bills . Even had those that they could were set up on a level pay plan .
 "They were probably 6-7 months ahead on food, maybe more, and 2 years ahead on all of their prescriptions," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The best forms of silver for survival purposes are pre-1965 United States 90% coins and 1-oz silver rounds . Pre-1965 U.S. coins and silver rounds are the best way to survive .
 Most useful forms of gold would be V 10 -oz Gold Eagles and V4-oz Gold Gold Eagles . The most useful form of gold is V 10-oz gold .
 Hundreds of web pages promote numismatic and collector coins, as well as foreign coins . That is because hundreds of web sites promote coin collectors and collectors .
 If the time ever comes that gold and silver coins are again used as money, coins would be worth only their metal content . Coins would only be worth their metal contents .
 The price of gold is more than .9675 times the value of gold . It's difficult to convince Mr. Gaudens to accept it at more than $1,000 .
 In an emergency, having the gold content stamped on a coin could go a long way toward causing someone to accept it . The gold content of a coin is stamped on the coin .
 Third, the coins you buy for survival purposes should contain amounts with which Americans are comfortable . Americans should be comfortable with coins with which they are comfortable, says CNN iReport .
 Don't hold your breath. There is just something about my spending 36 $3,000 on a rifle that yanks her chain . That’s only for the rifle, the scope is expensive, too, too .
 The Leupold Mark 4 3.5-10x40mm LR/T M3 Illuminated Reticle scope features M3-style adjustments and an eleven position illuminated reticle control dial . The Mark 4 M3 features the best features of the Mark 4 .
 The Super Match is built for the individual who demands the very best . Capable of sub-MOA accuracy with the proper ammunition, the Super Match can be easily shot with the correct ammunition .
 Springfield’s latest proprietary development for the Super Match is the rear lugged receiver . The Super Match has been developed by Springfield's Springfield-based company . Springfield's Super Match receiver is the latest in a long line of receivers .
 Air gauged air gauged national match barrel, custom oversized op-rod guide and maximum dimension match grade stocks available in American walnut and McMillan fiberglass . Additional features include an ultra-heavy air gauging national . match barrel .
 Eric, The Ammoman, has M\14 magazines for only $139 for 10 mags or $880 for 80 mags . Eric has been with the magazine for more than 30 years .
 USGI mags are brand new sturdy steel construction they work and look great . You cannot tell these from US GI mags from USGI .
 80 magazines at 20-rounds each would take 1,600 rounds of ammo to fill them one time . 80 magazines would take one time to fill one magazine at 20 rounds .
 Fleataxi’s Alaskan series of stories . If you aren’t sure what to put in your BOB, read the series of Alaskans .
 It appears North Korea has conducted a test of a short-range missile, White House chief of staff Andrew Card says . Card: North Korea appears to have conducted a missile test . The test is believed to be the first of its kind, Card said .
 Card: It appears that there was a test of a short-range missile by the North Koreans . Card: The missile landed in the Sea of Japan . Card says it appears that the test was a North Korean missile .
 Six-nation talks on persuading North Korea to curb its nuclear ambitions have stalled since last June . Talks involving the two Koreas, the United States, China, Japan and Russia have been stalled since June .
 Levin: Bush administration's refusal to hold direct talks with North Korea leads to even greater nuclear threat . Levin: Sunday's test shows Bush administration’s refusal to meet with Pyongyang is leading to an even greater threat .
 The North Koreans are going to lose their heads trying to save a little face, says CNN's John Defterios . North Korea is going to 'lose their heads' trying to keep a face,' he says .
 The North Koreans are capable of putting things into orbit using either the NKSL-1 a Taep’o-dong-1 missile with a third stage and satellite added . The NKSLX-2 and NKSLSL-X-1 are also capable of adding a
 The U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency warned last week that North Korea has the ability to mount a nuclear device on a long-range missile . The communist state could hit United States territory, the agency said .
 If North Korea attacks the US, a single Peacekeeper missile will constitute over retaliation . Peacekeeper missiles could be used in retaliation for North Korea's attack .
 If the Peacekeeper can’t reach North Korea, we have 14 SSBN’s with 24 Trident-D missiles apiece . The Peacekeeper is a Peacekeeper, the U.S. says . The U.N. says it has more than 1,000 Trident
 Highland IP, Camp Pike, Fort Pike, Camp Robinson, Fort Chaffee, Little Rock AFB, Ebbing ANGB, Everton ESS and Fort Smith are all located in Little Rock .
 "I think we're in pretty good shape here in Flippin, it’s mountainous and we have the shelter. I think we’re in pretty . good shape," he says .
 Ott family was from McConnellsburg, PA, about 50 miles west of Gettysburg . The Ott family lived in McConnellsburg .
 The oldest of their children was his great-grandmother who was born in 1864 . The oldest child of the couple were born in the 1864 era .
 The southern cops weren’t all bad; some of them smiled when they handed you the ticket . Some of the southern cops were not all bad. Some of them actually smiled .
 By any measure, good boys died on both sides and it was a rotten shame . Good boys died both sides of the line, but good boys were killed by both sides .
 The U.S. beat the Yankees 39-0 in the World Series on Saturday night . The game was played in New York City . The Yankees won the game 39-1 .
 Except for Francisco Pancho Villa’s raid on Columbus, NM on 3/9/1916, the United States hadn’t been invaded since 1812 . The U.S. hadn't been invaded by a major American invasion since the 1812 invasion .
 Mexican's gunned down about 17 (14, 18, pick a number) innocent civilians, contrary to Pancho’s instructions . The Mexican's killed about 17 people in the shootout .
 Blackjack Pershing and George S Patton chased Villa all over Mexico but never caught up with him . Villa was captured by Villa in 1944 .
 Wikipedia claims Villa had 1,500 men in Columbus, but the correct number was 485 . Wikipedia says Villa had more than 1,000 men . Wikipedia: Villa had 485 men .
 Villa starred as himself in 3 movies and 25 other actors played the part in other movies . Villa starred in 3 films and 25 others played the role of himself in other films .
 The battle of the Alamo occurred in Mexico, Texas hadn’t declared independence until during or after the siege . The Alamo was located in Mexico .
 Francisco "Pancho" Villa was born to rural peasant parents in San Juan del Rio, Mexico on June 5, 1878 . He was born in 1878 to a rural peasant family . Villa was the son of Mexican peasants .
 Raised in poverty in Durango, Mexico, he turned to cattle rustling and robbery as a young man . He soon became one of Mexico’s most wanted bandit leaders .
 As an enemy of the Mexican federal authorities who were trying to arrest him, Villa became an ally of Francisco I Madero in the struggle to overthrow President Porfirio Diaz . Villa was a natural ally of Madero’s efforts to overthrow Diaz . He was killed in the
 Villa led his forces in a daring raid against Juarez on May 11, 1911, capturing the city . Villa captured the city and secured Madero’s position as the new President . Villa was appointed a colonel in the revolutionary army .
 When Madero was assassinated two years later in a coup led by General Vittoriano Fluerta, Villa quickly reorganized his Army of the North . Villa quickly became one of the most important leaders of the anti-Huerta alliance .
 Villa's highly mobile mounted troops inflicted a major defeat on Huerta’s army in northern Mexico in the Battle of Zacatecas on June 23, 1913, and then began a campaign to the south . Villa's troops, called “Villistas”, inflicted a
 By December, in conjunction with the forces of Venustiano Carranza and Emiliano Zapata, Villa captured Mexico City, forcing Huerta to flee and placing control of the government in the hands of the three rebel leaders .
 Villa was forced out of the triumvirate when he lost a power struggle with Carranza, and in the ensuing conflict his troops were badly defeated . Villa returned to his headquarters in Durango and was forced to return to headquarters .
 There he resumed his life as a bandit, raiding American border towns and mining camps as well as Mexican villages . The bandit raided the U.S. border towns, mining camps and Mexican villages as well .
 On March 9, 1916, troops under Villa’s command raided the border town of Columbus, New Mexico . It was never established if Villa ordered the raid or if it was carried out without his knowledge looting the town .
 The United States government sent an expeditionary force into Mexico under General John J Pershing to capture Villa Villa . Villa was captured by a Mexican army force under the orders of General Pershing .
 Villa's maneuverability and superior knowledge of the terrain enabled him to elude the pursuing American troops . Pershing’s forces withdrew from the area the following year . Villa eluded the American forces, and Pershing's forces withdrew .
 Villa agreed to halt raids in exchange for his settling down on a ranch in Canutilio, Mexico . Villa was appointed a general in the Mexican army in 1920 . Villa is believed to have been the most successful rebel in the world .
 Villa was ambushed and killed by followers of Alvaro Obregon, a former army general, who feared that Villa would oppose their leader’s candidacy for President in the upcoming elections . However, on June 20, 1923, Villa died of his injuries .
 Patton led a raid at a place called the Rubio Ranch, believing that one of Villa’s men might be there . Patton led the raid on the Rubio ranch, a ranch owned by Villa's men .
 Patton and his men engaged them in a lively skirmish resembling an old western movie gun fight . Patton's men engaged three of the enemy in an attempt to escape .
 He took them directly to Pershing’s headquarters for identification where he created quite a commotion .
 Later, he carved two notches in his Ivory-Handled Colt .45 to commemorate his good fortune .
 The only problem is that Doolittle never heard of him and he isn’t on any roster of the men who participated in the mission . He is not even on a roster of those who participated .
 Every war has its ‘heroes’ who either weren’t what they claimed to be or whatever. ‘Hero’s’ were either not what they were or whatever .
 They had tanks of hydrazine, pentaborane, diborane, hybolene and nitrogen tetroxide, liquid florine . They also held tanks of pentaboranes, pentabane and diborsane . They were tanks of hyrazine and
 Like most of the Airmen at the Rocket Site, Gary had a ‘Get out of Jail Free Card’ properly called a Toxic Fuel Handler ID Card . Gary had to have a 'Toxic Fuel Handler' ID Card to keep him out of jail .
 He bought a stack of B-27 full-size police silhouettes and some target pasters . The range at 0.0-yards seemed like a pretty good range to start shooting .
 The following day he moved the targets to 200yards and spent 2-days at that range, readjusting the sights to shoot dead center mass . He then spent the next two days shooting at 200yards .
 He had fixed sights, so he just vaguely noted where the groups were falling . He was aiming to hit the ground, but was distracted by the gunfire .
 He acquired an inside the waistband holster for a Walther PPK and it fit his gun like it was made for it, which it wasn't . The holster is a holster for an inside-the-body holster .
 Since it was only a .32 auto, it wasn’t coming out of the holster except as a last resort . It wasn't going to come out of a holster except for use of the gun .
 Gary caught a fair number of fish during the summer of 2006 when he wasn’t off doing something else . Gary caught some of the fish in 2006 .
 He checked every nook and cranny for their 22-quart pressure cooker, but couldn’t find it . The pressure cooker was supposed to be a canning canning cooker .
 He mail ordered an All American 41-quart pressure cooker because it would do 19 one-quart or 32 one-pint jars at a time . The pressure cooker didn't have a gasket to go bad .
 "He was going to rototill in a little wood ash and a few bags of steer manure," he says . He was going for a few days in the summer .
 He thought about how hard it was to use a rototiller and decided to hire the work done . He decided to use the work to get the work out of his home .
 The last time they’d put in a large garden was in 1979, and it had been a monster. It was the last time the garden had been put in .
 Raccoons had a feast on their sweet corn; maybe they should fence this garden in . The garden is full of sweet corn and sweet corn .
 The price of gasoline has continued to rise, a penny here, 2 cents there, sometimes as much as a nickel, but it never came down . Meanwhile, the price of gas has never come down .
 Dow Jones Industrial Averages slipped below $10,000 and then slowly edged their way below $9,000 . Dow Jones Averages had slipped below 10,000 before slowly edging their way down . The Dow Jones Average Averages have slipped below 9,000 for the first time
 There was a disaster in the making, but it was happening in slow motion, says CNN's John Sutter . "There was a catastrophe in the make-up," he says .
 News organizations were expressing concern over the failing economy, but no one had a solution . News organizations expressed concern but no solution .
 He didn't have anything constructive to say; just his usual unsupported opinions trying to force a conclusion . He didn’t have anything useful to say, just his unsupported opinions .
 Alan Greenspan had retired, it had been long expected, and the new Chairman of the Federal Reserve had some different ideas about how to stimulate the economy . The new chairman of the Fed had different ideas .
 The Fed was forced to respond to the current economic situation . President Obama was not getting a chance to put his plans into play .
 The cost of living in 2006 jumped 7.2%, primarily due to the price of gas and a food shortage brought on by the continuing drought . In 2006, the cost of a person living in California increased 7.3% .
 They usually lower the interest rate to stimulate the economy and raise it to dampen inflation . But they usually lower interest rates to boost the economy .
 Gary and Sharon bought their first $1,000 face value of pre-65 U.S. dimes, quarters and halves . Sharon and Gary bought the first of their first dimes and quarters . Sharon says she and Gary have been together since 1984 .
 The coins cost them a shade over $5,000, forcing them to dip into the cash in the basement and Sharon’s checking account reserve . The coins were purchased by Sharon's husband, a retired accountant .
 During the last half of 2005 and most of 2006, they’d avoided depending on the Trust income for their living expenses . The Trust income has been reduced to less than $1 million a year .
 Moving from California to Arkansas had reduced their expenses dramatically . It hadn’t been too hard to do because moving from California .
 Sharon suspected the country was in trouble when Wal-Mart stopped advertising price rollbacks . Sharon suspected that the country is in trouble . Sharon says she's worried about the impact of the country's economy .
 Rumsfeld announced that U.S. forces in Iraq were finally below 100,000 . U.N. troops in Iraq have been in the country since 2003 .
 Rumsfeld sidestepped the question on when the troops would be home from Afghanistan . He said the troops will be home in the fall .
 According to the Internet, it was pushing $4.00 in San Francisco, the highest price in the nation . The Internet says the price is pushing $3.00 .
 There was Patriot Act I and Patriot Act II, but all they had done was taken away peoples’ rights, he said . "There were Patriot Act Act I. and Patriot . Act II," he said. "They had done nothing wrong. They had taken away people's rights
 In the rush to protect the U.S. from Osama bin Laden those rights had taken a beating . Hell, they might just as well repeal the Bill of Rights . The nation's rights might just be taken down by the government .
 A new project based on the Minuteman Project, in concept, had started in San Diego .
 The San Diego project only wanted retired police officers and people with military combat experience . The project is based on a study of the city's history of crime .
 People stocking up on high capacity magazines and weapons that are now legal in most of the country . People started stocking up after the prices came down, people said .
 By late 2006, it was almost as if the assault weapons ban had never taken place . The ban was lifted in 2006 .
 If the Congress ever enacted another assault weapons ban, the theft rate of firearms would triple/quadruple overnight . The theft rate would triple or quadruple overnight overnight .
 A few days before the assault weapons ban would be due to be implemented, they probably wouldn’t even bother to even bother . Cops aren't dumb about the ban, they say .
 Sharon and Gary had very little else to be thankful for, Sharon says . They thanked God for the food and the roof over their heads, but had little else . Sharon says she and Gary were thankful for the roof and the food they had .
 As had been the case when he’d gone to Kosovo, Derek had stopped keeping in touch with Derek . Derek had gone back to Kosovo .
 You didn't go anywhere without your Ml 6 and at least one magazine, on post . You didn’t go anywhere with your post .
 Off post they carried anywhere from 1 to 4 extra magazines in addition to their usual allotment of 7 30-round magazines . Off post, they carried around 1-4 extra magazines .
 Bought mason jars and a fancy canner so we can put in a garden next year . Bought some masons jars and canner for a garden . Bought a garden garden .
 The Three Amigos had been a sensation at a time in the past, but that was over . Each of them had moved on with their lives. The trio is now living in New York .
 Clarence was probably in Birmingham, Alabama; 45 that was where most of his family was . Gary was in Arkansas, Ron in New Mexico and neither one of them knew where Clarence was, probably Birmingham .
 Grouped together, they were all trying to outdo each other being conservative . Grouping together, the group of conservatives were trying to be conservative .
 As an individual, Clarence was a little liberal, Ron conservative and GarBear was somewhere in the middle, neither one nor the other . GarBear is not a liberal or conservative, but a conservative, liberal .
 In real life Gary was like what he’d been in college, able to understand macroeconomics but having trouble with microeconomics . Gary was able to do both macroeconomic and microeconomic .
 Macro looked at the country and micro was more like looking at an individual family’s spending habits . Micro looked at a family's spending habits rather than the country's .
 Ron Green’s last name is really Brown, Clarence Rawlings is really Clarence Floyd and his wife's name is Shirley, not Lucy . Ron Green's last name, Ron Green, is really Ron Brown .
 Linda's sister’s name isn’t Shelia. Shelia is correct, as far as I know . Linda’Shelia is not Shelia . Shelia was Shelia, Shelia's sister, Linda is Linda's daughter .
 The guy up in San Jose who made Thumper for The Ark runs a machine shop and really does make Gatling guns as a hobby . Thumper is a Gatling Gatling gun made by the man who made the gun for the Ark .
 The same federal government that outlawed the trigger cranks for rifles says that a Gatling gun in not a machine gun because you have to continue to crank it to make it shoot . Gatling guns are not machine guns, the government says .
 A lawyer, who doesn’t even know what a Gatling gun is, probably wrote the letter . A lawyer probably wrote it, and it's probably a lawyer .
 I ought to see if Bob R is still alive and commission him to build me a 12-gauge Gatling gun . I have no opinion on the matter, but I should ask Bob R if he's still alive .
 Reflex makes a suppressor for the shotgun, but it isn't much more than a flashhider . The suppressor is available in the U.S.
 In January of 2007, Sharon bought another $1,000 face value in pre-65 silver coins . Sharon bought more than a quarter of the face value of the coins .
 Russia and China held joint maneuvers for the third straight year . During January and February, the Russians and Chinese held joint exercises . The Russian and Chinese forces held joint drills in China and Russia in February .
 The Chinese didn't buy any more Backfire C bombers from the Russians, either . The Chinese did not purchase any more of the Russian-made bombers .
 They had managed to launch 6 more large cargo carriers, bringing their total to 18 of the new ships that could haul 5,000 containers, each . They had launched 6 more ships, bringing them to a total of 18 .
 Gary let out a sigh of relief when the maneuvers ended and the United States was still intact . Gary was relieved that the U.S. was still in good shape .
 Gold hit $600 on the London market at the end of December and gas was hovering around $3,249 in Arkansas .
 Derek wouldn’t be back to the states until the end of June of 2007 . He’d also figured out that Derek would be back in the states .
 He couldn’t even remember why he’d thought Derek would be back in March . Maybe it was wishful thinking. He couldn't remember why . Maybe he'd even remember .
 He was also wondering how Lake City could have surplus ammo or overruns when they couldn’t supply enough ammo for the troops in Iraq .
 Maybe this stuff was the rejects, but it fired ok so he didn’t worry about it, he just ordered more . Maybe this is the case, but he just 46 ordered more. Maybe this was the reject, he said .
 Epinephrine is only good for 1 year so you have to replace your Epi-pen . Epinejectors can only be used for a year, so you need to replace it .
 Epi-pens are self-administered and are very fast acting . People with severe allergies and a risk of anaphylactic shock commonly carry them . They can be self administered and are self administered .
 Epi-pens are regulated medical devices and require a prescription . In the United States and the United Kingdom, Epi's are medical devices . In U.S. and U.K. it requires a prescription to get them .
 The Pen usually has a shelf life of about 12 months, or until the contents contain a Precipitate or they discolor, whichever comes earlier . The Pen is usually sold for around £99 .
 Epi-pen should be discarded if unused by returning it to your local drugstore, pharmacy or hospital for safe disposal .
 Despite being trademarked, common usage of the word Epi-pen is drifting toward the generic context of any auto injector . The word is still being used in reference to an auto-injector, but it's not always used in the context of a pen .
 The carrying tube that the pen comes in comes in is easily broken . Several companies sell durable replacement carrying tubes . The pen's carrying tube can be broken easily .
 You can either buy rechargeable batteries or check the date on the package and keep them rotated . Check the date of the batteries in the package .
 I don't use rechargeable batteries because they have less energy than the non-rechargeable batteries . I don’t use rechargeables because they’ve less energy . I’m not using rechargeable battery technology .
 One way to make sure you always have good food is to rotate at least half of it every year . Have 2 jars of yeast one a year newer than the other one, e.g., have 2 jars .
 If you can make friend with your pharmacist ask him what the expiration date was on the bottle he dispensed the pills from . Ask him if he knows the date of the pills he gave to you .
 The one I got in 12/03 will expire 09/05; the one I received in 3/04 will expire in 11/05 . The one he got 12/04 expires in 08/07 . And, the one he received in 12-04 is due to expire in
 The problems are in getting your physician to write you an Rx for #100 and getting the pharmacy to dispense an unopened bottle of #100 . The pharmacy dispense unopened bottles of the bottle .
 Save them and add them to your back up prescriptions, assuming they come in open bottles . Save them as well as your back-up prescriptions .
 In my opinion, you should never have less than a 2-month supply of all of your prescription medications on hand . In this article, we asked readers to share their tips on how to get the best prescription medications .
 The next time, get the doctor to write your refills a little early and go to a different pharmacy . Maybe that's easier said than done .
 Ask your doctor about keeping a single course of antibiotics on hand that he is most likely to prescribe if you get sick . Ask about what antibiotics he is likely to use if you are sick .
 Generally, a broad-spectrum oral antibiotic is best; it will treat the most illnesses . It will treat most illnesses, but it will also treat most of the time .
 Antibiotics can be used once a year or more often in the U.S. You have a built-in rotation system .
 Always be sure to take the full course of treatment, usually 7 or 10 days . Always be careful to take a full course, usually seven to 10 days of treatment .
 If you walk out of your doctor's office with any questions it’s your fault, not the doctor's . If you have any questions, it's your fault not your doctor .
 Don't let him shine you on, you are paying him for his services and that includes information . Don’t pay him for your services, that includes info .
 WebMD also as a dictionary function, try typing in a word you don’t know . WebMD is also used as a search function .
 I didn't know what a Whipple Procedure was or what the big deal was that I didn’t have cancer until after the surgery . "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say, but I'm glad I'm not having cancer," she says .
 The operation took 9V2 hours and they kept me so doped up I didn’t even know my name. Yeah, right, that’s why the operation took nineV2 . The operation was so long it took nine hours to complete, he said .
 "They have this Russian redheaded nurse in the recovery room, va-va-va,voom," she said . "I don't think it's OK. They have a Russian nurse," she added .
 Just don’t let them give you extra pain medication, especially if you are on an epidural . Nice legs, about a D .
 Sharon turned 60 on February 12, 2007, and Gary turned 64 on March 23, 2007 . Sharon and Gary celebrated their 60th birthday together . Sharon is now 65 years old .
 Derek didn't get blown up and the Russians and Chinese didn't attack . That was the most notable thing of the spring of 2007 except that Derek didn’t get blown-up .
 By the end of July, when Derek finally showed up in one piece, the price of gas was $3,719 in Flippin, Arkansas . The price of gasoline in the state of Arkansas rose to almost $4,000 .
 Social Security and Supplemental Security Income beneficiaries will receive a 1.0 percent COLA for 2003 . The increase in the Consumer Price Index from the third quarter of 2001 through the third . quarter of 2002 . Social Security recipients will receive 1.5 percent increase .
 More than 47 million Americans will get a 2. percent increase in their Social Security checks starting in January . The increase means an additional $25 per month for the typical retiree . The typical Social Security check will increase by 2.5 percent .
 Almost half of that gain will be absorbed by a record increase in Medicare premiums . Medicare premiums are set to rise for the first time in Medicare history .
 The cost of living adjustment announced by the Social Security Administration will be the largest percentage gain since a 3. percent increase in 2001 . The increase is expected to be the biggest percentage gain in the past decade .
 Medicare premium increases are fully offset by the increases in Medicare premiums . However, they are not included in the increase in Medicare rates .
 Although Balad was in the Sunni Triangle, most of the fading insurgency was in other cities, towns and villages . They’d been lucky and although Balad is in the Sunnis Triangle, it was not a Sunni insurgency .
 He’d not hooked up with 1 of the 2 tank units in Shreveport and was to now with the Arkansas National Guard, counter battery target acquisition . He'd been with the National Guard since 2007 .
 The town's largest employer, the manufacturer of “Ranger” Bass Boats, wasn’t selling a lot of boats . The town’s largest employer was the company that makes "Ranger" bass boats .
 Flippin was home to Actronix, ArkPlas Products, Inc., Micro Plastic, Inc. Mountain Home Mold & Manufacturing, Ranger Boat Company and Rebrod Boat Company .
 Derek and Mary were better off financially than ever at any time in their lives . Derek says they are now financially stable . Mary says she and Derek are happy to be able to afford to live with the rest of their life .
 The rent from the second house nearly paid the house payment on the property . The second house was nearly paid for by the rent .
 While on active duty, Derek was bringing in more income than when he wasn't working at a civilian job . Groceries were more expensive, but Derek was able to afford to buy groceries .
 If Derek wanted to go in with him replacing the gas, he could do all of his fill ups from the tank . He could replace the gas himself with the gas .
 Derek told his Dad that his unit wasn’t being replaced and Bush intended to stop replacing the units when they rotated home . Derek said his unit was not being replaced .
 In August 2007, someone tested another nuclear weapon in the Indian Ocean .
 NORAD picked up the test this time too, but no one knew who had tested the weapon . NORAD also picked up this time, but it's not known who tested it .
 CNN says Israel, Iran and North Korea are likely suspects . CNN: Israel, North Korea, Israel and Iran are the three countries most likely suspects in the bombing .
 The only people who needed to test weapons were the newest members of the Nuclear Club, North Korea and Iran . North Korea, Iran and North Korea are the only ones who tested nuclear weapons .
 The Russians again reported that Iran had returned the expired uranium, just like they’d promised . Iran returned the uranium, but it was returned just like the Russians had promised .
 Iran steadfastly denied permission to the IAEA to examine its reactors because their agreement with Russia guaranteed they were in full compliance . Iran's deal with Russia guarantees they are in compliance, Iran says .
 The Director of National Intelligence is a United States cabinet-level official coordinating all 15 components of the Intelligence Community . He is the principal intelligence adviser to the President and the statutory intelligence advisor to the National Security Council .
 Creating the post of DNI was one of the recommendations in the report by the House-Senate Intelligence Committee investigating the September 11 th attacks .
 President George W. Bush named United States Ambassador to Iraq John Negroponte to the post in 2005, pending confirmation by the Senate . President Bush named Negropante on February 17, 2005, President Bush .
 President Bush’s first choice for Director of National Intelligence was Robert Gates, who declined the nomination . Gates was the former Director of Central Intelligence Agency Robert M Gates .
 On April 21, 2005, John Negroponte was confirmed by a vote of 98 to 2 in favor of his appointment as Director of National Intelligence . He was sworn in by President Bush on that day .
 The U.S. intelligence community had 2 real problems, the lack of Humint due to an over dependence on technology and the inability of the 15 intelligence agencies to share the information they gathered .
 Each of the 15 agencies felt that their information was proprietary and didn’t want to share it .
 No doubt the post was envisioned as a clearinghouse where the intelligence of the different agencies could be combined into a comprehensive report . The post was intended to be a clearhouse of the various agencies .
 That assumed that each of the 15 agencies wouldn’t hold anything back from the Director of National Intelligence . That assumption was that each agency would hold nothing back .
 Tachycardia is an abnormally rapid heartbeat and Bradycardia a slow heartbeat . Bradycarda is a fast and rapid heartbeat . Tachycardsia is a rapid and rapid heart rate .
 Ron has a bad heart and in 2004, the doctor implanted a pacemaker in his left shoulder . Ron has been diagnosed with a heart condition .
 Two of the most dangerous kinds of arrhythmias are ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation . The most dangerous kind of heart condition is ventricular heart arrhythmia .
 Ventricular fibrillation is when the ventricles of the heart begin to beat so quickly that they can’t pump blood anymore . It's when the heart beats so fast that it can't pump blood again .
 Cardiac arrest is a very different problem from heart attack to heart attack . It's often confused with a heart attack, but it's a different problem to a cardiac arrest .
 Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy is an exciting new kind of treatment for people with heart failure . Biventricular pacing is a form of cardiac pacing therapy .
 When the heart’s natural pacemaker stops working or doesn’t work properly, an implanted pacemaker can help . An implanted device can be used to keep the heart healthy and prevent problems .
 It sends out electrical signals to keep the heart beating at a normal rhythm . The heart beats at a rhythm rhythm when it is kept in rhythm .
 A standard pacemaker may not be enough for some people with heart failure . Pacemakers are usually attached to just one side of the heart . A pacemaker can be attached to the left or right of the chest .
 Simpler pacemakers are still available to treat people with heartbeats that are too slow, a condition called bradycardia . The pacemaker is still available in the U.S. and Europe .
 These are some of the smallest implantable devices often about the size of a wristwatch . They are often the smallest implants in the world .
 They attach to the heart with one or two leads and send impulses when necessary to keep your heart’s rhythm steady . These impulses are impulses that send impulses to keep the rhythm steady.
 Many implantable devices have more than one and sometimes all features . The implantable device can be used to carry a variety of features .
 They can be treated for a slow or irregular heartbeat but also be protected from sudden cardiac death . That way, they can't be diagnosed with a slow, irregular heartbeat . That's how they can be protected against sudden death .
 Gary and Sharon didn't need the home defibrillator or the Epi-pens when Ron and Linda visited . It didn’t appear to appear that the couple would need to use the home-defibrillators .
 There was a garden to weed, and a son newly home from Iraq to get to know again . There was also a son to weed and a new wife to weed .
 There still was the problem with the family being spread out between Iowa, Arkansas and California, but that couldn’t be helped .
 The best that they could hope for was some sign that the world was not going to destroy itself . The best thing they hope for is some sign of the world's future is that it will not destroy itself.
 Even with Derek home again, it was an uneasy summer in Flippin, Arkansas . "It was a summer of uncertainty," says Derek's mother .
 George W Bush had everyone out of Afghanistan and had accelerated the pullout from Iraq . Bush had already pulled out of Iraq and Afghanistan . He had accelerated pullout in Iraq .
 Fie was concentrating on getting Social Security Reform through the Congress but was still having a lot of trouble . Fie spent most of his life trying to get Social Security reform through the Senate .
 Just before the Labor Day holiday, Ron and Linda showed up for a visit . Ron, Linda and Linda visited the couple before the holiday holiday .
 The price with 1,000 rounds of Black Hills ammo and 20 magazines works out to be roughly $4,847.02.02 . The price is roughly $1,000 .
 They just kept building nuclear weapons and third stages for their Nadong-4 rockets . The North Korean state of state of the Korean peninsula is responsible for the development of nuclear weapons .
 Since the Nadong-4 rocket is liquid fueled, maybe the U.S. could launch if they ever saw the Koreans fueling all of the rockets at one time .
 The United States always promised that they wouldn’t do that. Then again, the U.S. always promised to do that .
 The real question would be on whether or not China and Russia would retaliate against the U.S. if the United States launched a pre-emptive strike on North Korea .
 The Russians reinstalled the refueling probes for the Chinese . That’s something to think about, especially since the Russians re-installed the probes .
 Congress commissioned the second Nuclear Posture Review in September 2000 . The first by this name took place in 1994, although the Reed Panel certainly qualified as such as such a review .
 A 10-kiloton nuclear bomb missing from the Russian arsenal was in the hands of terrorists, according to a report by the DOE’s top-secret Nuclear Emergency Search Team, presumably leaked to Time .
 Another secret document the NPR report was leaked to the Los Angeles Times Newspaper . Almost simultaneous with the DOE report being leaked to Time magazine, another secret document was leaked .
 The secret NPR report named seven countries as potential targets for tactical nuclear weapons . Russia, China, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Syria, and Libya are among the targets .
 It almost seemed that the scare of nuclear weapons in the hands of terrorists was used to justify an escalation in U.S. nuclear doctrine . The scare of terrorist possession of nuclear arms was used as a justification for the escalation .
 Two secret reports conveniently leaked to the mainstream media with such precise timing should raise critical questions . The timing of the leak of the reports raises critical questions about the timing of their release .
 "We want to make it very clear to nations that you will not threaten the United States or use weapons of mass destruction against us, or our allies or friends," Obama says .
 NPR preserves for the President all the options that a President would want in case this country or our friends and allies were attacked by weapons of mass destruction . General Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, further confirmed the accuracy of the information .
 Myers alluded to what a “surprising military development” might be something like Iraq attacking Israel, North Korea attacking South Korea, or China attacking Taiwan . Myers also alluded to the possibility of what a surprising military development might be .
 President Bush was asked at the 13 March 2002 White House Press Conference what his feelings were on building smaller nuclear weapons . Bush was also asked about the possibility of a smaller nuclear weapon .
 In six paragraphs of transcript he waffled all over the place covering everything from nuclear deterrence foolishness and warhead reduction negotiations to political gibberish and patriotic propaganda .
 In case you can’t tell from reading the excerpt, the guy who wrote the paper is absolutely opposed to nuclear weapons in any number or any form . The author of the paper says he is against nuclear weapons .
 The Chinese have made it very, very clear that they intend to retake Taiwan . The Chinese government has made it clear they want to take Taiwan back .
 If the U.S. exercised the nuclear option against China or Russia, the countries would retaliate . You had better believe that if the United States exercised a nuclear option, China and Russia would retaliate against it . The countries would then retaliate .
 H Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. should have been the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . H. Norman Schwarzpopf should be the Chairman, Joint Chiefs' Chairman of Staff.
 In 1990 he was chosen to run Operation Desert Storm, and was responsible for the “left hook” strategy that went into Iraq behind Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait . He is widely credited with bringing the ground war to a close in just four days .
 The next in line was General Peter Pace, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . General Pace is the next in the line of the next-line .
 He is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Nation’s second highest-ranking military officer . In this capacity, he is the nation's second highest ranking military officer.
 General Pace is the 17 th officer to hold the position and the first Marine . Pace is General Pace, the 17th Marine General to hold a post .
 President George W Bush nominated General Peter Pace of the United States Marine Corps to be the next Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . General Pace was nominated by President Bush in 2005 .
 Richard Myers will retire from the position on September 30, 2005 . Current Chairman Richard B Myers will step down as chairman of the board .
 "It’s exhilarating because I have the opportunity, if confirmed by the Senate, to continue to serve this great nation," she says . "I’m exhilarating," she said of her nomination .
 Gary had better stop running the second stoplight they put in by the Wal-Mart Super Center . The stoplight is the second in the area .
 The first Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was a General who had 5 stars on his collar and his name wasn’t MacArthur or Eisenhower . He was the first Chairman, not MacArthur, Eisenhower .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs was a Marine in 2007 & 2008 . Only the first Marine to ever hold the position .
 Only 4 Air Force generals and 4 Admirals had held the position, while 8 Army Generals had the job . Only 4 of the top generals had been in the Air Force .
 He didn’t meet him until years later when he was assigned to the 27th Infantry of the Hawaiian Division . He met him years later as a member of the Hawaii Division .
 His 12th Army Group was the largest ever commanded by an American general . At the end of operations in Europe, his 12th army group was largest ever commandered by a general .
 Leonard Gerow’s Fifteenth Armies, a force comprising 12 corps, 48 divisions, and 1. million men, is a force of 1.1 million men . The force includes 12 corps and 48 divisions .
 General of the Armies Omar Nelson Bradley left active service on 15 August 1953 . Bradley was the last general of the Army to leave active service in 1953 .
 In the 28 years before his death in 1981, he occupied himself in industry and was periodically consulted by civilian and military leaders . He died in 1981 .
 He retained an active interest in the Army, spoke at its schools, and frequently visited units and met with soldiers .
 There is no standard against which to compare Bradley as an army group commander . Bradley was a major commander of the British Army in Afghanistan .
 During the fighting in Europe, his calm and effective presence was important in times of crisis, as was his deft touch in handling subordinates . During the war, he was a key figure in the fight against the Nazis .
 It is difficult, for example, to imagine Patton without Bradley, who exploited the talents of that volatile commander as well as any man could have done . Bradley is a hero of the day for the U.S.
 His superb wartime record combined with his reputation for fairness and honesty, made him effective in what was probably his most difficult job, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 "He didn't fight for any principles, he didn’t fight to defend freedom or democracy or any abstract idea," he said . "He fought because he loved fighting," he added . CNN.com's John Sutter said .
 In his diaries you can read of his fear of flunking out of West Point . The prospect terrified him because he was certain that he would never be good at anything except being a general or a leader of a country .
 Patton's speech at the beginning of the movie is vintage Patton, an almost exact reproduction of a speech Patton actually gave to Third Army . Patton gave the speech to the Third Army in the Battle of the Civil War .
 Patton tells you in no uncertain terms that he is here to win, to destroy the enemy, and by God you’d better be too . It’s tough, and no-nonsense; Patton lets you know in no . uncertain terms . Patton is tough and no
 I don’t know if Patton directed traffic on the roads as he is shown doing in the movie, but it was very Pattonish thing to do .
 Patton joined a squad of G.I.’s in heaving a vehicle out of the mud . Patton did on at least one occasion get out of his staff car and join a squad . Patton's staff car was pulled from the mud by a team of soldiers .
 To those who had been wounded fighting for him he was always kind and considerate . To those . who had fought for him, he was also kind, considerate, he said .
 He could not comprehend the fact that other people didn’t share his love of violence for violence’s sake . But to those whose minds could not stand the horrible strain that war imposed on them, he was merciless .
 Not shown in the movie is Patton’s unlovable characteristic of turning on his subordinates once they surpassed him in their careers . Patton was an unlovable character who turned his subordinates on .
 Patton had nothing but good to say about Bradley, until Bradley was promoted over Patton’s head . Patton savaged Bradley in his diary, whereupon he savaged him in the diary .
 It is hard not to feel sorry for Patton as he desperately seeks his superiors’ approval to carry the war on eastward into the Soviet Union anything, just to have a war to fight . And although mankind’s single greatest stroke of good fortune in the 20th century was
 Those who have Jewish blood, or who were otherwise marked for death by the Nazi state, owe him a great debt of gratitude for his pivotal role in destroying that state .
 Had he been born German, Patton would surely have fought just as devotedly for the Nazi side . Patton was born in Germany, but he fought for the Nazis .
 At the recommendation of the Chairman of the Joint Chief’s and the Secretary of Defense, we are increasing our land forces in South Korea, says President Obama .
 Recent intelligence has revealed a situation which requires our immediate attention . Recent intelligence revealed that the situation requires immediate attention. The situation has been described as a 'major concern'
 All passes and leaves are cancelled and members of the military should report to their units . For the interim, all passes and leave are cancelled . The military is in full effect .
 Secretary Rice will present this matter before the U.N. Security Council tomorrow afternoon . Rice will be presenting the matter to the United Nations Security Council .
 I will continue to report to the American people as the situation develops, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 “If this doesn’t break until after they get there, maybe there will be time for them to get here,” Gary announced .
 Until the 82 nd lands in Korea, the North won’t really have any reason to invade the South .
 Jennifer and Brenda and their families can be here in 3 hours so tell them to make sure they bring everything that they need . Jennifer and her families can't wait to arrive in order to help the families .
 Zero-Dark-Thirty is a half-hour after midnight, but commonly used to describe any event that is scheduled to take place after midnight and before sunrise . The term is used to refer to events that take place before midnight .
 The President didn't tell the nation that he had ordered the Carrier Battle Groups to sortie as soon as they had stores aboard . What the President didn’t tell the . nation was ordering the Carrier . Battle Groups .
 Anyone missing would be hauled to the CBG aboard a C-2A Greyhound . Under the circumstances, anyone missing the movement would have to be hauled .
 Personnel would be forward deployed to catch up with the CBGs out of Japan . Once the CBG passed the range of the Greyhound, personnel would be deployed .
 Neither did he tell the nation that the U.S. military was on DEFCON 3 or ready to advance to 2 . The president did not say that the United States military was ready to move to DEFON 2 .
 The Depart58 merit of Homeland Security raised the Threat Level to Orange from Yellow . This was announced by all of the networks and cable news channels .
 All submarines not in yards for repair were ordered to sortie, too . All submarines that are not in the yards for repairs were also ordered sortie .
 Emergency sortie plans are contingency operations to evacuate ports in an orderly way in the event of national or local emergency . The emergency sortie plan is a contingency operation for ports to be evacuated in the country .
 These plans are often implemented in the event of hurricanes or other dangerous weather . These plans often come in response to dangerous weather events .
 Material Conditions establish the fighting integrity of the ship and maintain its survivability . Material conditions establish the ship's fighting integrity . The ship was designed to be able to withstand any weather conditions .
 It is set when the threat to the ship is minimal, during working hours when in port, or when there is no danger of attack or bad weather .
 It is set immediately and automatically when general quarters are sounded . It is automatically activated when the sound is heard .
 It is also set when entering or leaving port during wartime, to localize damage and control fire and flooding, or at any time the Commanding Officer deems it necessary .
 Underway Replenishment ; Vertical Replenish ; Air Operations; Air Operations . Amphibious Operations; . Transit of known or suspected hazardous navigation areas . Underway .
 A Severe Condition reflects a severe risk of terrorist attacks . Severe condition reflects the threat of terrorism in the United States .
 Protective Measures are not intended to be sustained for substantial periods of time . Under most circumstances, the Protective Measures for a Severe Condi59 . Crippling of the disease is not expected to last long .
 In the event of a national emergency, a series of seven different alert Conditions can be called . The alert conditions can be used in emergencies .
 EMERGCONs are national level reactions in response to ICBM attack . Normal peacetime readiness, increased intelligence and strengthened security measures . DEFCON 5 is normal peacetime ready for normal use of force . Normal intelligence, enhanced security measures and increased security measures are normal .
 Major attack upon United States forces overseas, or allied forces in any area, and is confirmed either by the commander of a unified or specified command or higher authority or an overt attack upon the United States .
 Emergency which exists when attack upon Continental United States, Alaska, Canada, or United States installations in Greenland by hostile aircraft or missiles is considered probable, is imminent, or is taking place .
 Sharon and Gary had replenished the cash in the basement . They took it and their ATM card to the Wal-Mart Super Store . Sharon had a lot of cash in their basement and they replenished it .
 Wal-Mart supports 76,444 supplier jobs in the state of Arkansas . As a result of the relationship with these suppliers, Wal-mart supports nearly 80,000 jobs in Arkansas . Wal-Wal-Mart’s relationship with suppliers is critical to its success .
 Union grocery store employees, especially in California, hate them . However, union grocery store workers hate them. They say they're not unionized .
 The store is right down the street at the new green-yellow-red stoplight and the Threat Level is Red . The new stoplight is at a stoplight on the corner of the intersection .
 Sharon and Gary price shopped for prescriptions in California . Gary and Sharon went to the pharmacy in California to buy prescriptions .
 Wal-Mart not only had the lowest price, they gave a discount for people on Medicare . The discount was a big advantage for Medicare recipients . Wal-mart also had the cheapest price .
 At the moment, the pharmacist was very understanding and didn’t make them wait one more day to refill their prescriptions . The pharmacy was very quick to refill prescriptions .
 The nice thing about the Super Store, among other things, was the size of some of the packages . The Super Store is a Super Store in New York City .
 Derek paid for the entire group of purchases with cash . Derek paid the difference in cash and the entire purchase .
 Mary and the kids were welcome to stay at her folks' house, along with her folks or at their home, it was a very short distance away . They only lived a short distance from the Wal-Mart and Mary was able to stay with the kids .
 Brenda and her ex-husband plus their little boy were among the first people to show up . Brenda's ex-wife and her son were among those who showed up .
 Gary got out the folding beds in the basement and Ronnie Joe helped him set them up . Ronnie Joe also helped Gary set up the beds . Gary and Ronnie got out of the basement basement and set up them .
 Ron called to tell Gary that David, Lorrie, Amy and 7 kids were at his house . Ron called Gary 13 hours after the President broadcast his message to the nation . David and Lorrie were at Gary's house .
 Gary said that they should just stay there and put Brenda on the phone to her Dad . Gary said he should just put her on the call to her dad . Brenda's dad said they should stay there .
 On a straight through drive between Ron and Gary’s it was maybe 19 solid hours, depending upon your speed . The drive was between Ron's and Gary's home .
 Ron and Linda told Brenda and then 61 Jennifer just to stay put for now . Brenda and Linda said they were going to stay with Jennifer . Linda and Linda are still in the care of Jennifer .
 Damon, Derek and Mary and their 3 kids would have 15 people not counting themselves . Damon and his girlfriend, and hopefully his 3 kids, would also be there . Derek, Mary and Mary, and Damon, Damon and Mary were also there .
 Mark and Paula arrived before him and his bunch . That little detour meant that they arrived before he and his group .
 Linda tried to get in touch with her sister, Ron says, but couldn’t get an answer . Linda's sister says she's never heard from her sister . Ron says he's not sure if Linda will be able to contact Linda again .
 Paula called her Dad and her aunt was at Ron’s house . When Mark and Paula got to Gary's house, Paula called Paula's Dad . Paula's aunt was also at Ron's house .
 The Security Council at the U.N. got bogged down in an argument after Condi made her speech . Condi spoke at the United Nations in New York City . She was the first woman to speak at the UN .
 Airliners were pressed into service to get the 101st Airborne personnel to Korea . Commercial cargo carriers were loaded up with military hardware and sent off as well .
 When the original aircraft arrived back in the U.S. after delivering the 82nd Airborne, they rotated crews and began loading the 10th Mountain Division . The original aircraft were used to load 10th mountain Division .
 The 82nd Airborne Airborne is stationed in Fort Bragg, North Carolina . The flying time from San Francisco to Seoul is about 12 hours .
 The flight could take at least 16 hours, each way, if they don't have to refuel . That makes the flight to the U.S. from New York to San Francisco .
 Over the last decade, the 10th Mountain Division has been involved in more deployments than any other division in the Army . The division has been deployed to Afghanistan and Iraq .
 Ronnie Joe was watching Geraldo on FOX on FOX and Geraldo said that the country was at DEFCON 2 . Ronnie Joe says that the government is on the verge of a nuclear war . Geraldo says the country is now in a state of emergency .
 It seemed to Gary that if the government wanted the country to know that, they would have told the country . Gary said that if they wanted to tell the country that they had done so, they should have told them .
 This was the second time in his life that he’d been though a DEFCON 2 situation . This was his second time that he had been through such a situation, he said .
 SAC responded by establishing Defense Condition Three . SAC ordered B-52s on airborne alert on 22 October 1962 . The Air Force responded to the request .
 The next day SAC declared DEFCON II, a heightened state of alert, ready to strike targets within the Soviet Union . Tension grew and the next day the SAC was on heightened alert . SAC said it was prepared to strike Soviet Union targets .
 A Defense Emergency meant they were attacking somewhere overseas and an Air Defense Emergency . North American or Greenland was the target of an air defense emergency .
 It was a good thing they had picked up another dozen 57ounce cans of coffee the way it was going . The coffee shop was full of more than a dozen cans .
 Costco is generally about the same price as Sam Club or the Super Stores . By the way, Costco is about the price of other stores .
 It had been one hell of a lot easier to get some deli food like potato salad, macaroni salad and hamburgers than to try and fix meals for that many people .
 Gary didn't have a lot of guns and there was plenty of room in the storage cabinet he used as a gun safe for the weapons . Gary didn’t have a large number of guns .
 The North Koreans withdrew 5km and the President lowered the DEFCON from 2 to 3. The North Korean withdrew 5 km and the president lowered the DeFCON to 3 .
 NORAD was tracking a pair of North Korean satellites that the North Koreans had launched into polar orbits in 2006 and 2007 . NORAD tracked the satellites in polar orbits . North Korea launched the satellites into polar orbit in 2006-2007 .
 Both satellites were schedule to pass over the United States at approximately the same time 3 days hence . Both satellites are scheduled to pass through the U.S.
 Space Command assumed they were spy satellites but the North Koreans had remained mum . Space Command had always assumed it was spy satellites . North Korea has remained mum on the matter .
 The United Nations was helpless to sanction the North Koreans and the Security Council dropped the matter . The North Koreans had never crossed the DMZ .
 Dubya decided to continue the troops transfer to South Korea, just in case . Dubya: "It's a good thing that we're not going to be in danger"
 Critics in the House and the Senate immediately got on the media and began to complain loudly . Critics in both houses immediately began to criticize the bill . The bill is expected to be signed into law by President Obama .
 A substantial portion of the United States Commercial air assets were busy transferring remnants of the 101st and the 10th Mountain Division to Korea . The FCC kept commercial airlines grounded until the assets returned from Korea and could be returned to service .
 Gary gave the same amount of money to Ron and Linda’s daughters and they took off for Cedar Hill . Gary gave them the money and the girls took off to Cedar Hill.
 Both groups of children were planning on driving straight through to their destinations . Both groups were planning to drive straight through .
 Gary was allowing Lorrie and Amy 24-hours because it’s never fun to travel with chil63 dren, regardless of their age . Amy and Lorrie were able to stay together for 24 hours .
 It took them 30 hours because they stopped and catnapped somewhere in Oklahoma . It took the team 30 hours to get to Oklahoma, Oklahoma .
 OPEC agreed to cap oil production at the current level . OPEC concluded an emergency meeting and agreed to the cap . OPEC is the world's largest oil-producing group .
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average slid $275 at the news Space Command had projected the paths of the North Korean satellites . Space Command projected paths of N. Korea satellites .
 The satellites would be in a nearly synchronous pattern on the 3rd day . One would bisect the eastern half of the U.S. and the other the western half . One of the satellites would have a nearly synchronized pattern .
 Space Command hadn’t realized that the North Korean satellites had the ability to reposition themselves, until now . Space Command hasn't realized that North Korea satellites can reposition itself .
 Amy had not only brought her kids, she’d brought Baby, Scrappy and the cats . Amy had also brought Baby and Scrapy, the cats, and Amy had brought them to the hospital .
 "You go ahead and issue the necessary instruction to our military units. You go ahead," he said . "I'm going to give you the necessary instructions," he added .
 A nuclear weapon detonated in or above the earth’s atmosphere can create an electromagnetic pulse . A high-density electrical field can be created by a nuclear weapon detonating in the atmosphere .
 EMP acts like a stroke of lightning but is stronger, faster and briefer than a lightning strike . EMP is a weapon of destruction that can be detonated in a matter of seconds . EMP can be used to send a message to anyone who needs it .
 EMP can damage electronic devices connected to power sources or antennas . EMP can seriously damage electronic gadgets connected to the power sources .
 This includes communication systems, computers, electrical appliances, and automobile or aircraft ignition systems . This includes automobile or plane ignition systems and communication systems .
 The damage could range from a minor interruption to actual burnout of components . The damage is expected to range from minor interruption or burnout .
 Most electronic equipment within 1,000 miles of a high-altitude nuclear detonation could be affected . Most of the equipment is located within a radius of the detonation .
 Battery powered radios with short antennas generally would not be affected by the changes .
 EMP is unlikely to harm most people, but it could harm those with pacemakers or other implanted electronic devices . Secretary of Energy said there was a limit to how much his department could do .
 The millions of miles of wire that made up the electrical grid would act as antennas in the event of an EMP attack . An attack would probably take the electricity grid down for an unbelievably long time .
 EMP attack could kill people who had pacemakers . The people of the U.S. should be warned .
 Dubya had his Press Secretary call an emergency news conference and give the news to the nation . Dubya's Press Secretary called the news conference to give the nation the news .
 The repositioning of the satellites was a ruse to attract the US’s attention off the growing crisis in Korea, it has been claimed . The move was meant to attract US attention away from the Korean crisis .
 There was so much going on that it was like trying to rub your head and tummy and chew gum at the same time . There were so many things going on at the end of the night that was difficult to keep up with .
 In South Korea the United States was still trying to match all of the soldiers with their equipment and move them to a position between the DMZ and Seoul . The U.S. was trying to move the soldiers to a new position in the South Korean DMZ .
 The Herculean effort had moved 2 Divisions to South Korea in 54 hours and the third was on the way . The third division had been moved to the South Korean border .
 No one had thought it possible, but they didn't talk about it, they just did it . "They didn't think it possible," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It was a miracle," says Sutter.
 North Koreans came across the DMZ like it wasn’t even there . The 10th Mountain Division was preparing to land in Korea when the North Koreans crossed it .
 They made it 3km into South Korea before anyone was able to react and put up a serious defense . They were able to make it into the country before anyone could react .
 China and Russia raised their alert status and the United States responded in kind, returning to DEFCON 2 and raising the Threat Level back to Red . The U.S. raised the threat level back to the lowest level of the threat levels .
 The White House recommended that the local governments impose a voluntary dusk to dawn curfew until the extent of the threat is known . Local governments are urged to impose a curfew .
 China had made a lot of promises to Kim Jong-il in return for him distracting the Americans . China had promised promises to North Korea in exchange for distracting the U.S.
 Among those promises was a promise not to press on the nuclear question . Among the promises was not press on nuclear questions .
 Using their new ships and their old ships, the Chinese were able to attack Taiwan with over 200,000 troops . The Chinese used the new ships to launch their attack on Taiwan . Using the old ships and new ships, they attacked Taiwan using their new and old ships .
 They also had 80 Backfire C bombers loaded with conventional weapons . They were able to stage a Blitzkrieg on Taiwan .
 The United States was committed to the defense of Taiwan and moved to DEFCON 1. The U.S. moved to Taiwan on the first day of the year .
 China introduced three new types of ballistic missiles in the 1990s to replace the older generation liquid-propellant DF-3, DF-4 and JL-1 . China introduced the land-based DF-21 and DF-31, and the submarine-launched JL
 DF-21 intermediateand DF-31 longrange ballistic missiles are both solid propellant, road-mobile missiles with shortened launch preparation times and improved accuracy . The DF-22 and DF-30 are both road-mobbed missiles with shorter launch preparation .
 DF-31 A has been given real ICBM capability by increasing its range to 10,000km . An improved version of the DF-32, known as DF-30 A, has also been given ICBM capabilities . DF31 A is a new version of an improved version known
 This would be sufficient to cover the entire western portion of North America . This would have been enough for the entire Western portion of the country .
 There is also evidence showing that China was developing MIRV capability for the DF-31 A and JL-2 to improve their strike capabilities .
 DF-4A was upgraded in the early 1990s under the name of the CZ-1D space launch vehicle project . The missile has an extended range of 8,000-10,000km and has a range of 10,000 km .
 DF-5A was upgraded to an extended range of 13,000km, enabling it to strike any corner of the earth from China . The DF5A has been upgraded to a range of more than 13,500km .
 Both missiles are deployed in ‘ready-to-launch’ status in silos located in central China . The missiles were deployed in 'ready to launch’s silos in China .
 The missile is a silo-based, three-stage, liquid propellant ballistic missile . Developed by China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology .
 The missile carries a single 2 megaton nuclear warhead and has an effective range of 12,000km . The missile has a range of more than 12km .
 DF-31 is a three-stage, solid fuel, 8,000-10,000 km range ICBM . It could reach targets in all of Europe, the west coast and several northern Rocky Mountain states of America .
 DF-31’s characteristics include road mobility, advanced materials engineering for payload and booster, improved solid-fuel propellant as well as endoatmospheric re-entry decoys, making it very difficult .
 The numbers of missiles sounds small, but that was in 2003 and they didn’t have MIRV’s . The numbers were smaller than the missiles used in 2003 .
 The year is 2007 and maybe we should change our assumptions about how many missiles China has . China's missile arsenal is the largest in the world, according to experts .
 It was reported in 2004 that North Korea had as many as 7 nuclear weapons . Back in 2004, it was reported that North Korean had 7 nuclear arms .
 It doesn’t seem to make much sense to have more missiles than you have warheads . The U.S. has a stockpile of missiles, not warheads, it seems to make sense .
 The entire world is angry at the United States of American and accuses the U.S. of being a Hegemon . The United States is accused of being an American . The U.N. should not be allowed to be ruled out of the world, says President Obama .
 If the U.S. learned a single lesson from 9/11, it ought to be that there are people out that that don’t like the United States and are willing to die to prove their point .
 Osama says he never expected the WTC to collapse, although he was happy that it did . Osama says that he never saw the WTC collapse . Osama: "I never expected it to collapse"
 The North Koreans and the Chinese are Communists and unless I recall incorrectly, Communists aren’t big on religion . North Koreans are Communists . The North Korean and Chinese are Communist .
 They may have some issues with the U.S. approach to problems, but it's not necessarily about religion, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Boys haven't worn ties to school in my lifetime and I haven't seen a schoolgirl in a dress since the 1950’s . I haven’t seen a girl wearing a dress for school in a long time . I’m not sure if boys will wear ties
 The suitcase nukes only have a blast radius of -360 meters . However, it might be very appropriate if terrorist had suitcase nuclear nukes .
 The reason is that we wanted to persuade the Russians we wouldn’t make a first strike . The reason for the delay was that we would not make a strike, it is said .
 The Americans and South Koreans didn’t pursue them as they were still getting organized . They were not pursued by the Americans or South Koreans .
 Nobody knows where the boomers are except for the people aboard the boats . The boomers have been missing for more than a decade .
 The boats can be staged to a particular level of preparedness and put on hold, if need be . The boats are staged to particular levels of readiness and can be put off if needed .
 Under this circumstance, it depends on whether they been given the PAL codes and put on hold for 6 hours or not given the codes and are waiting to receive them .
 In the former instance, they may end up launching when the hold period expires if they haven’t received orders countermanding their previous orders . In the other instance, the company could launch when they don't receive new orders .
 Board of Directors of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists moved the minute hand of the ‘Doomsday Clock’ The clock debuted 55 years ago, the same setting at which the clock debuted .
 Since the end of the Cold War in 1991, this is the third time the hand has moved forward .
 The Discovery Channel changed the name of the Wings Channel to the Military Channel . The Wings Channel is now known as the "Military Channel"
 EANS is an emergency action notification system and EAMAS is the emergency action message authentication system . EANS means emergency alert notification system. EANS also means the emergency alert system .
 Just because we keep telling ourselves that it will never happen doesn't mean that it won’t, it won't, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It will happen," he says .
 In the boomer program, they end up the drill by showing a test launch of a Trident I or Trident II missile .
 North Korea did what China wanted and China probably wouldn't honor it . Even if they did, North Korea probably wouldn’t honor it. China would probably not honor North Korea’s request .
 They aren't going to reply to missiles that obviously aren't aimed at them, they say . They aren’t going to respond to missiles fired at them. They’re not going to say yes, they’ve been hit by missiles .
 Americans don't give a crap about most things that don’t directly affect them . That’s a lot of BS; Americans give a little bit of crap about things they can't directly affect themselves .
 Most Americans think that people who believe in being prepared are crackpots until the hurricane blows down their house . Most Americans don't think that being prepared is a thing to do .
 Be a good neighbor and tell him that he can use it in a couple of months when you’re through with it, unless he has a gun . Tell him he can't use it until he’s out of the house .
 "Chris never loaned me the generator that I bought and paid for when we had a power outage," says Chris . "I bought it for when I bought it and paid it to be a generator," he says . "Chris's wife never borrowed it, but it's a good
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day for next week's gallery . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 The U.S. launched some nuclear tipped cruise missiles from something at the ships standing off Taiwan . If you were really smart, you’d accept your losses of ships and troops .
 NORAD sent 50 Peacekeepers and some of the Minuteman missiles to have Chinese for dinner . NORAD saw the missiles being launched and sent the Peacekeepers to have dinner .
 The President issued the PAL codes to the boomers and put them on a 6-hour hold . The PAL codes were put on a hold for 6 hours .
 W87 Peacekeeper warheads will be redeployed on Minuteman ICBMs under the Safety Enhanced Reentry Vehicle program . Some of the W87 warheads will also be deployed in the U.S. under the re-entry vehicle program .
 Each W87 warhead will displace one W62 or three W78 warheads currently deployed on Minuteman . W87 will replace W62, W62 and W78, which are currently deployed in Minueman .
 The U.S. has 44 combat-coded and an active force, 85 of B-52 bombers and a reserve force of 9 . The United States has 85 of its combat-coded B.52 bombers .
 During the Cuban Missiles Crisis in 1962, all of the nuclear bombs were loaded aboard the planes . The first time in history that the United States went to DEFCON 2 was the first time that the U.S. went to DeFCON2 .
 The military has a pattern of doing the same thing over and over again, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The military has done nothing wrong," says Sutter. "It is not the first time it has done anything wrong"
 A nuclear tipped cruise missile could be used to protect your bombers and bombs . That way if the Chinese react to your attacking their fleet with a nuclear tipped missile, all of your bombs and bombs are safe .
 It might be a good idea to use up the Minuteman missiles that still have the MIRV’d warheads, too, too . The missiles could be used in the U.S. to test nuclear weapons .
 Radiation drifted to the east, as expected . Smith had taken a hit, I wonder why, and the radiation drifted east .
 THAAD was still in the test stage and the U.S. didn't have an ABM umbrella . The United States didn’t have a similar umbrella, but the United States had a similar system .
 Maybe some of the military installations had the Patriot PAC-3 missiles and maybe not . Maybe not? Maybe not. Maybe not . Some of the Pentagon's military installations have the missiles .
 It had been nearly 30 years into the marriage before she found a spaghetti sauce she liked . She found a new recipe for spaghetti sauce in her marriage .
 Instead of tomato sauce and tomato paste, she used one can of diced tomatoes added near the end of the cooking process for every 2 pounds of meat . Her chili wasn’t thick and instead of thick, she added diced tomatoes to her chili .
 A person had 2 choices, eat the food the way she cooked it or put up with a woman who felt as if she’d been scorned . A person has 2 choices: Eat the food she cooked, or eat it the way the woman cooked it . A woman had
 Besides that was the way his mother fixed chili, except for the tomato part, he says . Besides that, he adds: "It's the way my mother fixes chili"
 You can always add more chili powder to your individual bowl of soup . Plus, you could always add a little chili powder in your soup .
 Shirley probably would have come to Flippin once she was totally convinced that there wasn’t any other alternative . Shirley would probably have come out of the hospital if she was convinced there was no alternative .
 Sharon and her dad got into a fight over Sharon's dollhouse that her dad had built for her 8th birthday years before . Sharon and Sharon didn't speak to each other anymore . Sharon's dad built the dollhouse for Sharon when she was 8 .
 Sister Shirley had recovered the Ark (as in Noah with wooden animals) and the dollhouse Roy had built and she paid a carpenter to restore them to their original condition . She then spent a fortune shipping them to California . Sister Shirley spent the fortune shipping the Ark and dollhouse to
 North Korea, China and the U.S. were, to varying degrees, Wastelands . The United States, North Korea and China were, for varying purposes, were, including the United States .
 The mightiest military power in the world didn’t just roll over and play dead because the country had been hit . However, the mightiest . military power . in the . world didn't just play dead . It was not the first time the US has been hit by a
 Much of projected power of the country had been at sea or in the air when the warheads hit . Much of the projected power had been in sea or air when it hit .
 It hadn’t been that difficult for the bombers to find someplace to land, there were places like Edwards AFB, Rosamond Dry Lake and Area 51 .
 There are 54 of the aircraft in the fleet and they moved back to Area 51 along with the B-2 bombers . The B-1s were used to carry out the mission . They are now back in Area 51 .
 The first B1 program was cancelled by Jimmy Carter in 1977 . Originally envisioned as a major upgrade in U.S. long-range capabilities over the B-52 .
 The B1-B is a multi-role, long-range bomber . It is capable of flying intercontinental missions without refueling . It can then penetrate enemy defenses .
 It can perform a variety of missions, including that of a conventional weapons carrier for theater operations . The U.S. Navy's largest aircraft carrier is based in Hawaii .
 The 7th Bomb Wing at Dyess AFB flew the last nuclear mission in October 1997 . Converting the B-1 B to the conventional role was a gradual process .
 Budget constraints and budget constraints meant the aircraft wasn’t as good as it could have been . The B-Series aircraft was developed at the beginning of the decade .
 Dale Brown wrote a book published in November of 1999 titled Battle Born . The book was published by Dale Brown in 1999 .
 A B-1 B Lancer unit in Nevada being trained into a new tactical strike unit . The unit is being trained to become a tactical strike force .
 You don’t have a TV or radio that can get any reception, but you can always play a movie or play cards or clean your guns or read a book .
 You could try to count the clicks on your CD V-717, assuming you have one . You could also count the clickings of your CD, if you don't have a CD .
 You know that your house is still standing, especially if you’re in Flippin or Cedar Hill . Cedar Hill residents say they’ve been hit hard by Hurricane Katrina .
 You know there’s a coating of fine ash because your CD V-717 is going crazy . You also know there's a coating . There's also fine ash coating on the CD .
 You know that the only news you’ll be getting for a while will be very local . Finally, you know that you'll be getting local news for the first time .
 You saw a lot of them at the Wal-Mart Super Store when you stocked up so you’re hoping most of them made it through and have enough supplies to last for a while .
 You know you have plenty, for now, but only because you're one of those crackpots who were convinced Armageddon was coming . You have plenty of time to spare, but that's not true .
 Gary saved all of the instruction manuals for the stove, hot water heater, dryer and furnace . He bought the jets to convert them to propane . Gary saved the manuals and bought them to convert the stove and dryer .
 You know you have a problem from the getgo because you only have 3,000-gallons of propane . Now you’re going to be running everything off that single tank .
 You know where the propane company is located and you can always barter for more, or steal it if necessary . But, you know where it is located, you can't go to buy it .
 When he moved to Flippin, Gary gave up on writing Patriot Fiction and concentrated on trying to stay alive as long as possible and getting ready for the 'Big One'
 To get there, he had to go through Little Rock, which was probably gone, only to get to Shreveport, which is probably gone also . He had to get there from Little Rock to Little Rock and then from Shrevepor, which were probably gone .
 They couldn’t call him on the phone and order him to active duty because the phone lines were gone . The phone lines are gone . They were used to order him into active duty .
 For a change, he could stay home and take care of his family instead of going God knows where and helping other families . "For a change of his life," he said, "I'm glad to be able to help other families"
 Amy would be grateful to be alive, but wondering why she had spent the last 10 years getting an education . Amy would have been grateful to have survived, but wondered why she hadn't been able to get an education for the last decade .
 Suck it in and establish residency in Arkansas; maybe you can be a politician . Maybe you can run for office in Arkansas .
 It would be very handy having David there, because you forgot to buy a pair of heavy-duty boltcutters . David says David is a good guy, and he's not afraid to be alone .
 Damon had spent the entire 2 weeks calculating where his next model rocket would land, once he found someplace to buy more motors and tubing, etc. etc. Damon decided to spend the rest of the time calculating where the rocket would go .
 Gary had spent the entire 2 weeks taking inventory of the things stored in the shelter . Gary spent the whole 2 weeks inventory taking inventory .
 'Because he was anal retentive, he marked down everything that was used and managed to get everything on a spreadsheet' 'Because of him, everything was marked down and documented on a computer'
 Ron hadn't been on 10-meters yet, but that could be for a dozen reasons, including the fact that he didn't know anything about radios . Ron hadn’t been on . 10-meterers yet .
 We’re going to need to go to Wal-Mart and find a generator and some wood cutting tools so David and the boys can harvest extra firewood . We'll need to buy a generator for the boys .
 "We can probably equip David and the boys pretty well. They sell firearms so we can probably . They sell guns so we . probably . probably equip them pretty well."
 Get what you can from the pharmacy, but don't take anything we don’t need . Here’s a list of our prescriptions, get what you need .
 I have a list of antibiotics to take but don’t take more than a couple of courses of treatment for each family . I have been given antibiotics to help with the symptoms of the flu .
 “I wrote down the quantities for a single course of treatment,” Gary instructed . Gary instructed.
 The scavenging went very well and Gary concentrated on making a list of everything they took . Gary made the list of things they took, including everything they found .
 After the country puts itself back together and Wal-Mart reopened the store, he’d come in and settle up with the store manager . He’s not sure how long he'll be back in the store .
 Derek left a note for the store manager telling him that he and his family had been in the store and taken some things . Derek left the note to the manager saying that he had been there and taken things .
 If you buy kerosene and store it for a very long time, it will varnish the inside of the jug, but it will still burn . If you store it in a jug for a long time it will be varnished .
 To keep a lamp burning evenly, trim the wick to keep it burning evenly . And don't forget to buy extra wicks, because to keep the lamp burning, trim .
 When the tsunami hit in December of 2004, the whole world rushed to the aid of the people in the Indian Ocean . The tsunami was the largest tsunami in history .
 The U.S. launched a single Trident II D-5 missile and ended the Korean War once and for all . South Korea probably took the opportunity to help North Korea recover after the launch of the missile .
 Countries that would no doubt move in to help the Chinese also surround China . China is surrounded by countries that want to help China .
 Even though the U.S. and Canada have had their problems, I can’t imagine the Canadians and probably the Country of Mexico would not lend aid to their North American cousins . The United States has had its own problems, but it's not surprising that Canada and Mexico have
 The United States helped Europe rebuild after WW II with the Marshall Plan . The U.S. helped rebuild Europe after the war .
 The United States would probably be inundated by the UN whether or not they’d been invited . The U.S. would probably receive an inundated list from the UN .
 Everyone knows that the ideology of the United States and the UN are at odds . U.S. and UN have been at odds for decades .
 Without doubt, the UN would move to Europe, probably The Hague, Netherlands, after a thermonuclear war involving the U.S. and some other country . The United States and other countries would be at risk of a nuclear war .
 The greatest danger from the UN being in the country would be the gun grab that would accompany the other countries lending aid. The UN would be in the midst of a gun grab, says Dr. David Cameron .
 The Wall Street Journal by ROBERT L BARTLEY, editor of The Wall St. Journal .
 We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights . Among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness .
 The government created by the Declaration of Independence two centuries ago is weighing war against Saddam Hussein before he acquires nuclear weapons . Saddam Hussein has nuclear weapons in Iraq .
 High-minded folks around the world are urging it to submit to the judgment of the United Nations as arbiter of when war is justified . The U.N. should not be allowed to decide when war should be justified .
 It does serve helpful functions on the likes of post and telephone service . It does help post and phone service .
 If the UN didn’t exist, we’d have to invent it. The UN is a forum where the world’s governments meet and talk. On a grander scale, it is a meeting of world leaders. It is also a forum for governments to meet
 The UN signed up before the U.S. Senate did to support the first Gulf War . At times it has even advanced the interests of security, writes Peter Bergen .
 Even in its darkest hours it promise a forum for settling disputes among nations without violence is a promise worth preserving . Even in the darkest hours its promise to settle disputes without violence was worth preserving.
 Whatever its pretensions, the UN is the epicenter of world cynicism, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The UN is an epicenter for cynicism, he says .
 Idealistic rhetoric is routinely invoked on behalf of power politics and often-sheer tyranny . Here idealism is often invoked by power politics .
 They range from long-standing democracies such as the United States and United Kingdom to one-man-all-the-vote politics in Cuba or Zimbabwe . One-man all-voters politics is a form of democracy .
 Andorra and San Marino are among the smallest countries in the world . They range from giants such as China and India to dwarfs such as Andorran and San Maradones .
 Kiribati and Maldives worry about vanishing if global warming raises sea levels on their Pacific atolls . Maldives are among the atolls in the region of the Pacific .
 Five “permanent” members have a veto in the Security Council; the favored members include France but not Japan or India . The five "permanent" members of the five have vetoes in the council .
 The definition of China changing at the convenience of “world opinion’s ‘world opinion.” China is not so permanent, with the definition of the country changing at a convenience of world opinion. China's permanent members are not permanent .
 Some 41% of the world’s population were “free,” enjoying political rights and civil liberties . Of these, 85% were ‘free’ with political rights, civil liberties, according to the World's most recent census .
 Another 59, with 24% of the world’s population, were “partly free,” with significant but abridged rights in particular one-party political systems . Another 59 were ‘partly’ free, with significant and abridging rights in
 The remaining 48 countries, or 35% of the world’s people, were “not free,” with no consent of the governed or respect for the individual . 35% were ‘not free’, according to the UN .
 The United Nations is what you get when you have this melange send representatives, confine them in a hothouse on the East River, stiring briskly, and tell them to go forth to solve the great issues of the world . The U.N. has been accused
 Some nations follow Marquis of Queensbury rules and others do not . In political pushing and shoving, too, some nations follow it too .
 The pariah is a nation rated free, indeed a nation of 23 million souls and the world’s 17th largest economy . The country is rated free and has the world's 17th biggest economy .
 Taiwan has been blocked from UN membership every year for 10 years now . The country has been trying to join the U.N. for more than a decade . Taiwan is the only member of the world's largest non-member state .
 The United States has just been readmitted to the UN’s 53-member Commission on Human Rights . The U.S. has just readmitted its membership to the Commission on Rights .
 It was voted off last year by opposition from the tyrannies and perfidy by the Europeans . The European Parliament voted against it last year . It is the first time the European Parliament has been voted off .
 Other commission members include such paragons of human rights as Cuba, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Vietnam and Zimbabwe . Other members of the commission include the U.S. and Libya .
 The agenda concerns much mischief over Israel, as well as efforts to revoke consultative status of Freedom House . Freedom House is a consultative body of freedom of speech .
 In President Bush’s UN speech in September, he said the United States is willing to return to the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization .
 It withdrew from UNESCO in 1985 after Congress sent its General Accounting Office to confirm that director Amadou Mahtar M’Bow had created a fiefdom without a trace of accountability, financial or otherwise .
 UN Secretary-General Kofi Anann thought it was a great victory when Saddam Hussein offered to talk about letting UN inspectors back into Iraq on the same terms that didn't work the last time .
 The important thing is not whether or not the inspections succeed in curbing weapons of mass destruction, that is, but whether they come under UN auspices . The UN says inspections will be conducted under the auspices of inspectors .
 President Bush tolled off all of the resolutions the UN Security Council passed in its better moments . Saddam Hussein has systematically violated these last 10 years, he said .
 The UN faces “a difficult and defining moment,” as the President put it, in progress toward its promise . The UN now faces ‘a difficult, defining moment’ in progress, he said .
 If it fails, it has no reason in justice or morality to claim deference from a government that has for two centuries now pursued Jefferson's principles .
 Kofi Annan’s actions with respect to the Food for Oil Program raised a lot of questions . As we later learned, Kofi's actions raised many questions, he says . He says Annan's actions in relation to the food for oil program raised questions .
 It would be better if the UN moved to The Hague or Brussels, it would get them closer to their constituents . The UN should be closer to its constituents, says David Cameron .
 Most Americans are independent thinkers and they don't like to be told what to do, says CNN's John Sutter . "Most Americans are pretty independent thinkers," he says .
 An all-out nuclear attack on the U.S. or China wouldn’t kill all of the people, regardless of what anyone says . An attack on China or the United States would kill all the people .
 Ask most people over 60 what the 7-10 Rule is and they maybe can't explain it, but they know it means that you have to stay in 77 a shelter for at least 2-weeks after a nuclear war .
 Depending on where they are located, some of those people might get a little extra radiation . Some of the radiation is likely to be in the form of radiation .
 If you don’t have Dosimeters or a Survey Meter, you’re going to need to limit your exposure . You need Dosimeters and Survey Meter .
 Three-Mile Island and Chernobyl remind us of our common sense . That’s common sense and we’ve had three-mile Island, Chernobyl to remind us .
 Keep the kids indoors as much as possible unless you have Potassium Iodide or Potassium lodate . Keep the children indoors as well as possible .
 India and Pakistan were at each other’s throats over the Kashmir issue . There was a lot of concern that one or both of the two countries would use their nuclear weapons .
 In 2004 and 2005, most of the concern was focused on Iran and North Korea . In 2005 and 2006, the main concern was Iran and N. Korea .
 Possibly, the citizens of the United States should be more worried about what will happen after a nuclear war than the actual war itself . U.S. citizens should be concerned about what would happen after nuclear war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The war will probably result in the loss of half to two-thirds of the population of the U.S., sooner or later, says George W. Bush . The war is likely to result in a loss of the United States, he says .
 Since the U.S. has a lot of tornados, let’s assume one-half out right in the first few months following the nuclear exchange .
 "They will either be immediate casualties or die from radiation sickness," says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The rest of this story is about what might happen afterwards, when the countries of the world rush to the U.S. and China to help us pick up the pieces . CNN's John Sutter says it's not clear what will happen after the crisis in Syria .
 It took about 3 weeks to get enough of the weather radio stations up and running for the President to address the country . It took three weeks for the weather to be able to do so .
 The attack that the U.S. experienced was at the hands of the Chinese government in their former capitol of Beijing, writes President Obama . The attack was in the former capital of Beijing .
 The U.S. will be under martial law with a dusk to dawn curfew . The curfew will be a dusk-to-dusk curfew .
 Any members of the U.S. Reserve military forces or the state National Guards are ordered to report to their posts, stations or bases, if possible . The National Guard is ordered to stay at home .
 Your government has been in contract with the governments of Canada, Mexico and Great Britain . Aid for both our country and China is forthcoming, the government says .
 FEMA will begin organizing camps for those members of our population that have survived . FEMA plans to start organizing camps after the disaster . FEMA will be looking at camps for survivors .
 I am advising you not to report to the camp established in your area if you do not require assistance . However, our resources will be stretched to the limit and I'm advising you to stay away from camp .
 I'm sorry, but I don’t see that I have any other choice in this matter. I’m sorry . I'm not sure what else I have to do with this matter .
 Presently Secretary Rice is in The Hague discussing the conditions that the UN may wish to attach to that aid . Rice is currently in the Hague to discuss the conditions .
 "I shall not allow the other nations of the world to dictate our form of government," says President Obama . "We will not allow other nations to dictate us," says Obama .
 I shall only remain in power for another year, however during that year I will do everything possible to hand the country over to my successor . I will hand the nation over to a functioning country, says President Obama .
 Stay tuned to the station you are listening to for further information . Stay tuned for more information .
 The President of the United States hadn’t revealed where he was located during his speech .
 The following Executive Orders are associated with Federal Emergency Management Agency that would suspend the Constitution and the Bill of Rights . The Executive Orders were associated with the FEMA .
 EXECUTIVE order 10990 allows the government to take over all modes of transportation and control of highways and seaports . The order also gives the government control of the country's seaport and highways .
 EXECUTIVE order 10995 allows the government to seize and control the communication media . The order was created by the U.S. government in 2003 .
 EXECUTIVE order 10997 allows the government to take over all electrical power, gas, petroleum, fuels and minerals . The government will take control of the country's electricity, gas and petroleum .
 EXECUTIVE order 10998 allows the government to seize all means of transportation, including personal cars, trucks or vehicles of any kind . Total control over all highways, seaports, and waterways is also allowed .
 EXECUTIVE order 10999 allows the government to take over all food resources and farms . The government will take over the government's food resources .
 EXECUTIVE order 11001 allows the government to take over all health, education and welfare functions . The government will take over health, welfare and welfare .
 EXECUTIVE order 11002 designates the Postmaster General to operate a national registration of all persons . The order is designed to register all persons in the United States .
 EXECUTIVE order 11003 allows the government to take over all airports and aircraft, including commercial aircraft . The government will be able to take control of airports and planes in the future .
 Executive Order 11004 allows the Housing and Finance Authority to relocate communities, build new housing with public funds, designate areas to be abandoned and establish new locations for populations .
 EXECUTIVE order 11005 allows the government to take over railroads, inland waterways and public storage facilities . The order also gives the government control of railroads and inland waterways .
 EXECUTIVE Order 11051 specifies the responsibility of the Office of Emergency Planning . Order gives authorization to put all Executive Orders into effect in times of increased international tensions and economic crisis .
 Executive Order 11310 grants authority to the Department of Justice to enforce plans set out in Executive Orders . It also gives authority to establish judicial and legislative liaison, to control all aliens .
 Executive Order 11049 consolidates 21 operative Executive Orders issued over a fifteen-year period . Emergency preparedness function to federal departments and agencies, consolidating 21 operative orders issued .
 The Federal Emergency Preparedness Agency will develop plans to establish control over the mechanisms of production and distribution, of energy sources, wages, salaries, credit and the flow of money in U.S. financial institution in any undefined national emergency .
 Congress cannot review the action for six months . It also provides that when the President declares a state of emergency, it cannot be reviewed by Congress . Congress can also review the actions of the President under the emergency .
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency has broad powers in every aspect of the nation . The agency is responsible for national disasters like Hurricane Katrina .
 Act of 1916 authorizes Secretary of the Army to take possession of any transportation system for transporting troops, material, or any other purpose related to the emergency . Act of August 29, 1916 .
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act enables the President to seize the property of a foreign country or national . President can seize property of foreign countries or national, according to the law .
 FEMA took over the powers of the federal government in 1979 . FEMA has been in charge of FEMA since 1979 . The agency is responsible for much of the country's federal government .
 The United States is withdrawing as a member of that august body, President Obama told Condi to inform Condi .
 At the moment, he told her; the United States had nothing to spare, especially not what remained of its military might . U.S. had nothing left to spare in the world, he said .
 Given that set of definitions, I think maybe a friend is better than an ally, but that's just one person’s personal opinion . Given that definition, maybe friends are better than allies, but it's just a friend .
 We could always count on England, even if the people were angry at the U.S. The United States. England. England . England. America. America .
 We were two peoples separated by a common language, according to George Bernard Shaw . Shaw: "We were two nations separated by the common language" Shaw: We were separated from each other by a language .
 The string that stuck in George’s craw was the UN insistence of that America disarm . The UN insisted that that U.S. disarm, George said .
 Some Americans might hand over their weapons, but there are many who would not . Many Americans would not hand over weapons, CNN's John Sutter says .
 If provoked, the citizens of the country would turn the disaster into another Civil War, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "If provoked, it would be a civil war"
 If FEMA pressed the public too hard, the President was equally certain that the same thing would happen . The President is also certain that if FEMA presses the public, the public will be pressed too hard to respond .
 Dick Cheney had addressed the Annual Meeting of the NRA in 2004 and given the membership certain assurances . Cheney had given the NRA membership assurances .
 The problem is simply that is an oxymoron, the state legislature . The state legislature is trying to pass a bill that would make it easier for Americans to sign .
 Gun control bills are just plain ignorant, and what is most frightening is that both are moving toward floor votes in their respective houses . Both of the bills are being voted on by both houses .
 SB 357, obviously named after the magnum handgun round, would mandate matching serial numbers on each bullet and bullet casing . The bill would mandate that all handgun ammunition have matching serial serial numbers . It would make ammunition used in crimes trace back to the original purchasers .
 Never mind the astronomical costs involved making such ammunition, or that it would create a monopoly for one company that has been touting its ability to make such ammo .
 The reality is that it wouldn't help solve crimes, and it could implicate innocent people . But the reality is, it wouldn’t help solve crime, it could incriminate innocent people, he says .
 The reality is that it would create as many problems as it might solve, confusing juries in serious criminal cases . It would create questions about otherwise obvious guilt or innocence .
 The bill would also create a registry of all these guns, they could go right to the registered owner and arrest him . Since the bill also creates a registry, police could arrest the owner .
 Since most guns used in crimes are stolen, this would not be a help at all . Most guns are stolen by people who commit crimes .
 It would make the chamber rough, making the gun less safe, making it less safe . It would probably cause it to jam occasionally, especially if the gun were dirty . The gun would also make it harder to shoot .
 Now you've left brass at a crime scene that points investigators the wrong direction . Now you’ve left brass on the scene that leads investigators to wrong direction.
 Never mind that registration is expressly forbidden by federal law or the costs involved in making guns with this feature . This would create the awful bureaucracy this would create .
 Massachusetts had a similar law pass several years ago . Justice department there is recommending it be scrapped because it has cost taxpayers an immense amount of money to run .
 It turns out that criminals who are stupid enough to be caught by the benefits either of these bills provide, usually leave a pile of other evidence that will convict them . The bills will be signed into law .
 Legislators know this legislation is stupid, but it’s a back door way to make gun ownership excessively expensive and onerous . It's a way to increase the cost of gun ownership, the author says .
 Blair had gathered his forces and sent them to the United States when Bush had given an all clear on radiation levels . Blair had been elected to a 3 rd term back in 2005 and he had gathered forces .
 The new President of Mexico, Roberto Madrazo, was ready with aid and troops, too . The new president of Mexico is expected to be in touch with his troops .
 Canada had been dealing with the problem from the outset because cities like Windsor and Vancouver had received fallout . Canada had to deal with the fallout because of the fallout from the issue .
 Groom Lake and Rogers Lake looked like parking lots with all of the bombers and fighters moved to those two locations . The two lakes were used as a parking lot .
 The Nighthawks had moved from Holloman to Area 51 and many of the other fighters had moved to Rogers . Area 51 is based in Area 51, located in the middle of the military base .
 It had been a challenge and heartbreaking for the pilots ferrying their aircraft to alternate locations . It was the first time they had been forced to leave their aircraft on the ground .
 They had witnessed several of the Chinese missile strikes and saw their country being destroyed before their eyes . They said they saw several missile strikes .
 There weren’t enough tankers to refuel all of the aircraft being moved and some had to land at commercial airports and refuel with Jet fuel . Other military units had dispersed according to long established plans and most made it through the attack .
 The President had them remain under cover until the radiation levels were something they could cope with . MOPPed up to level 4. The President kept them under cover .
 In mid-October, much of the country is cold and some parts have snow on the ground . Some parts of the U.S. is even having snow .
 A week before the President’s announcement, the troops were already out there effecting rescues . The troops are already working on rescues in Afghanistan .
 In areas where trouble was expected, they put on a show of force with their Bradley’s and Abrams tanks . The U.S. has been in the Middle East since 2003 .
 He’s had trouble assembling his antenna or he’d have been on the air earlier, he says . He'd had trouble assembled his antenna .
 Some of the kids had moved in with Robert . They were overcrowded in New Mexico but some of the children had already moved in .
 Neither man had any idea what had happened to Clarence because Birmingham had probably taken a strike . Neither man was able to find Clarence after he was found dead .
 The pair discussed getting together but dismissed the idea as being impractical . They also discussed the idea of getting together in the future .
 The Manager of the Wal-Mart store showed up at Derek’s wanting to know what he had taken and suggested strongly that payment was in order . Derek says the manager of the store called him to say that he had been taken .
 He offered to pay for everything with a check drawn on the Trust fund account up in Iowa . The check was drawn on a check from the trust fund account .
 The Manager didn't want to take an out-of-town check . Under the circumstances, the Manager didn’t want to . take out of town check .
 Gary wrote a check on Iowa and deposited it in their Flippin account to pay Wal-Mart . Gary wrote the check on the Iowa account to deposit it into the Flippins account .
 The Manager agreed to hold the check for a day and told Derek to get to work because they were shorthanded . Derek was told to get back to work as they were short-staffed . Derek says the check will be held for the next day .
 He was so happy to be reimbursed for the things they had taken; all of the paperwork on the weapons had gotten overlooked .
 Derek had a decision to make and since the President had only told the Guard and Reserve to report in if they could, he decided that, for a change, he couldn’t . Derek had to make a decision .
 The Russians couldn’t afford to provide aid, but they could provide soldiers and civilians to assist with the cleanup . The Russians could help clean up the mess .
 The United States bought a lot of their products, guns and ammo to name a few, and had provided homes for many of their criminals . The U.S. had provided many of the criminals with homes .
 The United States has taken care of a couple of thorns in Moscow’s side, China and North Korea . More than that, the U.S. had taken care for the North Korea and China .
 The United States had finally demonstrated a willingness to use its nuclear arsenal . The U.S. had finally shown it's willing to use nuclear weapons .
 Number wise, the Russians had more nuclear weapons on hand than the U.S. Number wise wise, Russia had more weapons than the United States .
 The U.S. had the delivery systems and they had been demonstrated . However, the United States had the systems and had demonstrated them .
 The President rescinded the order for the SSBN’s to launch their missiles when it was apparent that the Peacekeepers and Minuteman III missiles had done their job .
 The U.S. still had 14x24 missiles roaming the high seas, plus 2 of the SSGN’s . The United States still had a total of 14x 24 missiles .
 Israel was on full alert and had fighters standing by with nuclear weapons in case Iran got any ideas . Israel was also on alert with fighters standing ready with nuclear arms in case any nuclear weapons were needed .
 85-year-old says he has updated on the situation in the U.S. President Barack Obama has been critical of the situation .
 All of the state capitals and most of the major cities were hit in the nuclear exchange . Most of our major cities and state capitals were hit by the nuclear attack .
 The estimates of the loss of life remain unchanged, but at the moment, they are only estimates . The estimate of the death toll is still unchanged .
 I have accepted their offers and offers from Russia for relief workers . Russia has also offered to send relief workers to help in the wake of the earthquake .
 If you hear someone speaking Russian, please don’t shoot them, they are here to help . Please don't shoot them. They are in the process of helping people speak Russian .
 "The United States retains its ability to react to any other threats against this great country of ours," says President Obama .
 People have survived in all of the countries involved including North Korea, China and the U.S. of America . North Korea and China have been involved in the conflict .
 If your homes are habitable and you have sufficient resources, please remain there . If your home is habitable, please stay there . Please remain in the area .
 Efforts are already underway to reestablish supply chains, but we expect temporary shortages in the immediate future . Efforts to rebuild supply chains are underway already underway .
 If you observe looting, call the nearest law enforcement officer to handle the situation . If you see looting, contact the nearest police officer .
 In order for the defense system of any country to function, the governments have had to make an assumption . In order to protect the nation, governments have to make assumptions, the government says .
 They have had to assume that when called upon to do so, the men in the loop would push the button . They have assumed that when . called upon, they would push it . The government has had to deal with the situation .
 The dangers of going to a fully automated system were clearly demonstrated in the movie titled, War Games .
 There were probably other movies with the same theme, I know there were more, but I don’t remember the titles . "There were probably more movies with similar themes, but there were probably others"
 The U.S. would never make a first strike and anything they did was in retaliation . Americans who had the responsibility of activating the weapons have always had to do so .
 North Korea began fueling its nuclear missiles and the United States responded with a single Trident II D-5 from a boomer . The U.S. responded by sending a single missile from a single nuclear missile .
 The Red Chinese attacked Taiwan and the United States responded with nuclear cruise missiles . The U.S. responded with a series of nuclear missiles in response to the attack .
 Richard Widmark launched an RUR-5 ASROC at a Russian sub and the skipper of the boat responded with a snap shot of a nuclear torpedo . Widmark had James MacArthur so wound up he launched an . Rur-5ASROC launched at the Russian sub
 Powers Boothe refused to stop his mission to deliver a nuclear bomb with a B-52 . In the latter movie, he refuses to stop delivering the nuclear bomb .
 Of that movie, on critic said, “Okay first of all this is just like Dr. Dr. Martin. Martin’s "Dr. Martin" The film is based on Martin Martin's book, "Dr Martin Martin"
 If space command ever detected missiles they would launch the 86 bombers for survivability so they would have never been caught on the ground . The 86 bombers would have been launched by space command for survival .
 The President would not have been allowed to stay at the White House for a minute, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Russian President would not have used the old Teletype communications system . President Vladimir Putin used the system to communicate with him .
 It is so easy to criticize movies, most people were scared shitless by the movie . The movie was a horror flick, but it was the most scary movie ever .
 A B-47 with 2 nuclear bombs aboard looks just like a B.47 without 2 nuclear missiles aboard . A B.-47 without a nuclear bomb is a B-46 without a bomb bomb . The plane was shot down by the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s
 The base was even named after a pilot who was killed flying another dud, the YB-49 . The base is named after the pilot who died flying the plane .
 Glen W Edwards was selected to join the team of test pilots and engineers at Muroc who were then evaluating the Northrop YB-49, the all-jet version of the exotic flying wing bomber . Edwards was chosen to join a team of engineers and test pilots .
 After his first few flights, he was not favorably impressed, confiding to his diary that it was the darndest airplane I’ve ever tried to do anything with . The plane was the first airplane he had tried to fly in .
 Daniel Forbes was killed when the plane broke apart in the sky northwest of the base . Forbes was the pilot of the plane when it broke apart from controlled flight .
 Northrop’s design concepts were solid, but the means to implement them were still several decades away . Perhaps it is fair to say that Northrop's designs were solid but still a long way from being implemented .
 The YB-49 was the “wrong plane at the wrong time,” getting trapped in the transition between propeller-driven and jetpowered aircraft . The plane was a prototype of the World War II-era Air Force One .
 The first atomic bomb that was ever dropped was the Little Boy on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945 . The Little Boy was dropped on Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945 .
 The United States had built several of the Fat Man bombs and except for the plutonium core they were ready to go . The U.S. had built a Fat Man bomb .
 Preparations were being made for the delivery of operational atomic weapons to Tinian Island in the Pacific for use against Japan at the earliest possible date .
 Two weapon designs were available for use the gun assembly Little Boy bomb that used uranium highly enriched in U-235 . The implosion assembly Fat Man that used plutonium was also available . The Little Boy and Fat Man bombs were designed for use .
 After Trinity test, the next weapon that was available was the completed Little Boy . The first plutonium bomb core was detonated in Trinity test .
 Another Little Boy weapon would not have been ready for months, for this reason only one Little Boy unit was prepared . Only one unit would have been prepared for months .
 The Fat Man bomb only existed when assembly of the Fat Man unit with the plutonium core was completed shortly before the mission . In contrast many Fat Man bombs were on hand . The actual Fat Man Bomb was delivered against Japan only .
 They couldn't really bomb Tokyo because that’s where the Emperor of Japan was and it was the Emperor who needed to surrender . They couldn’t really . bomb Tokyo . It was the . Emperor who needs to surrender.
 You may have seen the TV movie about the last minute conspiracy to prevent him from surrendering . You may be able to watch the TV show about his last minute escape .
 Hirohito surrendered on August 15, 1945 and Japan signed the documents of surrender on September 2, 1945 aboard the USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay . Japan's surrender was signed aboard the Missouri in Japan Bay .
 History reveals that Stalin wanted his own atom bomb . By 1949, the Soviet Union had tested their first atomic bomb . The Soviet Union tested their own atomic bomb.
 After the bombing of Nagasaki, no nuclear weapons were ever fired in anger, except in the movies . No nuclear weapons have ever been used in anger since the bombing .
 The U.S. made the second first strike in history. And then I came along and the United States made the first first strike . The first strike was the first strike of its kind, the first in history .
 Amy stayed with Sharon, Gary and Gary and Damon and his family moved in with Derek and Mary . Damon and Damon moved to Derek's side of the road to stay with Mary and Sharon .
 Sharon could hide out in the basement when Audrey and Udell, Jr. got unruly .
 Gary practically lived in the basement, he liked the peace and quiet and he wanted to be near the radio in case Ron called again . Gary wanted the radio near his basement to keep an eye out for Ron .
 Think about how long it took to clean up lower Manhattan after 9/11 . Think about it and multiply the problem by at least 1,000 . Remember the time it took for the clean-up clean up in lower Manhattan .
 It appeared that it would take about 3 years just to clean up the mess the U.S. cities were in . The United States cities are in a state of chaos .
 Some cities had to be abandoned, for a while at least, they were simply too hot to demolish . Some cities were abandoned because of the hotness of the city .
 Electricity and natural gas wouldn’t be restored to Flippin for at least a year, officials say . Electricity and gas wouldn't be restored for a year .
 A 7kw portable generator isn’t intended to run that long and they needed to come up with alternatives . Derek’s home and spare house powered by a portable generator .
 It took the government 6 months to straighten out a system whereby they could pay the Social Security payments . The government took six months to fix the problem .
 The good news was that it resulted in a large check to catch up 6 months’ worth of missed payments . The check was a check for 6 months worth of missing payments .
 Gary and Derek had enough money to buy one standby system and only left with the problem of finding one . Derek and Gary were able to buy a standby system for $1 million .
 Ozark Power Company is located in Evening Shade, AR, northeast of Mountain Home, AR . They finally located a dealer .
 They didn't have any of the Onan generators but they did have the Kohler model 12RES-LP generators . They had them for $4,000 plus tax, delivery and installation .
 They were heavy-duty units that could run a very long time with nominal servicing . Heavy duty units could run for a long time without being serviced . They could be heavy duty units that can run very long .
 Kohler 30RES with ran on both LP and Natural Gas. Fat cats could put in a Kohler . Kohler ran on LP and natural gas .
 At $13,000, you could always get a home improvement loan to install one . They were expensive, but could always be used to install them .
 Gary used the radio in his truck to contact the Shelter and explained the problem . Gary used his truck's radio to call the Shelter .
 The United States changed after 9/11 and many argued the changes weren’t necessarily for the better . The U.S. changed dramatically after the terrorist attacks .
 We should have known back in 1993 when terrorists attacked the WTC the first time . The WTC was attacked by terrorists on September 11, 1993, 9/11 .
 In the run up to Y2k, a lot of Americans got concerned because the datafields in databases weren’t big enough and it might bring our computer systems down . The datafields were not big enough in databases to make computers work .
 Andrew was a small and ferocious Cape Verde hurricane that wrought unprecedented economic devastation along a path through the northwestern Bahamas, the southern Florida peninsula, and south-central Louisiana . Andrew was the first hurricane to hit the U.S. mainland since Hurricane Katrina .
 Damage in the United States was estimated to be near 25 billion, making Andrew the most expensive natural disaster in U.S. history . Andrew is most expensive disaster in United States history, with 25 billion dollars .
 Andrew was only a Category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale 1-5 rating . Andrew was the second Category 4 hurricane to hit the United States .
 The fact that no lives were lost in the U.S. due to storm surge is viewed as a fortunate aberration . Storm surge is seen as a lucky aberration in the United States .
 Dade County Grand Jury reported that ninety percent of all mobile homes were totally destroyed . The Grand Jury said that 90 percent of the mobile homes in south Dade county were completely destroyed .
 In Homestead, more than 99% of all mobile homes were completely destroyed . More than 100% of the homes were destroyed in Homestead .
 The Cold War was well and truly over, but it ended with a great big bang . It was the end of the Cold War, but the end came with a bang .
 Many people were far away from the targets of the Chinese missiles they could have . Lots of other people weren't and they didn’t, even though they were close to the targets .
 Their problem was that they weren’t prepared and guns were such nasty things. They weren't prepared, they weren't ready, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Their problem was ... not being prepared," he says .
 He'd been away from home when the attack came and although Shirley and he had lost their home, they’d managed to survive . Shirley and her husband had been away at work when they were attacked .
 Ron set up a conference call with Gary and The Three Amigos decided to have a reunion . Gary and Ron had a reunion on the phone and Ron set them up . Ron and Gary decided to reunite .
 I stumbled onto a collection of brand new Ml 4 rifles . Anyway the reason I wanted to talk with you guy was that I stumbled upon a . collection of . brand new . rifles . I stumbled on a collection . of brand . new rifles .
 I remember you telling me that they weren’t worth a crap on full-auto . Anyway, I remember telling you that they were worth a lot of money on full auto . I’m not sure if they’re worth anything, but they were. Anyway,
 The tri-compensator for the BM59 is 22mm in diameter, the standard internal ID for a NATO Rifle Grenade . The BM59 has a diameter of 22mm .
 It is a combo Flashhider, Muzzle Brake/Muzzle Rise Limiter, and Grenade Launcher . It is also a combination of Muzzlebrake and a muzzle rise Limiter .
 It is attached, and serves the same purpose, as the Garand Gas Cylinder Lock . The lock is attached to the same type of lock used to lock a gas cylinder .
 In other words it keeps the Gas Cylinder from moving forward or backwards on the barrel . It keeps the gas cylinder from moving backwards or backwards .
 The stripper clip guide on the top of the receiver accepts standard Ml4, 5 round stripper clips .
 The BM59 was completely controllable in full auto and was a joy to shoot . The tri-comp is real good, and the geometry of the weapon is also good .
 The FN-FAL was a real bitch to shoot full auto it took all I could do to keep it on target . It took all the time to keep the gun on target.
 The BAR was a piece of cake and a joy to shoot and if anything is too accurate, it's not too accurate . The BAR is a "piece of cake" and a "joy to shoot"
 Ron decided to take the bull by the horns and do the whole project himself . He decided to do the entire project himself.
 Gary gave him the web address of the company that sold the BM-59 parts and told Ron just to search what was left of the web for a Russian or Chinese magazine . Gary gave Ron just the address .
 The Chinese magazine was easier to reload because it had a hinged plate . It was easier than a Chinese magazine because of a hinging plate .
 You loaded the magazine and when you were ready to shoot, you wound up the spring . You loaded your gun and loaded it up to shoot .
 SAW version of the M-14 was developed by the U.S. military . The weapon was developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 They got one hell of an insurance settlement after they got lawyers involved . They got a hell of a settlement .
 "I don’t know how I’m going to pay you for 4 of those rifles and magazines," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says he's not sure how he'll pay for the guns .
 It will still be less than $1,000 face in silver and once Clarence gets moved, he can buy them from me,” Gary suggested . Gary suggested.
 Clarence and Shirley went lot hunting the following day and found a nice lot on the other side of town from Gary and Sharon’s . The couple found a new lot in the next few days .
 Nobody seemed too anxious to leave so The Three Amigos found a meeting and sat in for a few . Nobody seemed to want to leave the group to leave .
 Clarence got Gary’s blueprints for their house and after Ron returned to New Mexico, hired a contractor to duplicate the house with a couple of exceptions . Clarence and Ron got the blueprints from Gary's blueprints .
 Clarence was putting in the Kohler 30RES and had everything put into his basement before they closed it over . Clarence had to put everything in the basement before the closing over .
 He was able to contact the business and they had a lot of Lake City 7.62x51 mm ammo on hand . The business also had Lake City Lake City ammunition on hand.
 The price was $239 for 1,000-rounds and Eric was offering free shipping . Eric was offered free shipping on the $239 .
 They agreed on 35 cases shipped by freight instead of the more expensive carrier they usually used . They agreed to use the cheaper carrier to ship the cases .
 With the 15,000 rounds that Derek and Gary already had, they now had 50,000-rounds and could fight a couple of wars . Gary and Derek already had 15,500 rounds of boxing rounds .
 Clarence bought 12 cases of the ammo, 3 per rifle, leaving Gary and Derek with 38,000 rounds . The ammo is between the 4 Ml 4, 4, modified rifles and the 4Ml 4 modified .
 They didn’t know what they were waiting for, trouble most certainly, but they had no idea what kind of trouble they were facing . They didn't know what it was, but it was going to be trouble .
 He had 12,000-rounds and figured he had enough for both the next 2 world wars . He had enough to fight both World War II and the Second World War .
 Ammo is like toilet paper, cigarettes or coffee; you can never have too much . Ammo is also like to toilet paper or coffee .
 Gary says he replaced 12 cases of ammo and bought a dozen more just to get the same price . Eric says Gary replaced the 12 cases with 12 more . Eric: "Ask Gary, he called up Eric and replaced those 12 cases"
 Eric had a special on Lake City .223 overruns and he bought a twenty-five cases of it as well . Eric also bought a .25 cases of the .223 as well as a .223 .
 Eric’s price on .22LR ammo wasn’t very good at all . Derek loaded up on it at the Super Wal-Mart store . Eric and Derek went to the store to buy it .
 Gary had been secretly buying guns for some time and if Sharon ever found out, he would get the funeral . Sharon was sure to get the . funeral .
 I hinted when I told you that the S&W J-frame revolver is very compact . I hinted that the revolver is a compact revolver .
 The air weight J-frame model 360PD only weighed 12oz. empty and shot .357 Magnum rounds . The J-framed 360PD weighs 12oz . empty and shoots . 357 Magnum rounds.
 All duded up with a pair of Crimson Trace Lasergrips and loaded with .38 +P ammo, the gun was the perfect self-defense weapon . The gun was loaded with a .38+P ammo .
 In the never-ending battle to destroy our constitution, more “big lie’s propaganda is being dumped on our elected officials . More “Big lie” propaganda is dumping on elected officials, says author .
 The rhetoric given forth by the Violence Policy Center so easily deceived the legislators of California, resulting in the banning of fifty caliber rifles because they are powerful and their bullets punch holes when they strike . The rhetoric . was so easily . deceived by the . legislators, California legislators .
 It’s hard to believe we live in such a dark time that someone has actually banned a single shot rifle . The ban was imposed by the U.S. State Department .
 What lies before us is the continuation of the misinformation campaign, trying to coax yet another state to infringe upon the U.S. Constitution as California did. What lies ahead is a continuation of this misinformation campaign .
 The antifreedom/anti-gun movement has discovered how transparent they appear when they propose sweeping gun bans and now are successful by biting off a little at a time . Anti-gun activists have found themselves successful by bitching off at least a little bit of gun bans .
 Many politicians are trading off your rights without you recognizing their violations . Ever so small, many politicians trade off your right without you noticing their violations.
 “Saturday Night Special” was all affordable handguns, then “sniper rifles” which were scoped deer rifles . “Sniper rifle’s” were any scoped rifle rifles . The Saturday Night Special was the first time a sniper rifle was available
 Clinton’s Crime bill produced a wasted 10-year setback on your freedoms and safe gun design . Those were obvious, too big a scam to go unnoticed, but with the creation and demonization of the term “assault weapon,” the bill was a waste .
 This is the same bull the officials in the 1950’s fell for when they banned the self-unfolding knife . The self-folded knife was banned from being used in the U.S.
 First the knife was demonized by giving it an evil name, ‘switchblade’ Then we were told that the problem of gang violence was solved with its banning . Now we are told that its banning is solved with the banning .
 In reality, gang violence was and is a serious social problem, but it was not related to manually unfolding verses self-unfolding knives . Gang violence was a serious problem, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "The elected officials voting to ban an object like a knife proved themselves unwilling or uncaring to understand the problem," author says . "They proved themselves to be incapable of any real solutions," he says .
 The handful of people that make up the VPC are solely responsible for the big lie on .50s, claiming fantastic destruction capabilities .
 They manipulate fear by claiming terrorists will use these rifles on targets of our infrastructure, they say . Terrorists are manipulating fear by saying they will use the rifles to target targets of infrastructure, he says .
 The risk of terrorist attacks on these targets will be solved with the banning of powerful rifles, in this case, the .50 caliber rifle . He is boldly telling these officials that the risk of terrorism is solved by banning powerful rifles .
 In reality, terrorism is complex and will be defeated with improved intelligence . Terrorists will be able to fight terrorism with better intelligence, says President Obama .
 In this instance, the officials voting to ban an inanimate object like a rifle prove themselves to be ignorant of the problem of terrorism and are wasting time and resources . The officials voting for a rifle ban prove themselves ignorant of terrorism .
 You must understand the brilliance of this dangerous back door deception, says CNN.com.com .
 Your politicians are being told that the fifty is a highly destructive cartridge that can destroy airplanes, fuel transport trucks and depot storages of fuel . The 50 is being told it can destroy planes, transport trucks, and depot warehouses .
 A l/ 2 -inch plate of steel being pierced by a .50 cal . round while stopping a .308 caliber . 60 Minutes shows a l/2 -inch . plate being pierced .
 This is all to confuse the people, those with little exposure to firearms, with the impression that the .50 punches holes in sensitive targets where other rifles cannot . The .50 can punch holes into sensitive targets, but other rifles can't .
 The VPC demands a ban or strict regulations on rifles that chamber a cartridge that has the ability to penetrate targets . First, with the confusion of massive, technical data and the hammering of urgency .
 VPC’s Tom Diaz appears often on TV with maps of Washington, DC, instructing where to position one's self to illegally fire on vulnerable targets of our government . Diaz promises these specific targets will be safe when ,50s are banned . VPC's Tom Diaz has
 He pressures politicians to act quickly on this URGENT legislation needed to make these terrorist targets safe, hoping they will act quickly .
 The legislation naming and defining the targets that are damageable by rifle fire, they create a new class of rifles . The legislation names and defines the targets and defines them as damageable .
 This new class is not defined by such foolishness as detachable magazines, flash hiders, or pistol grips . This class will not be defined by detachable mags, or flash hider grips .
 If so, the law-abiding citizen shouldn’t be allowed to have this, so they must ban this class of rifle before they can be misused .
 Remember they are banning rifles because specific targets named in our infrastructure are susceptible to damage . No, remember they are banishing rifles because they are targeting specific targets . Remember that specific targets are vulnerable to damage. Remember that .
 The Attorney General or State Secretary must add those cartridges to the banned list . So, in order to comply with the spirit and intent of the law, they must be added .
 They're after your hunting rifles, centerfire target rifles and just about any rifle you own . They’re after hunting rifles and centerfire targets .
 Unlike California, we cannot allow any of our local, state, or federal officials to be deceived with any of this “big lie’s gun control propaganda. Unlike California , we can’t allow local or state, federal . officials .
 Virtually every real world scenario of firearm abuse is already covered in some law that is currently on the books . Virtually all real world scenarios of gun abuse are already covered by some laws .
 He continued to use his officers in the same deceptive practices formerly utilized with the city council . The city council used similar deceptive practices with the council, he says .
 Officers testifying in Sacramento contributed to the unconstitutional AB50 law being passed . These few officers testified in Sacramento ultimately contributed to AB50 being passed.
 "I refused to assist anyone or any organization that is in violation of the United States Constitution," he says . "It saddened me to have to tell members of the LAPD SWAT team that they would have to send someone for their rifle," he adds .
 The state is not in compliance with the United States Constitution’s 2nd and 14th Amendments . We will not sell nor service any of our products to any government agency of the State of California .
 I appreciate all the phone calls and E-mails from LAPD officers and civilians during that time, encouraging and supporting our actions . I appreciate many of those calls and e-mails during the time of the incident .
 "I am in the proud and fortunate position that many of our forefathers were in when they risked all for our liberties," says President Obama . "I'm in a position that I am in in a fortunate position," he says .
 The bill is being reintroduced in Washington state . It's resurfacing in city council meetings, in individual states, and in individual cities .
 I've received thousands of E-mails and letters from you offering encouragement and support . I’ve received . thousands of . letters and support from you . support .
 This lie depends on the elected official being naive about firearms and their capabilities . This lie is based on a lack of knowledge about firearms, says CNN.com's Jeff Jarrett .
 Stand ready to carry this same message to your U.S. Senator and Representatives . Stand ready for your United States Senator and Representative to speak out .
 You need to join the NRA, the Fifty Caliber Shooters Association, and the NSSF in order to stay informed .
 "These people have been with me in the trenches, fighting for every inch of the liberty you enjoy," he said . "They are with you in the trench," he added. "They're fighting for the freedom you enjoy"
 You can talk to your Representative or Senator until you’re blue in the face, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don’t think it’s easy to say anything to your Congressman or Senator. You’ve got to
 Politicians already had their minds made up before they were elected . The politicians already had already made up their minds .
 His re-organization of that 50,000-person department with a $2.2 billion dollar budget resulted in a 39% decline in serious crimes and a 50% reduction in homicides . The department's $2 billion budget was $1 billion .
 As the LAPD Chief, his responsibilities include the supervision of 9,304 sworn and 3,055 civilian employees . LAPD Chief's responsibilities include supervising 9,300 sworn officers . The LAPD is the largest force in the Los Angeles County .
 The next thing you know, someone will be questioning John McCain’s patriotism, Sen. John McCain says . McCain: “The next thing I know is that someone will question John McCain's patriotism.”
 When they threw him into the Hanoi Hilton, he had two broken arms, a broken knee, and a screwed up shoulder . He had broken legs, broken knee and a broken shoulder when he was thrown in .
 In 1967, he was shot down over Vietnam, and was held as a prisoner of war in Hanoi for five-and-a-half years . He was held in Vietnam for five and a half years .
 When his captors discovered he was the son and grandson of admirals, he was offered a chance to go home . But he refused to break the military code that POWs are released in the order that they are captured .
 He survived the injuries he received when he was shot down, the beatings from an angry crowd and his captors, a year of torture, and two years of solitary confinement . He was finally released from captivity in 1973 .
 In 1977, he became a Navy liaison to the Senate . Once released, his POW injuries prevented him from receiving a sea command . He was released from the Navy in 1977, but became a Senate liaison .
 He was discharged from the Navy in 1981 as a Captain, on the day he watched his father buried next to his grandfather in Arlington National Cemetery .
 During his military career, he received a Silver Star, a Bronze Star, the Legion of Merit, the Purple Heart, and a Distinguished Flying Cross .
 He forgave his captors for his treatment . Decided years later to not live with hatred in his heart, he forgave them . Deciding years later, he decided to live his life with no hatred in the heart .
 Despite rumors to the contrary, John McCain and John Kerry aren’t in the same league . And, despite rumors, John Kerry isn't in a league .
 Kerry’s first Purple Heart came when he suffered a shrapnel wound in the left arm above the elbow . Kerry was awarded the Purple Heart for his role in the Vietnam War .
 The shrapnel was removed and the wound was treated with bacitracin antibiotic and bandaged . The wound was bandaged and treated with antibiotic and antibiotic .
 Kerry still has shrapnel in his left thigh because doctors removed the damaged tissue and closed the wound with sutures rather than making a wide opening to remove the shrapnel . Kerry's doctors decided to close the wound rather than make a wide open to remove shrapnel from his thigh .
 Kerry was wounded twice that day, and he would receive his third Purple Heart . Kerry would receive the Purple Heart for his third time .
 His injuries included shrapnel wounds in his left upper buttock, which were treated with antiseptic lotion and bandaged . His injuries include shrapnel wound in the left upper cheek .
 He also suffered contusions on his right forearm from hitting the bulkhead . The mine exploded near his boat, which was treated with warm soaking . His boat was hit by a mine mine explosion .
 Kerry also got the Bronze Star on that occasion and had earlier received the Silver Star . Kerry also won the Bronze and Silver Star in the same ceremony .
 Kerry’s commanding officer joked that he didn’t know whether to courtmartial him for beaching the boat without orders or give him a medal for saving the crew . Lieutenant George Elliott joked he didn't know if to give Kerry a medal .
 Elliott recommended Kerry for the Silver Star . Zumwalt flew into An Thoi to personally award medals to Kerry and the rest of the sailors involved .
 Admiral Zumwalt was Kerry’s Fredric March and William Holden . John Kerry was Admiral Zummalt's William Holden during his Vietnam career . Kerry was the Vietnam vet, but Zummummalt is Kerry's Vietnam vet .
 Admiral Zumwalt must have gotten tired of giving Kerry medals, he sent him home to girlfriend Hanoi Jane .
 Both John McCain and John Kerry were heroes of the war in Vietnam . Yes sir, both McCain and Kerry were hero of the Vietnam War .
 The New Madrid Seismic zone lies within the central Mississippi Valley . It extends from northeast Arkansas, through southeast Missouri, western Tennessee, western Kentucky to southern Illinois . The zone is located in the Mississippi Valley, extending from Arkansas to Missouri .
 Historically, this area has been the site of some of the largest earthquakes in North America . Historically, the area was the site for the largest quakes in the North American .
 Between 1811 and 1812, 4 catastrophic earthquakes, with magnitude estimates greater than 7.0, occurred during a 3-month period . 4 catastrophic quakes occurred during that period . The earthquakes are thought to be the largest in the history of the Great Depression .
 The largest earthquakes to have occurred since 1843 were on January 4, 1843 and October 31, 1895 with magnitude estimates of 6. and 6.2 respectively . The largest quakes to occur since then have been recorded at least 6.3 magnitude .
 Instruments were installed in and around this area in 1974 to closely monitor seismic activity . Instruments were placed around the area to monitor the seismic activity in 1974 .
 Since then, more than 4000 earthquakes have been located, most of which are too small to be felt . Most of the quakes have been small enough to cause a quake .
 On average one earthquake per year will be large enough to be felt in the area . One earthquake will be felt by an earthquake every year in the region .
 The New Madrid seismic zone is so named because the town of New Madrid, Missouri was the closest settlement to the epicenters of the 1811-1812 quakes . The town was the town closest to epicents of the quakes in Missouri .
 St. Louis and other major cities in the central U.S. were sparsely settled in the early 1900s . The area was largely populated by men, women and women .
 At least 3 of the series of earthquakes were felt throughout much of the U.S. and as far away as Quebec . The series of quakes were felt in the United States and Canada .
 The potential for the recurrence of such earthquakes and their impact today on densely populated cities in and around the seismic zone, has generated much research devoted to understanding earthquakes .
 Scientists hope to understand causes, recurrence rates, ground motion and disaster mitigation . By closely monitoring the earthquake activity, scientists hope to know their causes .
 The probability for an earthquake of magnitude 6.6. or greater is significant in the near future, with a 50% chance by the year 2000 and a 90% chance in 2040 . The probability of a 6.5 magnitude earthquake is significant .
 A quake with a magnitude equal to that of the 1811-1812 quakes could result in great loss of life and property damage in the billions of dollars . A quake equal to the magnitude of that of that quakes in 1811 and 1812 could have caused great damage .
 Scientists believe we could be overdue for a large earthquake . Research and public awareness may be able to prevent such losses .
 Gary didn't feel whatever it was that Clarence was talking about, it wasn't the New Madrid Seismic Zone . Gary didn’t feel whatever was that it was . Gary felt it was not the New . Madrid .
 Unless an earthquake rattles their mirror doors, Gary never knew when they happened . Gary never saw when the mirror doors opened .
 Clarence lived just a mile from the San Andreas back in California . Perhaps Clarence was just over sensitive, he only lived a mile .
 Fie wanted the walls a minimum of 9” thick and a foot would make him happier . Fie said walls should be 9’s thick and he wanted a foot more thick .
 Gary put a 30kw Onan residential generator and an air filtration system for the basement . Gary put the system in the basement to finish their new home off .
 The overhead of the basement was made from pre-stressed concrete slabs . The overhead was made out of pre-Stressed concrete slab .
 We might shake, rattle and roll if they have a Big One, but considering the alternatives, Flippin is pretty safe . It's a pretty safe bet for us, considering the alternative .
 The region is home to millions of people, including those in the cities of St. Louis, Missouri and St. Paul .
 Most structures in region were not built to withstand earthquake shaking, as they have been in California and Japan . Adding to the danger, most structures in the region have not been designed to withstand shaking .
 Earthquakes in the central or eastern United States affect much larger areas than earthquakes of similar magnitude in the western United States . Earthquakes are more frequent in the region than in the west .
 Differences in geology east and west of the Rocky Mountains cause this strong contrast . Geologists say geology west of Rocky Mountains is very different .
 You’ve seen epidemics, tornadoes, floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, earthquakes and tsunamis, landslides, volcanic eruptions and those are just the natural hazards . You've also had epidemics and tornadoes .
 Name a few wars that were avoided after the ball got rolling after the war got rolling . Name a list of wars that weren't predetermined, but name a few .
 The Cold War never really ended like everyone thought it did until China and the U.S. ended it . The only one I can think of was the Cold War, which never really really ended .
 Military forces use first strikes, also called preemptive strikes, when they need surprise or the extra strength they get from the element of surprise . First strikes are also known as 'preventive strikes'
 The United States made a first strike on Korea when they saw the Koreans fueling their missiles . The U.S. made the first strike when the Koreans saw the North Korean missile fuel .
 The United States made a first strike on China with 2 cruise missiles when China attacked Taiwan . The U.S. made the first strike against China with two cruise missiles .
 If they were going to do that to China, they needed to attack all of China’s missiles simultaneously using Trident II missiles, he says .
 The fly time on a coastal launch of a Trident II is a matter of very few minutes; perhaps so short China couldn’t have retaliated . The fly-time on a . coastal launch is a . matter of a few minutes .
 Moshe Dayan hadn’t planned on taking either the Gaza Strip or the West Bank . Dayan’s first mission was to take over the Gaza and West Bank, Israel .
 The First Gulf War was won by using a preemptive strike against Iraq and following it up with a major land battle that lasted only 4 days . The war was won with a pre-emptive strike on Iraq and a land battle on Iraq .
 Operation Iraqi Freedom captured Iraq in 3 weeks, but the United States screwed the pooch because they lacked the final element of every preemptive strike, a viable exit strategy . The U.S. didn't have a viable strategy to exit the country .
 There is a disaster every minute of every hour, every day of every day, every year somewhere in the U.S. There is one disaster a year in the United States .
 It might be something as serious as one of those super volcanoes erupting, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It might be a serious mistake," says Sutter.
 I sure hope the squirrels down in Florida got the generators, spare gas and flashlight batteries . I'm sure hope squirrels got the generator and spare gas .
 Gray’s team issued their first extended range forecast for the 2005 season . Gray's team issued the first extended-range forecast .
 11 named storms, 6 reaching hurricane strength, and 3 reaching Category 3 on the Saffir-Simpson scale . They predicted a slightly above-average season, with 11 named storm storms and 6 hurricane strength .
 Experts predict a greatly increased chance of a major hurricane striking the East Coast of the U.S. and the Florida peninsula .
 Flowever, even these abovenormal forecasts are below the activity level of the 2004 season . Flowever is expected to be the lowest level of activity in the last four years of the season .
 The updated forecast predicts 13 named storms, 7 hurricanes, with three reaching Category 3 strength or greater . Three hurricanes are expected to reach Category 3 or greater strength .
 The odds of a storm striking the U.S. were also raised slightly . The odds were raised slightly slightly .
 The first 13 names on the list of 2005 hurricanes are Arlene, Bret, Cindy, Cindy and Dennis, Dennis, Emily, Franklin, Gert, Flarvey, Irene, Jose and Jose . Katrina, Lee and Maria were the first 13 hurricanes to hit in 2005 .
 The other names are Nate, Ophelia, Philippe, Rita, Stan, Tammy, Tammy and Wilma .
 Debbie Reynolds survived losing her first husband to Elizabeth Taylor . She was becoming the unsinkable Debbie Reynolds . Flaving survived losing first husband and Elizabeth Taylor to Taylor .
 She had to keep working and turned to stage musicals when Hollywood stopped making them . She turned to staging musicals after Hollywood no longer made them .
 She has her own casino in Las Vegas, a home for her Hollywood museum . Now she has a casino in the city, it's a new home for the museum .
 Carrie looked pretty good in a bikini as Princess Leia . Her daughter Carrie also appeared in the bikini .
 Gary looked out the window too, but he didn’t see any rocks hurling in from the sun . Gary looked to the side of the road, but no rocks were hurling out of the sky .
 The dancer that Jabba drops into the Rancor pit loses her top as she falls in . Jabba's top is lost in the pit .
 David Prowse only portrayed Darth Vader completely for the first half of the movie . David Prowse played Darth Vader for the entire first half .
 In the second half of the movie, the character was played by Bob Anderson during the fight sequence, and Sebastian Shaw after the character is unmasked . The character was also played by Sebastian Shaw during the movie's fight sequence .
 James Earl Jones voiced the character throughout, with the exception of the unmasking scene . The film was released in 2009 .
 Carrie Fisher complained about her costumes in the previous two movies . Carrie Fisher has complained about the costumes in previous movies .
 Star Wars fans complained about the costume she wore as Jabba’s prisoner . Those complaints led to the skimpy outfit she wore .
 Patricia Neal has admitted she was completely unaware during the filming that the film would turn out so well and become one of the great science-fiction classics of all time .
 She assumed it would be another one of the then-current and rather trashy flying saucer films that were popular at the time . She found it difficult to keep a straight face while saying her lines .
 When she and her husband of 30 years got divorced, he married her best friend . When she got married, he got married to the best friend of her 30-year-old .
 It's too late in the chapter to start something and introduce you to Cliff Hanger . Yes I’m stalling, it’s too late to introduce something to Cliff .