 These two countries were involved in various confrontations, very few of which were deadly . The two countries have been involved in numerous confrontations .
 Each country wanted power over the other, whether it was through weapons of mass destruction or through space travel . An atmosphere of tension and mistrust lay between them, as each country wanted to power .
 The two countries were involved in a 'space race' where each country tried to be the first into space, and on the moon . The space race was a 'race between the U.S. and Russia .
 USSR were successful in carrying the first man into space in 1961 . USA were the first to carry man to the moon, some eight years later, in 1969 .
 "This was a race to see who could produce the most destructive nuclear weapons," says President Obama . "This is a race for the future," he says .
 Both countries tried to keep an eye on each other by using a network of spies . Both countries used to use spies to monitor each other's movements .
 An American pilot, Gary Powers, was caught taking aerial photographs of Russian military sites in a U2 spy plane in 1960 . The incident was in 1960 where an American pilot was caught .
 One of Castro's promises was that Cuba would have a better standard of living once he was in power . Castro promised to improve Cuba's standard of life once he came to power .
 Castro was not communist, but he was fast introducing communist ideas into the country of Cuba . Castro introduced communist ideas to Cuba in the 1950s .
 The new president of America, President Kennedy, was not pleased with the fast growing communist Cuba . President Kennedy was unhappy with the country's fast-growing communist Cuba.
 There was a plan to get rid of Castro that Kennedy inherited when he took over the role of president . Kennedy inherited the plan when he became president .
 It was t be known as 'The Bay of Pigs' invasion and it was a complete failure . The invasion was a 'complete failure' for the U.S.
 There were heavy U.S. casualties and Kennedy and the United States government were made to look fools . Kennedy's government was made into fools by the loss of the war, he says .
 Castro and the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev were becoming even friendlier . Meanwhile, Castro and his Soviet leader was becoming friendlier with the Soviet Union leader .
 These bonds between Castro and the USSR were arousing major suspicion over in America . These bonds arouses major suspicion in America.
 Kennedy ordered U2 spy planes to fly over the island of Cuba and take photographs of the area . Kennedy ordered the U2 to take photos of Cuba .
 Kennedy was told that the Soviets were building nuclear missile bases on Cuba . Kennedy was also told that he had been told that they were building bases .
 This one said, 'You are worried about Cuba...because it is 90 miles from America, but Turkey is next to us' Conclusion: "You are concerned about Cuba ...because it's 90 miles away from America...but Turkey is right there"
 We agree to remove from Cuba those means, which you regard as offensive . Cuba agrees to remove those means from Cuba, Cuba's president says .
 It was actually Kennedy's brother, Robert, who came up with the idea of replying to the first letter and pretending that they had not received the second letter .
 It had seemed that Khrushchev had written the first letter by himself, without the advice of his associates . It was thought that he had written it without the help of his colleagues .
 His associates must have seen his letter after he had sent it, and had said that he could have got more out of this bargain, and that he had come away with nothing . He had sent a letter to his associates, saying that he should have received more .
 Kennedy written a letter saying that if Soviet bases were removed from Cuba then the United States blockade of the island would be lifted and no invasion of Cuba would occur . Kennedy said that if the Soviet bases had been removed then the U.S. blockade of Cuba was lifted .
 He also said that if there were no reply by October 29th there would be a war . He also warned that if the government did not respond to the threat of a war, it would be the end of days .
 Khrushchev had accepted the American offer and removed the missile bases from Cuba . The U.S. agreed to remove the bases from the island .
 Cuba's greatest trade was sugar and earned Cuba alot of money . Because America weren't trading any sugar many Cubans began to lose their jobs . America wasn't trading sugar .
 Khrushchev asks of America to get rid of its blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba . In exchange he will take away missile installations on the island of Cuba .
 Describe the key features of the Berlin crisis, including the Cuban missile crisis . Describe how the crisis unfolded .
 Between 1950 and 1961, the refugees continued to leave at a rate of 100,000 to 200,000 a year . The refugees left the country at an average rate of 200,00 a year between 1950 and 1960 .
 He promised to not leave the Warsaw Pact if these new reforms were implemented . He promised not to do so if they were implemented, he said .
 Dubcek told the Czechs to not resist militarily when the Warsaw Pact troops moved into Czechoslovakia . The Czechs were told not to resist when Warsaw Pact forces moved into the country . Dubcec told Czechs not to fight back when the invasion began .
 The Soviet Union did not react because they were preoccupied with Czech and issues there . Edexcel Cold War 1943-1991 Revision: Soviet Union didn't react because of Czech .
 Cold war Relations worsened within the Soviet Union and between East and West . East-West relations worsened during the Cold War .
 Britain and USA staged protests about the actions of the Soviet Union, however, it was not a serious threat to their relations . Détente started after a slight break in relations .
 The Marshall plan used money to do it while the Truman doctrine used soldiers . The Truman doctrine also used soldiers to carry out the Marshall plan . The Marshall Plan used money and the Truman plan used soldiers.
 These events show the United States willing to fight off communism . These events are quite important when put together because they both show the U.S. willing to defend itself .
 The significance of this is that the U.S. is doing something about communism, which the communist powers were not . The communist powers see that the United States is doing . The significance is that this is not the same thing .