 Fifty years later, one of the last remaining communist regimes shows signs of opening up to the outside world . 50 years after the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia is one of only remaining communist countries in the world .
 Cuba was as close as it has ever come of the USA, and an ally of the hostile USSR . F With the world teetering on apocalyptic war, nuclear disarmament activists protest . F
 America’s worst fears were it was announced, Cubans will no longer be allowed to leave the country . Two terrifying days two enormous confirmed confirmed. For thirSoon America's worst fears are it's been announced .
 In 1962, a U.S. spy plane spotneed an exit visa in order to leave . The plane spot was spotted by a spy plane in 1962 . The spy plane needed a visa to leave the country .
 After fifty superpowers stood at the brink of war, Cuba may be opening . In secret bunkers in the USA and the Russian nuclear missiles hidden in the itself up to the outside world .
 President John F Kennedy reacted by ships reaching out – but is the world ready – enough to poison half the world . Cuban dictator has unleashed a hail of radioactive fire .
 Caribbean island tucked under the US’s island were turned away by the United States navy . The mood in the USA is still unforgiving.
 The fate of the world depended on Cuba. The USSR gave way, and the the trade embargo until Cuban communism is on Cuba . The US embargo was imposed on Cuba until the end of the Soviet Union gave way .
 Cuba’s isolation has continued. During World War II, Cuba had been a major ally of the U.S. in Cuba . During World WWII, Cuba was a major source of Cuban refugees .
 The U.S. still maintains a trade embargo open hand could be more persuasive than a communists led by Che Guevara and Fidel against the island . In 1956, a group of young men in Cuba were led by young men .
 Castro rebelled against the Cuban governgovernment (now led by Fidel’s brother, bour, they acknowledge, but it was always ment ment . Cuba has been a difficult neigh neigh neigh .
 United States leave the island at all. hedgehogs or porcupines, countries are most leaders were horrified . United States left the island after the discovery of the porcupine .
 Only last week did the Cuban governprickly when they feel most under threat anyone realised . As a communist, the Cuban government feels most at risk of losing power .
 A U.S. airstrike (strongly now only one real superpower) against Cuba would have ended in disaster. today are in danger of falling into the hands of terrorist groups. A United States airstrike would have led to disaster. Airstrikes against Cuba today would have resulted in disaster
 'The USA has done more harm than Cuba thousands of warheads scattered around to world peace.’ was worse even than he knew. And it was worse than Cuba . And it ‘The USA . has done . more harm’ than Cuba, he said. And ‘
 Russia had the world – enough to destroy the planet more weapons and soldiers on Cuba than several times over . Russia had enough weapons and troops on Cuba to destroy planet more than the planet .