 The serious analyst seeks to discover why one specific state of the world came to be the case -rather than some other . In pursuing these questions, what the serious analyst wants to discover is why .
 Faced with a demand for explanation, most analysts proceed by showing how the nation's action constituted a reasonable choice, given rational objectives . Most analysts proceed to show how the decision was reasonable given rational goals .
 The missile construction in Cuba is explained as a Soviet probe of American intentions . Thus, missile construction was explained as an American probe of Soviet intentions .
 U.S. 7roops marched across the narrow neck in Korea, according to standard accounts, because American objectives had escalated as a consequence of easy victories in tne SouCh. United States 7 .
 Pearl Harbor explained as Japan's solution to the strategic problem posed by U.S. pressure in the Far East . The attack on Pearl Harbor is explained as a solution to Japan's strategic problem .
 Th&t occurrences can be most satisfactorially understood as purposive acts of national governments, conceived as unitary, rational agents . What these explanations assume is th&t. occurrences can't be explained as national governments .
 Treating nations as if they were rational individuals provides a productive shorthand for understanding problems of policy . Treating countries as rational individuals is a useful shorthand to understanding problems, such as foreign policy .
 This assumption -like all assumptions -obscures as well as reveals. But this assumption - like all - reveals as much as it does .
 The implications of this fact for the activities of foreign policy analysts is the purpose of this exercise . To explore the implications of the fact that this fact is important to foreign policy experts .
 "oblems of foreign policy in terms of implicit conceptual models which have significant consequences for the character of their thought. Specialists in foreign policy and policy makers as well as plain men reading the New vw-Times, think abnr."
 Explanations aimed at relieving puzzlement like that surrounding Soviet missiles in Cuba or Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor constitute a considerable part of the intellectual product of foreign policy analysts .
 The discursive, non-cumulativw, almost casual character of this work has become a commonplace . The Discourse, Non-conformity character of the work has been a commonplace.
 Careful inspection of these explanations reveals a number of underlying clusters of fundamental similarity . Careful examination of the origins of the world's most famous animals reveals many of these clusters of similarity .
 Explanation produced by particular analysts display regular and predictable attributes . Explanations produced by analysts are quite predictable attributes, such as predictability .
 The first proposition of this essay is that these regularities rtflect frames of reference or conceptual models with which analysts approach problems of foreign policy . The essay argues that the regularities in foreign policy can be used to understand foreign policy decisions .
 One conceptual model so pervades the literature of foreign affairs, diplomatic history, and international relations, as well as the normal reactions of plain men, it way be said to constitute the standard frame of reference .
 Explanation of the occurrence, according to this model, consists in showing how placing missiles in Cuba was a reasonable choice from the point of view of the Soviet Union .
 This essay makes no claim that scholars of foreign policy have developed any satisfactory theoretical models . In arguing that explanations proceed in terms of implicit conceptual models, this essay does not claim to have developed a satisfactory theoretical model .
 In this essay, the use of the term ""model"" without qualifiers should be read ""conceptual model."" -33.33.3.5 .
 Two alternative conceptual models offer considerable additional power for understanding happenings of international politics . Two alternative concepts offer more power to understand happenings in world politics .
 Although the standard frame of reference has proved useful for many purposes, it is now clear that this model must be supplemented, if not supplanted, by frames of reference which focus upon the detailed functioning and malfunctioning of organizations and individuals in the policy process .
 Recent developments in the field of organization theory provide the foundation for the secorid model . According to Model II, what the rational policy model analyst categorizes as ""acts"" and ""choices"" are instead outputs of large organizations functioning according to standard patterns of behavior .
 Model II consists in identifying the relevant Soviet organizations and displaying the patterns of organizational behavior from which the action emerged . Explanation of the occurrence, according to Model II, consists .
 A third model, implicit in the work of a small but growi'o group of analysts, focuses on the internal politics of a government . A third, a third, is a model that focuses on internal politics .
 Happenings in foreign affairs are understood according to Model III, neither as choices nor as outputs . Happensings should be understood as choices and outputs, Model III .
 What happens is categorized as outcomes of various overlapping bargaining games among players arranged hierarchically in the national government . Rather than what happens, what happens is an outcome of an overlapping bargaining game .
 Explanation of this happening, according to Model III, displays the games, power, and maneuvers of principal players . Model III also displays the understandings and misunderstandings from which the outcome emerged .
 Chess chess is played on a computer screen without information as to how the pieces came to be moved . The standard model assumes that each chess player is moving the pieces in terms of strategic plans and tactical maneuvers toward a single goal .
 A pattern of moves can be imagined which would lead the serious observer, after watching several games, to conr;t-. ti... hypothesis that the chess player was not a single individual but rather a loose alliance of seLai-independent organizations .
 The king's rook, bishop, and their pawns repeatedly attacking the opponent according to a fixed plan . For example, movement of separate sets of pieces night proceed in turn, each according to the routine .
 The pattern of play would suggest to the imaginative observer that a number of distinct players, with separate goals and objectives but shared power, were determining moves as the consequences of collegial largaining .
 The black rook becomes the principal guardian of the ""palace"" on that side of the board . For example, the black rook might contribute to the loss of a black knight .
 The limits of this essay do not permit adequate development and support of such general arguments . This essay does not provide adequate support for the argument .
 Analogues of these conceptual models are employed by analysts of various areas of governmental policy . Analogues are employed in the design of government policy .
 A crisis decision, by a small group of men in the context of ultimate threat to the nation, this is a case of the rational policy model par excellence . The decision was made by a group of small men in a context of a threat to Britain .
 Models II and III uncover dimensions and factors which . uncover in this case . particularly suggestive of the character of work produced by these styles of analysis . Analysis of this case is particularly suggestive .
 The general argument is developed by three sections each of which sketcheE q conceptual model and articulates it as a paradigm . Within these limits, the general argument was developed by the three sections .
 These alternative explanations of the same happening illustrate differences among the conceptual models -at work .
 The concluding section generates predictions in terms of each of the models . It suggests how the three conceptual models may be related to each other .
 Soviet anti-ballistic missile deployment, evidence of Soviet actions towards detente, when slotted in our implicit model, produce a question . The question is whether Russia's anti-nuclear missile deployment and detente actions are justified .
 This question arises only when the analyst brings to the phenomena a frame of reference which conceptualizes occurrences as purposive choices of consistent, unitary actors . The analyst's view of events is that they are purposives choices of . consistent, unprovoked actors .
 The most widely acclaimed explanation of this occurrence has been produced by two eminent RAND Soviotologists . Two eminent RANDSoviotologists.
 In Sherlock Holmes style, they test each possible objective which the Soviets might have had against all available information about the details of Soviet behavior . Then they proceed to test each objective which might have been against all known information .
 Horelick and Rush's explanation presents an argument for one objective which allows interpretation of the various details of Soviet behavior as a value-maximizing choice .
 If either power combination could gain a decisive advantage in the Balkans, it woull achieve an advantage in Europe's overall balance of power . It could achieve a decisive edge in the overall European balance of powers .
 When explaining particular occurrences, nevertheless, though emphasizing relevant constraints, he focuses on the choices of nations . When explaining specific occurrences, nonetheless, though . emphasizing relevant . constraints, though, he . focuses on choices of nation .
 More frequently, Hoffmann uncovers confusion or contradiction in the nation's choice . I91 I91: I91 More frequently. I91
 Thomas Schelling's Strategy of Conflict formulates a number of propositions which explain the dynamics of deterrence in the nuclear age .
 Confidence in the contention stems not from an inductive canvass of a large number of previous cases, but rather from calculations . Confidence stems from calculations from two calculations. Confidence of the contention is based on two calculations .
 In a situation of ""balance"" but vulnerability, there are values for which a rational opponent could choose toltrike first, g. to dcstroy etaemy capabilities to retaliate . A rational opponent would choose to strike first and retaliate .
 Schelling explicitly recognizes that strategic theory does assume a model . Most contemporary strategic thinking is driven implicitly by the motor upon which this calculation depends, Schelling says .
 Each assumes that what must be explained is an action, i.e., the realization of some purpose or intention . The question is whether the answer is an answer to the question .
 Each assumes that the action is chosen as a calculated response to a strategic problem . The action was chosen as an appropriate response to the strategic problem.
 For each, explanation consists of showing what goal the nation was pursuing in committing the act and how this action was a reasonable choice, given the nation's objective . For each of the explanations, explainers show what the country was pursuing and how it was reasonable .
 This set of assumptions constitutes the frame of reference which is here labeled the rational policy model . This frame of . reference is the basis for the rational . policy model, which is based on .
 Foreign affairs are the acts of nations, but this conceptual model has rarely been recognized . The concept of foreign affairs is fundamental to thinking about foreign affairs, it is rarely recognized .
 To explain an occurrence in forcign policy, so the prevailing consensus maintains, simply means to show how the nation could have rationally chosen that action . The prevailing consensus is to show that such a decision could have been rational .
 Illustrations from several areas of the literature amount to no argument by innumeration . These brief illustrations from several of the . areas of . the literature amounts to no . argument by innumeration.
 This essay attempts to convey a grasp of the model which will permit the reader to uncover numerous other examples from the literature with which he is most familiar . It is not only that the model will be revealed, but that it will be used in other examples .
 To assert that Model I is the standard frame of reference is not to deny highly visible differences among the interests of Soviotologists, diplomatic historians, and international relations theorists, and strategists .
 Hans Morgenthau, Stanley Hoffmann, and Thomas Schelling all worked at the same time . Schelling's work is the work of three men in the same way .
 The literature of contemporary strategy employs the most refined version of the conceptual model . It is a modern-day version of a conceptual model of strategy .
 Other variants can be characterized by modifying the basic paradigm, are noted .
 Earlier drafts of this essay have aroused heated arguments concerning a proper name for this model . This essay has aroused heated debate over the name of the model .
 To choose a name from ordinary language ib to court confusion, as well as familiarity . To choose an ordinary language, the name ib will be chosen from ordinary English .
 Policy as National Choice Happenings in foreign affairs are conceived as actions chosen bV the nation . Happensings in . foreign affairs were conceived as . actions chosen by the nation, not by the government .
 Nations choose actions after calculations concerning value-maximizing means for achieving strategic goals and objectives . Nations choose to take action after calculations about the best means to achieve strategic goals .
 These ""solutions"" to strategic problems are the fundamental categories in terms of which the analyst perceives what is to be explained . These solutions are the 'solutions' to problems that need to be solved .
 Moves in chess game are explained as rational choices of a single player . Chess moves are explained in chess games .
 The nation, conceived as a rational, unitary decisionmaker, is the agent of the nation . The nation is conceived as an agent, but the nation is not the agent, it's the agent .
 The nation has one set of specified goals . One set of perceived alternatives, and a single estimate of the consequences that follow from each alternative . The nation's goal is to achieve the goals of the nation .
 Action is chosen in response to the strategic problem which faces the nation . Action is based on a response to a strategic problem facing the nation. Action will be chosen in a bid to solve the problem .
 Threats and opportunities arising in the ""international strategic market place"" move the nation to act . Threats  arise in the "international strategic market place" move the country to act. Threats or opportunities arise in international strategic markets .
 Action results from national choice among alternatives of a means calculated to achieve strategic objectives . Action follows a decision to take action in order to achieve the country's objectives .
 National security and national interests are the principal categories in which strategic goals are conceived . National security is the principal category in the strategic thinking of strategic goals .
 Analysts rarely translate strategic goals and objectives into an explicit utility function . Analysts trade off side effects in an intuitive fashion . Analyst: Analysts focus on major goals, objectives and trade off sides effects .
 Various courses of action relevant to a strategic problem provide the spectrum of alternatives . Various options are available to help solve the problem .
 "Enactment of each alternative course of action will produce a series of consequences," says President Obama . Enactment will produce consequences, he says .
 The relevant consequences constitute advantages and disadvantages in terms of strategic goals and objectives, says the author of the book . The consequences of these decisions constitute advantages, disadvantages, says author .
 The rational agent selects the alternative whose consequences rank highest in terms of his goals and objectives . He selects the alternatives that have the highest consequences for his goals .
 The point of each is to place an action within a value-maximizing framework, -9III, Dominant Tnference Pattern Employment of this paradigm leads analysts to rely on a cange of loosely formulated propositions in producing explanations .
 If a nation performed a particular action, that nation must have had goals and objectives towards which the action constituted a value-maximizing means . The action must have been achieved by a nation's goals, objectives and objectives .
 The nation's objectives can be discovered by calculating w'at strategic values are maximized by the action performed . The country's strategic values can be found out by calculating how much of a nation's objective can be achieved .
 The rational policy model's explanatory power stems from this inference pattern, says the author of the book "Rational Policy Model"
 Puzzlement is relieved by revealing the purFosive pattern within which the occurrence can be located as a value-maximizing means .
 The disgrace of political science is the infrequency with which it formulates and tests non-trivial propositions of any generality . Political science is a failure to formulate and test any of these propositions, says Dr. Martin .
 Paradigmatic analysis argues for consciousness concerning the terms in 'hich analysis proceeds, and 3eriousness about the logic of explanation . Paradigm analysis argues .
 Explanations entail propositions . The paradigm includes several propositions on which analysts rely .
 The basic assumption of value-maximizing behavior produces propositions central to explanations in most contexts . The assumption is that behavior should be maximally maximally efficient .
 I An increate in the cost of an alternative, i.e. a reduction in the value of the set of ronsequences which will follow from that action, reduces the probability of that alternative being chosen . I An increase in an alternative is a reduction of the
 A decrease in the costs of an alternative, i.e. an increase in the value of the set of consequences which will follow from that alternative, increases the probability of that action being chosen given certain constraints . A decrease of costs increases the likelihood of that alternative being chosen, or an
 But mo.; variants constrain the focal concepts stated in the strategic paradigm. But mo. variant constrain . The concept is said to be the focal concept of the strategic strategy .
 National propetisities or personality traits reflected in a ""operctional code,"" concern with certain objectives, or special principles of action narrow the ""go.go. national" code .
 A further variant, employed often by Hloffmann and by George Kennan, explains government action as deviation from the norm of rational choice, I' This model is an analogue of the theory of the rational entrepreneur which has been developed extensively in ecofiomic theories of the firm and
 The sub-theory of deterrence is based on the theory of deterrence, says the author of the book, "Deterioration"
 Second-strike capability affects the calculus by increasing the probability and the cost of retaliation . This proposition is derived from the general proposition that a second strike capability affects a potential attacker's calculus . Second strike capability increases the probability of a second-strike by increasing both the probability .
 Second-strike capabilities reduce the probability of escalation from the accidental firing of a missile to a full-blown nuclear exchange . Second strike capability reduces the risk of escalation to a nuclear war .
 Second-strike capabilities increase and reduce for a particular set of consequences . This proposition is derived from the general proposition plus the asserted fact that mutual second-strike capability increases and reduces for a set of reasons .
 A stable nuclear balance produces a more significant reduction in the probability that such consequences would be choscii in response to a limited war . This proposition is derived from the general proposition plus the asserted fact that though increasing the costs of a nuclear exchange, a stable nuke balance reduces the
 The Soviet Union chooses its force posture as a value-maximixing means of implementing Soviet strategic objectives and doctrine . Soviet Union chose force posture to implement its strategic objectives, doctrine .
 Dinerstein explains the Soviet force posture of the 1950's as rational implementation of Soviet military objectives . The 1950's military posture was rational, he says, as a result of Soviet objectives .
 Faced with a puzzling occurrence, the analyst puts himself in the place of the nation . CNN's John Sutter says the nation needs to know how to deal with the situation .
 Examination of strategic charactetistics of the problem permits the analyst to use principles of rational action to sift through both commission and omissions . Examination of the strategic characteistics of a problem requires the analyst .
 Evidence marshalled to present a coherent picture of the purposive choice from the point of view of the nation which had to act . Evidence about the details of behavior, statements of government officials, and government papers are marshalled .
 American nuclear superiority could be counted on to immobilize Soviet nuclear power . Soviet transgression of the nuclear threshold in response to an American use of lower levels of violence would be wildly irrational since it would mean virtual destruction of the Soviet Communist system and Russian nation .
 American local superiority was so overwhelming that it could be initiated at a low level while threatening with high credibility an ascending sequence of steps short of the nuclear threshold . The U.S. was so strong it could launch an attack at low levels, but it could also be initiated with a low
 All that was required was for the United States to bring to bear its strategic and local superiority in such a way that American determination to see the missile removed would be demonstrated, while at the same time allowing Moscow time and room to retreat without humiliation .
 The naval blockade -or quarantine, as it was c&lled in order to circumvent the niceties of international law -did just that . The blockade, or quarantine, was designed to circumvent international law by circumventing international law .
 The United States government's selection of the blockade after weighing all available alternatives followed this logic . The U.S. government's decision to blockade is based on the fact that all options were available .
 Most of the time during the week that followed was spent canvassing all the possible tracks and weighing the arguments for and against each one .
 The Soviet Union had long been subjected to a nuclear threat from U.S. bases within the United States and from bases less than 90 miles from her border .
 The real danger was that the U.S. would over-react to this Soviet move . Thus the real danger is that the United States would overreact to it .
 The Soviet action should be announced by the United States in a casual and calm manner . The U.S. should deflate whatever political capital Khrushchev hoped to make of the missiles, he says .
 This explanation, produced without commentary, is consistent with prevailing explanations . This explanation is produced in terms of Model I .
 To arraign the Soviet Union before the U.N. Security Council held little promise . The Russians could veto any proposed action, and Zorin was chairman of the Council for October . The Soviet Union happened to be chairman .
 To send a secret emissary to Khrushchev demanding that the missles be withdrawn would be to pose untenable alternatives . The U.S. State Department would not have been able to reach out to the Soviet Union in advance .
 Khrushchev was invited to seize the diplomatic initiative, perhaps committing himself to strategic retaliation in response to an attack on tiny Cuba . The invitation would have mobilized non-aligned and left-wing opinion to press the U.S. towards a conference a la Munich .
 On the other hand, an ultimatum which no great power could accept would have been tendered, thus justifying either a preemptive strike against the United States or at a minimum, our indictment in the court of history . On the one hand, it would have meant a pre-
 The analogy between U.S. missiles in Turkey and Russian missiles in Cuba could not be erased . To confront Khrushchev at a summit would guarantee demands for United States concessions .
 U.S. withdrew Jupiters in Turkey and Italy in order to replace them with superior, less vulnerable Mediterranean Polaris submarines . "The middle of a crisis was no time for concessions," the U.K. says .
 The offer of such a deal might confirm Soviet suspicions that the West would yield and thus tempt them to demand more . The offer might confirm their suspicions of the West that it would yield .
 It would confirm European suspicions that the U.S. would sacrifice their security in order to pro-tect our interests in an area of no concern to them, he says . It would be a sign of widening cracks in the alliance, he adds .
 OthLr nations would observe the U.S. willingness to compromise the interests of third nations when the chips were down . OthRr countries would observe that the United States would compromise its interests .
 The difficulty with this proposal was that the missiles were property of the Soviet Union . The difficulty was that this proposal would be difficult to implement .
 Soviet troops transported, constructed, guarded, and controlled the missiles . Soviet troops were involved in the construction of the missiles and construction of them .
 The U.S. could take this occasion not only to remove the missiles but also to rid itself of Castro . The United States could also remove Castro's missiles, remove him from Cuba .
 A Navy exercise -13 had been long scheduled in which Marines, ferried from Florida in naval vessels, would liberate the imprisoned island of Vieques . The exercise was long scheduled .
 Preparations have been made for an invasion, but as the last, not the first step . Preparations were made to an invasion of the U.S. But they were made for the last step, not first step.
 American troops would be forced to confront 20,000 Soviet troops in the first case of direct contact between the troops of the two super powers in the postwar world . The risk posed the gravest possible risk of a world war .
 The missile sites should be removed by a clean, swift conventional attack with or without advance warning . The sites should not be targeted by an advance attack, the author says .
 This was the firm, effective counter-action which the Soviet attempted deception deserved . This was an effective counter to the Soviet attempt to deceive the world .
 A surgical strike would effectively remove the missiles and thus eliminate both the danger that the missiles might become operational and the fear that the Soviets would discover the American discovery and act first . The U.S. has not been able to find out if the missiles are operational or if they are operational
 Preceded by announcement of missiles' presence on Saturday and accompanied by an explanatory address, increased surveillance of the island to prevent further instaliations, and a call for a summit, this would settle the matter .
 The initial attraction of this alternative was dulled by several difficulties, including difficulties . The new version of this version of the Game of Thrones will be shown on BBC2 .
 Even if the missile sites could have been destroyed, the Soviet MIG's and IL-28 bombers might attack Guantanamo or the Southeastern U.S. Even though the sites were destroyed, they could still be attacked by Soviet bombers .
 Air Force assured ExCom that destruction of missiles could not be guaranteed . Some might be fired during the attack; some might not have been identified . Some of the missiles might not be identified; some may not be fired .
 This might result in chaos and political collapse, eventually necessitating a U.S. invasion . This might lead to chaos and chaos, eventually resulting in a United States invasion .
 Second, a surprise air attack would of course kill Ruesians at the missile sites -and elsewhere, if the attack were more massive . If the attack was more massive, it would also kill the Ruesian .
 An attack on the military troops and citizens of a super power could not be regarded lightly . An attack against the military forces and citizens would not be seen lightly .
 Pressures on the Soviet Union to retaliate would be so strong that an attack on Berlin or Turkey was highly probable . The Soviet Union would respond strongly to the threat posed by the West . An attack on Turkey or Berlin or Berlin is highly probable, the author says .
 Indirect military action in the form of a blockade of one of several types became more attractive as the ExCom uncovered the ugliness of the other alternatives . The ExCom found the alternative to direct military action was more attractive .
 Even the term ""blockade" presented a formidable difficulty . An embargo on military shipments to Cuba enforced by a naval blockade was not without problems .
 The likely solution to joint blockades would be the lifting of both blockades, bringing the U.S. back to the present point and allowing the Soviets additional time to complete the missiles . The U.N. would then allow the Soviets more time to finish the missiles.
 There are similarities between the drawbacks which disqualified the air strike and the possible consequences of the blockade . Second, there were significant similarities between . The drawbacks which disqualify the strike and those which could be the consequences are similar .
 If Soviet ships did not stop, the U.S. would be forced to fire the first shot, inviting retaliation . The U.N. would have to fire first shot if they did not pull the trigger .
 A blockade offered the Soviets a spectrum of mischievous alternatives from respecting the blockade and talking while missile installations were completed to counter-blockade and propaganda initiatives .
 It was a middle course between inaction and attack, aggressive enough to communicate firmness of intention, but nevertheless not so precipitous as a strike . It was the middle course of inaction and attacking, but it was aggressive enough .
 No possible military confrontation could be more acceptable to the United States than a naval engagement in the Caribbean . The U.S. could face a military confrontation in the region .
 The flexibility of this first step allowed the United States by conventional buildup in Florida to exploit the threat of subsequent non-nuclear steps in each of which the U.S. enjoyed significant superiority .
 The U.S. has imposed a blockade on the Gaza Strip in response to a request for humanitarian aid . The blockade is the first time the blockade has been allowed to be allowed in the region .
 Nuclear powers must avert confrontations which bring an adversary to a choice of either a humiliating retreat or a nuclear war . Above all, while defending our own vital interests, nuclear powers must avoid those confrontations .
 Government behavior can be summed up as choice of a unitary, rational decisiormaker: centrally controlled, completely informed, and value maximizing . Government behavior should be usefully summarized as a rational decisormaker, a rational decisionmaker .
 "Governments" consist of a conglomerate of semi-feudal, loosely allied organizations, each with a substantial life of its own . But this abstraction must not be allowed to conceal the fact that ""governments"" consist of "governments"
 Government leaders do sit formally, and to some extent, on top of this conglomerate . Government leaders sit formally and often sit formally with the conglomerate .
 Governments define alternatives and estimate consequences as organizations process information . Governments define alternative scenarios for organizations to deal with the information .
 What a government does that is relevant to a problem can be understood according to a second conceptual model, not as deliberate choice but rather as outputs of lar-e organizations functioning according to standard patterns of behavior . What government does can therefore be understood as a result of a pattern of behavior,
 To be responsi-'e to a broad spectrum of problem areas, governments consist of large organizations with primary responsibility for particular areas is divided . Governments are divided among which primary responsibility is divided.
 Each organization attends to a narrow set of problems and acts in quasi-independence concerning these problems . Each organization has a unique mission to solve these issues .
 Few important problems fall exclusively within the domain of a single organization . But few important problems are solved by a single person, says the author .
 Government behavior reflects the independent output of several organizations, sometimes partially coordinated by government leaders . Government behavior relevant to any important problem reflects the output of other organizations, such as the government .
 Government leaders can substantially disturb, but not substantially control, the behavior of large organizations, experts say . Government leaders need to be able to control large organizations' behavior, they say .
 Each organization must attend to a set of problems, process masses of information, and perfcrm a range of ections . Each organization needs to be able to solve a problem or solve it .
 The behavior of large numbers of individuals must be coordinated . To perform these jobs, large groups of individuals will need to be coordinated, says CNN.com .
 Each player must perform maneuvers specified by a previously established play . The quarterback has simply called the play in this situation .
 At any specified time, a government consists of existing organizations, each with a fixed set of standard operating procedures and repertoires . The government is comprised of existing government organizations with a set of standards .
 The behavior of these organizations -and consequently of the government -relevant to an issue in any particular instance, is determined primarily by routines established in these organizations prior to that instance . This particular instance is determined by routine established in that instance, therefore .
 Explanation of a government action starts from this base line, noting incremental deviations from it . i I -16: "But organizations do change. i I-16: Change is incremental. i -16"
 Occasionally -however rarely -sharp deviations from the base line do happen . Sometimes sharp deviations from base line are very rare .
 Both learning and change are influenced by existing organizational capabilities, say experts . Both learn and change is influenced by already existing capabilities, experts say .
 These loosely formulated propositions about governments and organizations amount simply to tendencies . Borrowed from studies of studies of organizations, these loosely-conceived propositions amount to tendencies. Borrows from studies from organizations .
 When scientists tried to generalize about ""solids,"" they achieved similar results . Scientists tried to predict the generalities of "solids" when they looked at them .
 An adequate categorization of the various elements now lumped under the rubric ""organizations" is needed . More adequate categorizing of various elements is needed to be done .
 The behavior of particular organizations seems considerably more complex than the behavior of solids . On the other hand, it seems that particular organizations seem to be more complex .
 Additional information is required for further specification of the tendency statements . Additional information about each specific case is required .
 The characterization of government action as organizational output differs from Model I . Attempts to understand problems of foreign affairs in terms of this frame of reference should produce quite different explanations .
 The influence of studies; of organizations upon the present literature of international affairs is difficult to discern. This lacuna stems from two failures. The influence . of studies . of organizations . upon the . present literature, organizations .
 Specialists in international politics are not students of organization theory, they say . They say they are not specialists in organization theory . International politics is not an organization theory theory, it's an international politics expert .
 Organization Theory has only recently come to study organizations as decisionmakers . Organization theory has not yet produced behavioral studies of foreign policy organizations from the decisionmaking perspective . Foreign policy organizations are more likely to be influenced by organization theory .
 It would be unreasonable to expect that these gaps will remain unfilled much longer . The gaps will not be bridged much longer, according to the U.S. government .
 Considerable progress has been made in the study of the business firm as a decisionmaking organization . The study of business firms as decision-making organizations has led to significant improvements in business practices .
 Scholars have begun translating these insights into contexts in which the decisionmaker is a g'rernment organization rather than a firm . Scholars say the insights are being translated into contexts where the decision maker is a decisionmaker .
 Interest in government organizations is spreading rapidly among institutions and individuals concerned with actual government operations . Interest is growing rapidly among people concerned with government operations, experts say .
 As an expression more of the prospects than of the payoffs in this area of inquiry, an organizational process paradigm is articulated . An organizational process paradigrain is articulated. As a result of this, an organization process paradigm has been articulated .
 While not emploýyed in the present literature, it should be suggestive of paradigms which will soon be important, it will be important . It should be a good example of a new approach to the study of evolution .
 Without the necessary but missing behavioral studies of the organizations which constitute governments, this formulation must remain somewhat abstract . Without these studies, the formulation of government policy must remain abstract .
 In order for the paradigm to get a grip in a specific case, the bare bones of the statement must be fleshed out by detailed study of the characteristics of each organization involved .
 This paradigm's debt to the orientation and insights of Herbert A Simon and to the behavioral model of the firm stated by Richard Cyert and James March is considerable . Nevertheless, the present state of knowledge in this area does suggest a number of interesting implications .
 Government organizations are the less routine, less quantified, less categorized functions of the less differentiated elements termed government organizations .
 The decisions and actions which constitute the happenings of international politics are outputs of organizational processes in three critical senses . Policy as Organizational Output is the result of an organizational process in three different ways .
 Government leaders can trim edges of this output and exercise some choice in combining output . But the mass of behavior is determined by previously established repertoires, the author says .
 Government leaders have a range of effective choices open to government leaders confronted with any problem . "Existing organizational processes" constitute the range of the effective choice open to leaders, he says .
 Only the existence of men, equipped and trained as armies and capable of being transported to North Korea, made entry into the Korean War a live option for the Chinese leaders . Only a few men could be transported into North Korea .
 The fact that the fixed programs (equipment, men, and routines) existing at the particular time exhaust the range of buttons which leaders can push is not always perceived by these leaders . The fixed programs, such as equipment, men and routines, are often not perceived by leaders as they
 It's critical for an understanding of what has been done to help the victims of the war . But in every case it's critical to understand what is done by the victims .
 Third, organizational output structure the situation within the narrow constraints of which leaders must contribute their ""decision"" concerning an issue . Leaders must also contribute their "decision" about an issue, according to the organization .
 Outputs raise the problem, provide the information, and make the initial moves which color the fact of the issue which is turned to the leaders .
 If one understands the structure of the situation and the face of the issue - which are determined by organizational output - the formal choice by the leaders is almost always anti-climactic . L34J
 Analysis of formal governmental choice centers on the information provided and options defined by organizations, the existing organizational capabilities which exhaust the effective choices open to the leaders, and the outputs of relevant organizations which fix the location of S~-18pieces .
 Analysis of the aggregation of actual occurrences which comprise government behavior relevant to an issue focuses on executionary outputs of individual organizations as well as organizational capabilities and organizational positioning of the chess board .
 The actor is not a monolithic ""nation"" or 'government"" but rather a constellation of loosely allied organinations which acts only as relevant organizations act . The actor, not a nation or government, is not only a constellation but a constellation .
 Cognizance of the multiple facets of foreign affairs requires that problems be factored and parcelled out as broad areas of responsibility to various organizations which constitute the government .
 In order to avoid paralysis, primary power accompanies primary responsibility . Primary power must be followed by primary responsibility, says President Obama .
 If organizations are permitted to do anything, a large part of what they do will be determined within the organization, says John Defterios . He says organizations will be able to do whatever they want .
 Factored problems and fractionated power are two edges of the same sword, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Factored problems, fractional power and fractional problems are two edged swords," he says .
 Factoring permits more detailed, specialized attention to particular facets of problems than would be possible if goverment leaders tried to cope by themselves . Factoring allows government leaders to focus on specific facets of the problems, not alone .
 The creation of what Richard Neustadt has called ""separated institutions sharing power" must be paid for in the coin of discretion for considerable choice concerning what shall be attended to .
 Primery responsibility for a narrow set of problems encourages organizational perochicaliam . Primery of responsibility for narrow set-of-a-set problems encourages organization perochivaliam. Primery .
 Selective information available to '.he organization, recruitment of personnel into the organization, tenure of individuals in the organization and smell grokip pressures within the orginization, and distribution of rewards by the organiza•ion enhances these pressures .
 Clients, govramnt allies (e.g., Congressional committees), and extra-national counterparts galvanize this parochicalime . Clients include Congressional committees and extra national counterparts . The British Ministry of Defensi for the Office of the Secretary of Defense LISAj
 Organizations develop relatively stable propensities concerning operational priorities, perceptions, and issues . Thus organizations develop . organizational . propensations concerning . operational priorities .
 The Air Force is manned by careerists -19 on a highly structured ladder, promotion on which is critically dependent on years of demonstrated service to the Air Force mission .
 Work routines, patterns of association and information channels (accents on enemy aircraft and United States aircraft design) combine with external pressures from Air Force organizations and fr~inds in Congress to make the Air Force's search for new manned bombers predictable .
 Each organization's performance of its ""job"" has major consequences for other departments . The performance of each department's job has a major impact on other departments in the organization .
 Important problems lap over the jurisdictions of several organizations . The problem is over the jurisdiction of some organizations .
 The necessity for decentralization runs headlong into the requirement for coordination . Thus the need for coordination is to be decentralized, says the author .
 Both the necessity for coordination and the centrality of problems of foreign policy to national welfare guarantee the interest of government leaders in the activities of the organizations among which problems are factored and divided .
 Government leaders can intervene and disturb organizational propensities, routines . Government leaders should intervene and disrupt routines, says CNN.com editor .
 "Central direction and persistent control of organizational activity, however, is not possible," says President Obama . Central direction and control of organization activity is impossible, he says .
 Higher authorities can exercise some control by specifying criteria in terms of which organiratioral output is to be judged . Reward and punishments for members of an, organization are distributed by higher authorities .
 These criteria become constraints within which organizational activity proceeds . These criteria are constraints within the organization itself .
 Specification of relevant operational criteria for the activities of most government organizations is incredibly difficult . Specifying the operational requirements for most government agencies is extremely difficult. Specification is difficult to do .
 In the United States government, the leader's control over critical rewards and punishments is severly limited . Moreover, in the U.S. government, in this case, it's not easy to punish the president .
 Intervention by government leaders does sometimes change the activity of an organization in an intended directitn. Intervention by the government can sometimes change an organization's activity .
 The Navy's recent rejection of McNamara's major intervention in Naval weapon procurement should be studied as an antidote . And lest the McNamara revolution in the Defense Department seem too striking a counterexample, the Navy rejected it .
 An operational set of constraints defines acceptable level performance for each organization . Although seldom revealed by formal mandates, these constraints define acceptable levels of performance .
 These constraints are typically embedded in rules for promotion and reward, budgeting procedures, and mundane operating practices . The constraints are often embedded in the workplace, such as promotion and rewards .
 Central to organizational health is organizational health, defined usually in terms of bodies assigned and dollars appropriated . Central among these constraints is the organization's organizational health .
 The set of constraints emerges from a mix of expectations and demands of other organizations in the government, statutory authority, demands from citizens and special interests groups, and bargaining within the organization .
 The constraints represent a quasi-resolution of conflict - the constraints are relatively stable, so there is some resolution . Conflict among alternative goals is always latent, hence it is a 'quasi resolution'
 Typically, the constraints are formulated as imperatives to avoid roughly specified discomforts and disasters . Typically, these constraints are . Typically they are . formulated as . imperatives . They are . considered imperatives for roughly specified . discomfort and disasters, experts say .
 Budget also reduced Air Force's percentage of the defense pie . That budget also reduced the air force's share of defense spending .
 The existence of conflict among operational constraints is resolved by the device of sequential attention, says the author of the book "Sequence"
 As problems arise, subunits of the organization most concerned with that problem deal with it in terms of the constraints they take to be most important . Subunits deal with problems most important, such as the constraints of the most important subunits .
 When the next problem arises, another cluster of subunts deal with it, focusing on a different set of constraints . Subunts focus on the next challenge and focus on solving it in a new way .
 Organizations perform their ""higher' functions,g.g., attending to problem areas, monitoring information, and preparing relevant responses for likely contingencies, by doing ""lower" tasks, such as preparing budgets, producing reports, and developing hardware .
 Reliable performance of these tasks requires regularized behavior patterns, characterized by simple standard operating procedures . Reliable behavior patterns require regularization of behavior patterns .
 Rules of thumb permit concerted action by large numbers of individuals as responses to basic stimuli . Rule of thumb allows concerted action in response to stimuli such as stimuli .
 The rules are usually quite simple in order to facilitate easy learning and unambiguous application . Rules are often quite simple, and they are meant to be easy to understand .
 Without these standard procedures, it would not be possible to perform certain concerted tasks . Without these standards, it is not possible to carry out certain tasks, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Inst:uocs appear unduly formalized, sluggish, and often inappropriate . But because of standard procedures, organizational behavior in particular instoocs appears unduly formally formalized .
 Many organizations must be capable of performing actions in which the behavior of hundreds of individuals is carefully coordinated . Many organizations have to be able to perform actions that are carefully coordinated.
 Assured performance requires clusters of established, rehearsed standard operating procedures for producing specific actions, e.g., fighting enemy units or constructing military installations . Assured performed performance requires cluster of established and rehearsed procedures .
 Each cluster comprises a ""program"" (in the terms both of drams and of computers) which the organizatior, has available for deaiing with a situation . Each cluster has a 'program' which is available to deal with the situation .
 The list of programs relevant to a type of activity, e.g., fighting, constitutes an organizational repertoire . The list is relevant to an activity, such as fighting .
 When properly triggered, organizations execute programs; programs cannot be substantially changed in a particular situation . Organizations execute programs when properly triggered; programs can't be changed .
 The more complex the action and the greater the number of individuals involved, the more important are programs and repertoires as determinants of organizational behavior . Programs are important for organizational behavior, experts say .
 Where %ituatitnscannot be creistrued as standard, organizations engage in search . Organizations engage with search to find out what% of the world is .
 The style of the search, and the soluLion in any particular case, are largely determined by axssting routines .
 Patterns of search reveal biases which reflect special -22training or experience of various parts of the organization, expectations, and communication distortions .
 Organizations don't attempt to estimate the probability distribution of future occurrences . Organizations do not attempt to . estimate the likelihood of future occurrence .
 By arranging a negotiated environment, organizations avoid the requirements that future reactions of other parts of their environment be anticipated . Organizations avoid the need to anticipate future reactions to their environment .
 The primary environmentrelations with other organizations which comprise the government, is stabilized by agreed budgetary splits, accepted areas of responsibility, and established conventional practices .
 Kennedy referred to the Cuban missile crisis as the rules governing 'the precarious status quo""", perform this function . Between enemies, contracts and accepted conventional practices, the rules govern the status quo .
 Organizations deal with remaining uncertainties by establishing a set of standard scenarios that constitute the contingencies for which they prepare . Where the international environment cannot be negotiated, organizations prepare for contingencies .
 The standard scenario for the Tactical Air Command involves combat with enemy aircraft . For example, the standard scenario in the U.S. Air Force is combat with an aircraft .
 The preparations are not relevant to more probable contingencies, such as provision of closein ground support in Viet Main, has had little impact on the scenario . That these preparations are nor relevant to other possible contingencies .
 Internal scoring systems are devised for measuring success in preparation for these scenarios . Internal scores are devised to measure success in preparing for such scenarios .
 The parameters of organizational decisionmakir4g change slowly over time as search in response to non-standard problems changes existing routines and allows the treatment of new situations as standard problems .
 Confronted with undeniable failure of procedures and repertoires, authorities outside of the organization demand change . Existing personnel are less resistant to change, and critical members of the organisation are replaced .
 If a nation performs an action of this type today, its organizational components must yesterday have been performing (or have had established routines for performing) an action only marginally different from that action . The nation's organizational components may have performed this type of action yesterday .
 The most adequate explanation of why a nation is doing such and such today is that its organizations were doing so and such yesterday, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: It's a good thing that a nation's organizations are doing such a thing yesterday .
 Most reliable predictors of what a nation will do tomorrow is what its organizations are doing today . Conversely, the most reliable predictor of a nation's future is what it's doing today, say experts .
 The rational policy model demands confusion or conspiracy - mass incompetence or diabolic design . It is either incompetence or conspiracy .
 A Naval War warning on November 28, report of a change in Japanese codes (evaluated as very unusual), reports of Japanese ships in Camranh Bay, orders to be alert for Japanese action in the Pacific . U.S. authorization to destroy codes and secret papers in outlying
 The Navy's activity on December 7 was identical with its behavior on December 6 which differed imperceptibly from December 5 and so on. Instead the Navy's . activity on Dec. 7 vas identical with Dec. 6 and Dec. 5 . Instead, it was identical to its activity on
 Each of these details represents standard output of an organization 5unctioning according to established routines . The details represent standard outputs of a 5-functioning organization .
 Detail and nuance of act-.ons by organizations by organizations are determined by organizational roitines, not government leaders' direction . Detail of an act-on by organizations is determined by organizations, not by government leaders, says author .
 The rational policy model's attempt to read out these details, hints concerning subtle plans, is misguided . Each of the moves falling on a smooth trendline of goverimewat policy is misguided, says David Cameron .
 Standard operating procedures amount to routines for dealing with standard situations . Standard operating procedure amounts to dealing with routine situations .
 While routines allow large numbers of ordinary individuals to deal with numerous instances, day after day, by responding to basic stimuli, this regularized capability for adequate performance is purchased at the price of standardization .
 A program, i.e., a complex action chosen from a narrow repertoire, is not designed for the specific situation in which it is executed . Specific instances, particularly interesting instances which may not have ""standard"" characteristics, are often handled sluggishly .
 "The program is, at best, the most appropriate of the programs in a previously developed repertoire," the author says . "Rather than the program, the program is the best of the program," he says .
 Programs available for dealing with a particular situation are often ill-suited . Programs are developed by parochial organizations for standard scenarios defined by that organization . The programs are often developed for specific situations .
 Major lines of organizational action are straight, i.e., behavior at one time is marginally different from that behavior at t-l.e. t-L. behavior is not always the same thing .
 Organizational budgets change incrementally -both with respect to totals and intra-organizational splits . Organizational budget changes incrementally . The budget is based on revenue from employee-to-employee budgets .
 In practice, organizations take last year's budget as a base and adjust incrementally . Organizations could divide the money available each year by carving up the pie anew .
 Predictions require large budgetary shifts in a single year between organizations or between units within an organization should be hedged . Predictions which require large budget shifts in one year should not be based on one-year forecasts .
 Organizational priorities, perceptions, and issues are relatively stable . The organization is relatively stable at the top of the organization .
 New programs and activities typically consist of marginal adaptations of existing programa and activities . New programs or activities are often adapted to existing programs .
 A program once undertaken is not dropped at the point where objective costs outweigh benefits . The program is a program that must not be dropped at that point . A program must be maintained in order to ensure the program is not abandoned .
 Organizational stakes in adopted programs carry them quite beyond the loss point . Organizational stake matters beyond the point of a loss .
 As early as March, 1940,Marshall had requested that an evaluhtive branch be established within G-2 .
 According to Marshall's request, G-2 's staff had been expanded, but the additions were concentrated in the ongoing espionage program .
 In explanation, analysis, and prediction, administrative feasibility muxt be a major dimension . Administrative feasibility is a key component of the study .
 A considerable gap separates what leaders choose (or might rationally) and what organizations implement . -25Organizations are blunt instruments. -25
 Projects which require several organizations act with high degrees of precision and coordination as surgical scalpels are not likely to succeed . Projects that require coordination are unlikely to succeed, experts say .
 Projects which demand that existing organizational units deal with problems quite different from their accustomed duties are rarely accomplished in their designed 7orm. projects . Projects that demand that . existing . organizational units . deal with . problems quite . different from . their usual duties .
 Government leaders can expect that each organization will do its ""part"" in terms of whal the organization knows how to do . Government leaders are expected to expect each organization to do its "part" in order to succeed .
 Government leaders can expect incomplete and distorted information from each organization concerning its part of the problem . Government leaders should expect incomplete, distorted information about each organization's role in solving the problem, says CNN.com .
 Where an assigned piece of a problem is contrary to the existing goals of an organizaticn, resistance to implementation of that piece will be encountered . The solution to the problem is to implement that piece .
 Wohlstetter's explanation of the success of the Japanese attack on the Philippines - given nine hours warning - succeeded . It succeeded, "not because of inadequate intelligence," he says .
 MacArthur ordered heavy bombers transferred to a safer field . MacArthur had ordered the heavy bombers to be moved to a safe field . After the war warning of November 27, MacArthur ordered the bombers transferred .
 The probability of a nuclear attack is more sensitive to organizational factors than it is to the relevant range of balance and imbalance, stability and instability . The probabilities of a nuke attack are sensitive to a number of organizational factors, experts say .
 The eremy's control system, i.e., physical mechanisms which determine who can launch rockets when, is criticl.e. The er.emy's . control system is critictl.
 Second, the enemy's programs for bringing his strategic forces to alert status determine probabilities of accidental firing and momentum . Third, the risk of an accident is that the enemy will be able to anticipate an attack on the ground .
 At the outbreak of World War 1, if the Russian tzar had understood the organizational processes which his order of full mobilization triggered, he woulh have known that he had chosen war .
 Third, organizational repertoires fix the range of effective choice open to enemy leaders . Organizational repertoires are a key part of an effective strategy to defeat enemies .
 The training and deployment of troops and nuclear weapons is crucial . Fourth, since organizational routines set the chessboard, the training is crucial for the military .
 Civen that the outtre•ak of hostilities in Berlin is more probable than most scenarios for nuclear war . Facts about deployment, training, and tactical nuclear equipment of Soviet troops stationed in Kast Germany .
 The Soviet force posture is determined by a number of organizational factors, within certain constraints set by government leaders . Soviet forces posture is based on organizational factors such as organizational factors . The Soviet Union has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Processes and procedures of the organizations which comprise the Soviet military and the research and development community are major determinants of this posture . The Soviet military is major determinant of its posture .
 The ""bomber gap"" which was predicted by many Model I Sovietologists for the 1950's never materialized . Thus, the ""bombing gap"" never materialised .
 The Soviet military establishment included no Air Force, whose business it would have been to expand this system, does not seem irrelevant . The fact that the Soviet Air Force included no . Air Force would have had no role in expanding this system .
 Soviet development and deployment of an Anti-Ballistic Missile system seems to be the result of activity of a Soviet organization, the PVO, whose perceptions, priorities and budget have pernitted development and . deployment by continuation .
 The bones of this paradigm allow an analyst to modify expectations generated by the rational policy model . Evidence suggests that this could be used to help shape the future of the US government .
 "The general propositions do yield some explanatory power," says John Sutter . Sutter: The general propositions yield some predictive power .
 This paradigm requires information about the behavior of specific organizotions . But satisfactory explanation according to this paradigm must be provided by specific organs .
 Until more studies become available, categorization of organizations and specification of propositions will be severely limited . Categorization will be limited until more studies are available .
 A United States blockade of Cuba's Organizational Intellilgence . The U.S. would block Cuba from entering the United States . The United States would block the flow of money to Cuba .
 At 7:00 P.M. on October 22, 1962, President Kennedy delivered the major foreign policy address of his career . Kennedy's address was the most significant foreign policy speech of his life .
 This decision was reached at the pinnacle of the U.S. Govermnt after a critical week of deliberation . L403 is the latest in a series of controversial decisions made by the US government .
 Air Force Major Rudolph Anderson took photos of Soviet missile sites in Cube . The photos were taken on October 14 by Air Force major Rudolph Anderson . Anderson was the first to take photos of the Soviet missile site .
 U.S. leaders might have received this information two weeks earlier - if a U-2 had flown over this area on the first day of October . L41J United States leaders .
 Lihus what determined the context in which American leaders chose to choose the blockade was the discovery of missiles on October 14 . -27
 The job of intelligence requires an incredibly complex organization, coordinating large numbers of actors, processing endless piles of information . Intelligence is a complex job that requires coordination, coordination and processing large amounts of data .
 That this organization must function according to established routines and standard procedures is a simple fact . That this is a fact, it's a fact that it must operate according to standard procedures .
 The organizational routines and standard operating procedures by which the U.S. intelligence community discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba were neither more nor less successful than they had been the previous month or were to be in the months to follow . The available record permits a fairly reliable reconstruction of the patterns of the
 Refugees from Cuba brought innumerable reports of Soviet missiles, Chinese soldiers and a variety of other atrocities . Refugees from the island nation brought in Soviet missiles and soldiers .
 CIA staff at Opa Locka, Florida collected, collated, and compared the results of interrogations of refugees - though often with a lag since refugees numbered in the thousands . The results of the interrogations were collected by staff at the Florida facility .
 The U-2 camera acquired the highest quality U.S. intelligence . The U.2 camera was acquired by the U.K. It acquired the most valuable intelligence ever obtained .
 SAM sites, coastal defense missile sites, MIG's, missile patrol boats, and IL-28 light bombers . These earlier flights produced information on SAM sites .
 No U-2 flight was directed over the western end of Cuba (after September 5) before October 4 . Yet the notorious ""September estimate"" concluded that the Soviet Union would not introduce offensive missiles into Cuba .
 Transmission time means transmission time means ftt facts :an be ""in the system"" without being available to the head of the orgenisation .
 Information mast must be winnowed at every step up the organizational hi-rarchy . The number of minutes in each day limits the number of bits of information each individual can absorb . Information can be wonnowed in the organization's hierarchy .
 Those who select which information their boss shall see rarely see their bosses' problem . But those who choose which information they will see are rarely see it as a problem .
 Facts with hindsight are clear signals of an occurrence are frequently indistinguishable froa surrounding ""noise"" before the occurrenre. Finally, facts vhich with hindsight were clear signals .
 Shipping intelligence experts noted both the ships had large hatches and the fact that the ships -29were riding high in the water .
 For experts sensitive to the Soviet's pressing requirement for ships, however, neither the facts nor the inference carried a special signal . For experts, the facts and the inference carry a special message .
 The refugee report of Castro's private pilot's remark had been received at Opa Locks along with vast reams of inaccurate and even deliberately false reports generated by the refugee community .
 This report and a thousand others had to be checked and compared before being sent to Washington . This report was sent to the White House by a thousand people .
 The two weeks required for initial processing could have been shortened by a large increase in resources devoted to this source of information . But the yield of this source w•as already quite marginal .
 There was little reason to expect that a change in procedures which might have reduced transmisioon time to one week would be worth the cost .
 CIA agent's sighting of the rear profile of a strategic missile had occurred on September 12; transmission time from agent sighting to arrival in Washington typically took nine to twelve days . The CIA agent sighting occurred September 12 .
 Report arrived at CIA headquarters on September 21, two days after the USIB meeting . CIA says the report is based on the findings of the CIA's own internal investigation into the CIA .
 Shortening transmission time would impose severe cost in terms of danger to sub-agents, agents, and communication networks . Shortening this transmission time could impose a severe cost on sub-agent, agents and networks, scientists say .
 U-2 flights had produced no hard indication of the presence of offensive missiles, U.2 officials said . U.S. had no hard indications of the existence of the missiles .
 The flight over Western Cuba on September 5, revealed SAM installations which were approaching completion . SAM installations are expected to be completed within weeks .
 A U-2 on ""loan"" to the Chinese Nationalists was shot down over mainland China on September 9 . The intelligence community feared that a fresh outcry raised round the world would force the abandonment of U-1 flights and thus mean the loss of its most reliable source of information
 The State Department pressed arguments concerning the political consequences of the loss of another U-2, for examplp, over Cuba . The State Dept. pressed arguments .
 Future flights should ""dip into"" Cuban airspace and peer as much possible from the periphery, it was decided .
 The 14 days between the September 19 estimate and October 4 decision to direct special flight over western uhba added a number of additional pieces to the picture .
 Castro's pilot's claim also arrived . Shortly afterwards, the refugee report of Castro's . claim also came from Castro's refugee .
 On September 27 a ""hard copy"" report of the sgent's sighting, which had been circulated as an ""advance report"" on September 21, arrived . This presumably included a sketch of the missile . The report was circulated on September 27 .
 Colonel Wright of the CIA had been studying the pattern of SAM installations photographed by the U-2 flight over Western Cuba .
 He noted that this trapezoidal pattern resembled photographs of SAM installations in the Soviet Union designed to protect strategic missiles . J66] J66].
 Reports were also received concerning action ir.the Pinar del Rio area . These pieces of information led some analysts to the hypothesis that the Soviets were placing strategic missiles .
 The CIA marked the central and western end of Cuba ""suspicions"" on September 29 and certified highest priority for aerial reconnaissance on October 3 .
 A U-2 overflight of Western Cuba is routine and non-startling from an organizational perspective . The U.S. State Department had a qualm about possible consequences of a loss of a U.2 over Cuba .
 The State Department put the case concerning consequences of the loss of a V-2 over Cuba in the strongest terms . The ten day delay between decision and flight is another organizational story .
 Defense Department took this opportunity to raise an important issue important to its concerns, the Pentagon says .
 Given the danger that a U-2 vould be downed, it would be better if the pilot were an officer in uniform rather than a CIA agent .
 The CIA argued that this was an intelligence operation and thus within the CIA's jurisdiction . To the contrary, the CIA said it was within the agency's jurisdiction to investigate .
 CIA U-2's had been modified in certain ways which gave them advantages over Air Force U-1's in averting Soviet SAM's . CIA U.2's were modified to avoid Soviet SAMs .
 State Department pressed for less risky alternatives such as drones and the Air Force (in Department of Defense guise) and CIA en1aged in territorial disputes . Five days passed while the State Dept. pressed for drones .
 On October 9 a flight plan over San Cristobal was approved by caoNR, but the CIA's dismay, Air Force pilots rather than CIA agents would take charge of the mission .
 Air Force pilot in an Air Farce U-2 may have had to descend to rest engine resta.t its engine .
 Second round between Air Force and CIA followed . Air Force pilots were trairad to fly CIA U-2's . Second round followed .
 In the face of well-founded suspicions concerning offensive Soviet missiles in Cuba which posed a critical threat to the United States' most vital interest, squabbling between organizations whose job it is to produce this information seems inappropriate .
 The issue was not simply which organization was to have Jurisdiction concerning U-2 flights over Cuba, but rather the broader issue of control of the U.2 intelligence . This is a very long standing territorial dispute .
 Deliberations of leaders in ExCom meetings produced broad outlines of alternatives . Deliberation of leaders led to a broad outline of alternatives to the government's plan .
 Details of alternatives and blueprints for their implementation had to be specified by the organization which would be responsible for performing these tasks . Details of these alternatives were specified by an organization which was responsible for the tasks .
 Whether the U.S. could perform the surgical strike was a factual question concerning capabilities . Whether the United States could perform a surgical strike is a question concerning capability .
 The majority of the members of the ExCom, including the President, initially liked the air strike . What effectively foreciosed this option, however, was the fact that the strike which they wanted could not be chosen with high confidence of success .
 L72, After having tentatively chosen the course of prudence -given that the surgical air strike was not an option -Kennedy reconsiderei. L72 . L72: After having . tentatively . chosen the . course of prudentence - given that . surgical air
 General Walter C Sweeny, Commnder of Ta'tical Air Forces, asserted again that the Air Force could guarantee no higher than ninety percent effectiveness in a surgical air strike .
 Organizations defined what the President believed V.S. military equipment and personnel were capable of performing in the Cuba missile crisis . Organizations defined the President's ability to carry out the mission .
 Specification of the air strike alternative provides a classic case of military estimates . Specification is a classic military estimate of the cost of air strikes .
 Specification of the details of this alternative was delegated to the Air Force . The Air Force has been tasked with developing an alternative aircraft .
 The problem was samplei elimination of the Communist Cuban thorn . From that perspective, the problem was the elimination of that thorn .
 The Air Force was said to have been restrained in lQt44l. It had to be restrained fvm this task in a lQT4l .
 Joint Chiefs emphasized United States security requirements which might be affected by the strike . As the plan was prepared, discussion among the Joint Chiefs was focused on security requirements .
 The detail of that plan called for extensive bombardment of missile sites, storage depots, airports, and, in deferenceto the Navy, the artillery batteries opposite the naval base at Guantanamo . Political leaders do not normally examine detailed war plans; this was a normal case .
 ExCom repeatedly expressed bewilderment concerning Air Force assertions that the air strike would call for as many as five hundred sorties involve collateral damage, etc. But the members of the ExCom said they were bewildered by the Air Force's assertions .
 Political leaders were interested in the air strike in which many thought the Air Force was talking about . The political leaders were never examined in detail by Air Force estimators during the first week of the crisis .
 The grounds for Sweeny's assurance to the President that a surgical air strike would not guarantee destruction of the missiles was no careful study . Rather Air Force estimators had simply excluded the alternative with the assertion that since the MRBM's were ""mobile,"" extensive bombing was required .
 During the second week of the crisis, civilian expercs examined the surgical air strike . Civilians examine the surgical strike . The surgical strike was the first to strike in Syria .
 Careful study revealed that the missiles designated ""mobile"" could be moved and reassembled -in six days . Study revealed that missiles designated "mobile" missiles could be reassembled in six days - in six .
 After the missiles were reclassified ""movable"" and detailed plans for surgical air strikes specified, this action was added to the list of live options for the end of the second week .
 The task of specifying the details of the option named ""blockade"" belonged to the Navy . The task was to specify the details .
 Before the President announced the blockade on Monday evening, the first stage of the Navy's blueprint was in motion . The Navy had a detailed plan for the blockade .
 The President had several less precise but equally determined notions concerning what should be done, when, and how . Mr. Obama had a few less precise ideas about what should, when and how to do .
 For the Navy the issue was one of effective implementation of the Navy's blockade -without the meddling and interference of political leaders . The issue is not only for the Navy but also for the country's political leaders, says Navy .
 A surface chronology establishes a context within which questions arise . The chronology of events in the U.S. is a complex and complex subject subject to questions .
 The President heard a discussion Ohout opeiation of the blockade for the first time at the meating of the formal Nastional Security CAuncil on Sunday, "ctober 21"
 L78 Admiral .eorpe Ande'son, Chief of Saval Operstivrns, described the plans and procedures . L78 Adm.eorpe . Ande’son described the plan and procedures for Saval .
 First, each approaching ship would be sigl•ed to stop for Soardi'R and inspection .
 If there were still no satisfactory response, a shot would be fired into her rudder to cripple but not sink . Finally, if there was still no unsatisfactory response, the ship would be sunk .
 The quarantine was proclaimed Tuesday evening, after the Organization of American States approval had been obtained . The quarantine has been declared .
 A careful reading of available sources uncovers an instructive incident . The incident occurred in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Navy's blueprint for the blockade was thus changed by drawing the blockade much closer to Cuba . L863 The Navy changed the blockade by drawing it closer to the island of Cuba .
 This incident seems to suggest that organizational plans and procedures can be changed by political leaders successfully and at small cost .
 A serious organizational orientation makes one suspicious of this account, says CNN.com . A serious organization orientation is suspicious in this account .
 More careful examination of the available evidence confirms these suspicions . Alternative accounts must be speculative, though alternative accounts are speculative .
 A quarantine drawn close to Cuba became effective on Wednesday morning, the first Soviet ship was contacted on Thursday morning, and the first boarding of a ship occurred on Friday . According to the public chronology, a quarantine became effective Wednesday morning .
 The Marcula had been trailed since about 10:30 the previous evening . L87j The Marula was trailed by about 10,30 the night .
 Soviet ships passed through the line along which American destroyers posted themselves before the official ""first contact"" with the Soviet ship .
 The Bucharest was hailed by the Navy on the morning of October 25 . Photographs of this vessel sLow the name Vinnita on the side of the veseel in Cyrillic letters . According to the official U.S. position, the first tanker to pass through
 A tanker traveling at 10 to 20 knots could not reach Havana from the blockade line in a single day . Simple mathematical calculation excludes the possibility that the Bucharest and the Vinnita were the same ship . The Bucharest was the last ship to leave Havana from Havana .
 It seems quite probable that the Navy's resistance to the President's order that the blockade be drawn in closer to Cuba forced the President to allow one or several Soviet shi s to pass through the blockade .
 On Wednesday morning, October 24, what the President had been awaiting occurred . President Barack Obama was greeted with a visit to the White House .
 The eighteen dry cargo ships headed towards the quarantine stopped dead in the water . They stopped dead and went into the quarantines .
 The President became quite concerned lest the Navy -already riled because of the leashing of its designed blockade -blunder into an incident . The President was concerned that the Navy might be riled by the situation .
 McNamara became suspicious of the Navy's organizational procedures and routines for making the first interception . Sensing President's fears, McNamara was suspicious of Navy procedures .
 At one point McNamara asked Anderson what he would do if a Soviet ship's captain refused to answer questions about his cargo . McNamara later asked Anderson if he would ask the captain to explain his cargo to the public .
 Model II's grasp of government action as organizational output, partially co-ordinated by a unified group of leaders, provides a salutary antidote to the standard model's efforts at understanding government behavior as actions chosen by a unitary decisionmaker . BUREAUCRATIC POLITICS
 Each of the individuals in this group is, in his own right, a player in a central, competitive game . Each of these individuals is, of course, a member of the group of players in the game .
 Government behavior can be understood according to a third conceptual model, not as organizational output but as outcomes of these bargaining games . Government behavior should be understood as a result of such bargaining games, the author says .
 In contrast with Model I, the bureaucratic politics model sees no unitary actor but rather many actors as players . Government decisions are made not by rational choice but by the pulling and hauling that is politics, writes David Frum .
 The apparatus of each national government constitutes a complex arena for the intra-national game . Each country's government apparatus is an arena for a complex game of politics .
 Political leaders at the top of this apparatus plus the men who occupy positions on top of the critical organizations form the circle of central players . The circle of players includes political leaders, political leaders and the people who occupy key positions in critical organizations .
 The necessary decentralization of decisions required for action on the broad range of foreign policy problems guarantees that each player has considerable baronial discretion . This decentralization means that each member of parliament has considerable discretion .
 The nature of problems of foreign policy permits fundamental disagreement among reasonable men about what ought to be done . The Nature of Problems of Foreign Policy permits disagreement, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Separate responsibilities laid on the shoulders of individual personalities encourage differences in perceptions end priorities . Separate responsibility is laid on shoulders of individuals, rather than individual personalities .
 "Respondent men are obliged to fight for what they are convinced is right," says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 This framework is entitled the bureaucratic politics model. What the nation does is sometimes the result of the . It is sometimes a result of . the bureaucracy .
 It might have been labeled administrative, internal, governmental, machine, or even palace politics . It might be labeled administrative or governmental, political .
 In either case what moves the chess pieces is not simply the reasons which support a course of action, nor the routines of organiza~ions which enact an alternative, but the power and skill of proponents and opponents of the action in question . What moves chess pieces are not simply reasons which
 This characterization captures the thrust of the bureaucratic politics orientation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If problems of foreign policy arose as discreet issues, this account would suffice . If problems arose as . discreet issues arose as issues, and decisions were determined one game at a time .
 Vietnam or the proliferation of nuclear weapons, emerge piecemeal, over time, one lump in one context, a second in another . Vietnam or nuclear arms proliferation, emerges piecemeal over time . Vietnam, nuclear weapons proliferate piecemeal and emerge piecearily .
 Each player is forced to fix upon his issues for that day, fight them on their own terms, and rush on to the next . Each player's issues are forced to focus on his own terms .
 The character of emerging issues &ad the pace at which the game is played converge to yield government ""decisions"" and ""actions"" as collages . Thus the character of issues and the pace of the game are played converge .
 To explain why one particular formal decision was made or why one pattern of government behavior emerged, it is necessary to identify the games and players, to display the coalitions, bargains, and compromises, and to convey some feel for the confusion .
 The concept of national security policy as political outcome contradicts both public imagery and academic orthodoxy . National security policy is political outcome, the author says .
 To accuse someone of ""playing politics with national security"" is a most serious charge . To accuse a politician of playing national security is a very serious charge, he says . He says the charge is a serious accusation .
 Sorensen and Schlesinger present the efforts of the ExCom in the Cuban missile crisis as rational deliberation among a unified group of equals . For example, they present the effort in Cuba as rational deliberations among equals .
 What public conviction demands, the academic penchant for intellectual elegance reinforces. What public convictions demands is public conviction, the author says .
 Internal politics is messy, according to prevailing doctrine, politicking lacks intellectual content . Political discourse is messy and needs intellectual content, says Julian Zelizer .
 As such, it constitutes gossip for journalists rather than a subject for serious investigation . As such it is not a serious investigation, it is gossip for the media .
 Most of the literature of foreign policy avoids bureaucratic politics . Occasional memoirs, anecdotes, anecdotes in historical accounts .
 The gap between academic literature and the experience of participants in government is nowhere wider than at this point . The gap is now wider than in academic literature, and it's getting worse .
 The paradigm articulated here relies upon this small but increasing number of people in the U.S. The paradigm relies upon these people .
 "Little labor has been invested in squeezing these insights into propositions," says John Sutter . Sutter: "Little effort has been made to squeeze them into propositions"
 Systematic investigation of major players' games, categories of decisions and actions, and the ""fine print" of bureaucratic politics, is required . Systematic . investigation of  decisions and categories of . decisions and . actions is required to be thorough .
 Until this work is more advanced the bureaucratic politics paradigm can be no more than a tentative formalization of an orientation, it can't be more advanced .
 National inputs into international affairs can be conceived as outcomes of intricate and subtle, simulcaneous, overlapping games among players located in positions, the hierarchial arrangement of which constitutes the government . Wittgenstein's concept of a ""game" is based on the concept of the "government"
 Chess games are to be explained in terms of the bargaining among players with separate and unequal power over particular pieces and with separable objectives in distinguishable subgames . The moves, sequences of moves, and games of chess are . to explain chess games in terms terms of bargaining among . players
 The actor is neither a unitary nation, nor a conglomerate of organizations, but rather a number of individual players, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Groups of players constitute the agent for particular goverwent decisions and actions . Groups of these players are agents for government decisions . The groups of players are the agents of government decisions, actions and decisions .
 Individuals become players in the national security policy game by occupying a critical position in an administration . Individuals become a key player in national security policies by occupying critical positions in the administration .
 The theatrical metaphor of stage, roles, and actors is more common than this metaphor of games, positions, and players . The theatrical metaphors of stage and roles are often more common .
 The concepts of games, positions, and players are more useful for this analysis of aative participants in the determination of national foreign policy .
 Wittgenstein's game theory uses the term "game" to address serious problems in philosophy and game theory . Objections to the terminology on the grounds that ""game"" connotes non-serious play overlook the concept's application to most serious problems .
 Wittgenstein's examination of the ""language game"" wherein men use words to communicate is quite analogous to this analysis of the less specified game of bureaucratic politics . Game theory typically treats more precisely structured games, such as the language game .
 Wittgenstein's employment of this concept forms a central strand in his Philosophical Investigations . Wittgenststein's use of the concept is a central part of his Philosopher Investigations .
 The advantages and handicaps with which each player can enter and play in various games stems from his position . Each player's position is considered to be a key to the success of the game .
 The two sides of this coin are illustrated by the position of the modern Secretary of State . The position of this position is illustrated by a modern secretary of state .
 First,in form and usually in fact, he is the primary . of political Jucgment on the political-military issues which are the stuff of contemporary foreign policy . He is a senior personal adviser to the President .
 President's other senior advisers include the Secretaries of Defense and Treasury, and the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs . He is also a colleague of the President's advisers on foreign policy .
 Third, he is the ranking U.S. diplomat for serious negotiation . He is also the ranking United States diplomat .
 Fourth, he serves as an administration voice to Congress, the country, and the world . He serves as a voice of the administration to Congress .
 The perspective stemming from the daily work which be must oversee--the cable traffic by which his department maintains relations with other foreign offices--conflicts with the President's requirement that he serve as a generalist and coordinator of contrasting perspectives .
 The necessity that he be close to the President restricts the extent of which, and the force with which, he can front for his department .
 When he defers to the Secretary of Defense rather than fighting for his department's position, as he often must, he strains the loyalty of his officialdom . He strains his loyalty to the secretary of defense .
 The Secretary's resolution of these conflicts depends not only upon the position, but also upon the player who occupies the position . The Secretary of State: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here to resolve these conflicts"
 How each man manages to stand the heat in his kitchen, each player's basic operating style, and the complementarity or contradiction among personalities and styles in the inner circles are irucible pieces of the policy blend .
 These begs include sensitivities to certain issues, commitments to various programs, and personal standing and debts with groups in the society .
 For the factors which encourage organizational parochicalism also exert pressure upon the players who occupy positions on top of (or within) these organizations . For the reasons which encourage . organizational . parochialism . also exerts pressure upon . players .
 To motivate members of his organization, a player must be sensitive to the organization's orientation . To motivate players, players must be aware of their orientation, he says .
 The games into -40 which the player can enter and the advantages with which he plays enhance these pressures . It is also a challenge for the player to be able to enter into the game . The player can also enter the game with a -40 rating .
 Propensities of perception and priorities stemming from position are sufficient to permit reliable prediction in many cases . Thus propensity of perception is sufficient to allow reliable prediction of many cases.
 These propensities are filtered through the baggage which players bring to positions . But they are filtered into the baggage that players bring with them .
 Sensitivity to both the pressures and the baggage is required for many predictions . Sensitivity is required to many predictions, such as many predictions of the future .
 Outcome outcomes advance and impede each player's conception of the natiotial interest, his organization's interests, programs to which he is committed, and the welfare of his friends, and his personal interests . But outcomes advance, impede players' conception of their interests, organizations' interests,
 These overlapping interests constitute the stakes for which games are played . The stakes for these games are important to ensure the stakes are high .
 Unsuccessful investment deplete both the stock of capital and the reputation of the company . Unsuccessful investments deplete capital and reputation .
 Each player must pick the issues on which he can play with high probability of success . Thus each player must choose the issues he can control with high likelihood of success.
 No player's power is sufficient to guarantee satisfactory outcomes, says CNN.com's John Sutter . But no player's will be enough to guarantee a satisfactory outcome, he says .
 Deadline and events raise issues in games, and demand decisions of incredibly busy players in ccntextexts which significantly influence the face that the issue wears . deadlines and events in games are more important to players .
 The problems for the players are both narrower and broader than the strategic problem . The problems are both narrow and broader . The problem is not only a problem but a broader problem .
 Each player focuses not on the total strategic problem but rather on tht decision which must be made now . For each player focuses on the fact that the decision is made now, rather than the total problem .
 Each decision has critical consequences not only for the strategic problem but also for each player's organizational, reputational, and personal stakes . Each player's decision has consequences for their organization, their reputual, and their own life .
 The gap between what the player was focusing on and the problem upon which 'he analyst focuses is so wide that it may be unbridgeable. Thus the gap between the player's focus and the analyst's focus may be too wide to bridgeable .
 Circuits, i.e.e., regularized ways of producing action concerning types of issues, structure the game by pre-selecting ths major players, determining their points of entrance into the game .
 Circuit circuits determine "who's got the action,"" that is, which department's Indians actually do whatever is decided . Most critically, circuits determine who will do whatever .
 Government actions emerge neither as the calculated choice of a unified group nor as a formal sumnary of leaders' preferences . Covernment decisions are made and government actions emerge as a result of a group's choice of leaders, not as a calculated choice .
 The context of .hared power but separate judgments concerning important choices, determines that politics is the mechanism of choice . Rather than a shared power, politics is a mechanism for choice .
 Each player pulls and hauls with the power at his discretion for outcomes which will advance his conception of national, organizational, group, and personal interests . Each player has the power to influence outcomes which he wants .
 The strategies and tactics employed are similar to those formalized by theorists of international relations . The strategies are quite similar to that of theorists, such as international relations theorists .
 Politics does not consist simply ef players pulling and hauling, each for his own chosen action . But the game ot politics does not always consist simply of players pulling .
 Staffers of Rarons fight to find issues, state alternatives, and produce arguwnts for their Chiefs . The staffers of the Chiefs fight for their chiefs .
 Presidential staffers -ideally -struggle to catth issues antd structure games so 4s to maximize both the President's appreciation of advocates' arguments and the impact of Presidential decision .
 Government decisions or actions rarely emerge as steady-state outcomes of a single game . Important government decisions often don't emerge as a steady state outcome, experts say . That's not always the case, they say .
 What the government does is a collage composed of individual acts, outcomes of minor and major games, and foul-ups . Rather than individual acts of individuals, the government is composed of the outcomes of major and minor games .
 Outcomes which could never have been chosen by an actor would never have emerged from bargaining in a single game over the issue, are fabricated piece by piece . Outcomes could never be chosen by actor and would never emerge from bargaining, say the writer .
 Sophisticated players appreciate that each piece of the picture is but a piece, and adjust their play accordingly . Sophisticating players appreciate each piece is a piece and adjust accordingly .
 Players concerned with the aggregate work of art must attempt to manage the stream of acts, outcomes, and foul-ups, though this is the most difficult aspect of the game of politics .
 If a nation performed an action, that action was the outcome of bargaining among individuals and groups within the government . The result of a nation's actions was the result of collective bargaining .
 The outcome included results of the triumph in the bargaining groups comitted to a decision or action . Resultants emerged from bargaining among groups with quite different positions and foul-ups .
 Model III's explanatory power is achieved by revealing the pulling and hauling of various players, with different perceptions and priorities, focusing on separate problems, which yielded the outcomes that constitute the action in question .
 The sum of the behavior of representatives of a government relevant to an issue wae. rarely intended by any individual or group .
 Separated individuals contributed pieces which compose an outcome distinct from what anyone would have chosen . Rather than separate individuals with different intentions contributed pieces .
 Horisuntailv, the diverse demand, upon each player shape his priorities, perceptions and issues. and issues . The diverse demand on each player shapes his priorities and issues, and will shape his life .
 For large classes of issues, budgets and procurement decisions, the stance of a particular playet can be predicted with high reliability from its seat . For large class of issues such as budgets and procurements, the position of a playet is predicted .
 The aphorism ""where you stand depends on where you sit"" has vertical as well as horizontal application . The aphoism has vertical and horizontal applications .
 The demands upon the President, Chiefs, Staffers, and Indians are quite distinct, first in the case of policy making, and second in the cases of implementation .
 His problem is to probe the special face worn by issues that come to his attention, to preserve his leeway until time has clarified the uncertainties, and to assess the relevant risks, he says .
 Foreign policy chiefs deal most often with the hottest issue de Jour . They can get the attention of the President and other members of the govermnent .
 They must "give the President confidence" in the choice of the right course of action . They must also give the president confidence in the decision to take action .
 Most problems are framed, alternatives specified, and proposals pushed, however, by Indians . Most of the world's problems are not solved by Indians, but by Indians.
 Indians' fights with Indians of other departments, for example, are microcosm of the action at higher levels . The struggles between International Security Affairs of the Department of Defense and Political-Military of the State Department are a microcosmic .
 The essence of a responsible official's task is to induce others to come to see what needs to be done is what their own appraisal of their own responsibilities requires them to do in their own interests .
 For implementtion of foreign policy decisions, vertical demands differ . For implementation, vertical demand differ. "Vertical demands differ"
 The necessity that he build a consensus behind his preferred policy frequently requires fuzziness . The necessity for him to build consensus behind a preferred policy often requires fuzzyiness .
 Different people mist agree with slightly different things for quite different reaons . Different people are different people who agree with different things .
 When a governmant decision is mrde, the character of the choice and the reasons for the choice must often remain vague .
 Conviction of footdraggers and subversives is a difficult task when the decision is clear and the watchman is the President . Conviction is difficult when the President is clear, the President says .
 Where decisions are fuzzed -as the first requirement demands - this task strains even the resources of the President . The task is a task that strains even even the President's resources .
 Most oversight, policing, 4th spurring is done not be the President but by the President's men or the men who agree with the government decision . Most oversight is done by the men and the men of the government .
 Men who would move elements of the government to act on what has been decided demand clarity . Men who want clarity demand clarity from government .
 The probability of a nuclear attack depends primarily on the probability of attack emerging as an outcome of the bureaucratic politics of the attacking government, says Peter Bergen .
 This latter probability is composed of a number of elements of the game in the politics of the attacking government . It is not the first time the government has been attacked by a government in the past .
 Whether the effective power over action is controlled by an individual, a minor game, or the central game is critical . Whether an individual has the power to control an action is critical is critical, says the author .
 Second, though Model I's confidence in deterrence stems from an assertion that, in the end, nations will not commit suicide, Model III recalls the carcasses of national suicides with which history is strewn .
 The major difference between a stable balance of terror and a questionable balance may be that most members of the government appreciate fully the consequences of attack in the case of the former and are thus on guard against the emergence of this outcome .
 U.S. government would have been aware of a considerable probability of attack on Pearl Harbor, historian says . Pearl Harbor was the result of a stream of decisions from which the Japanese attack emerged .
 In a crisis or after the beginning of conventional war, what happens to the information available to, and the effective power of, members of the central game. For example, in a crisis what happens .
 A third element of importance to attacks are probable differences in perceptions and priorities of central leaders . The attacks are likely to be aimed at central leaders, according to the authors .
 Pressures encourage both the Soviet Chairman and the U.S. President to feel differences between their own perspectives and responsibilities . The United States President and Soviet Chairman feel differences .
 Neither of them will likely perceive large differences between the death of one-million -45and one-hundred million of his own citizens when choosing to take, or refrain, a risk .
 Both the ""kings"" are partners in the game against nuclear disaster . Both may well appreciate the extent of the partnership .
 If channels can be arranged, such cormunication offers the most promising prospect of resolution of a crisis . If channels are arranged, it offers the best prospect of resolving the crisis .
 The broad outlines of Soviet force posture are established as outcomes of bargaining in the central Soviet game . The broad outline of Soviet forces is established in the Soviet Union game .
 The dominant fcature of bureaucratic politics in the Soviet Union is that the ""struggle for power"" is continuous . The dominant fictictation of bureaucracy is that the struggle for power is continuous.
 Occupation of positions in the central game is always uncertain and risky . Occupation is always always uncertain, risky. Occupation in the game always uncertain .
 Members of the Politburo and Central Committee are aware of the historical tendency for one man to assume considerable power . Members of Russia's Communist Party Party are aware that one man is capable of assuming considerable power, they say .
 A large part of the problem for Politburo members is how to keep the leadership collective . Thus while a central part of life for tihe leader is how he stays on top .
 To reorganize is to redistribute advantages and disadvantages in the central game . To reorganise is to redistribution of advantages, not just disadvantages, it says .
 Shifts in the resource allocations constitute shifts in the power of central players . Shifting in resource allocations constitutes shifts in power of the central players, say experts .
 Information concerning differences in perceptions and priorities within a government on a particular issue is rarely available .
 Accurate accounts of the bargaining which yielded a resolution of the issue are rarer still . Accurate account of the negotiations which led to a resolution is rare still .
 What the documents do preserve tends to obscure as much as to enlighten . The documents do not always reveal much of what they reveal .
 The source of this information must be the participants themselves. Thus, the source of the information is to be the participant themselves .
 Each participant knows one small piece of the story . But, ex hypothesis, each participant knows only one part of it .
 What is required is access to a large number of participants in a decision before their memories fade or become too badly discolored,by an analyst attuned to the players and sensitive to bureaucratic politics .
 The use of public documents, newspapers, interviews of participants, and discussion of close observers of participants to piece together the bits of information available is an art form .
 The model of foreign policy is this model's most pressing need . Transfer 6f these skills fronm the fingertips of artists to an outline which can guide other students .
 The Ex Con's choice of the blockadu cannot be understood apart (rom the context in which the necessity for choice arose) from the context of the choice, it is said .
 A series of ovLrlapping bargaining games determined L-oth the date of the discovery of the Soviet missiles .
 An explanation of tlie politics of the ,Lrovery L consequently a considerable piece of the explanation of the . explanation of tun' United States blockade of . Russia .
 The bay of Pigs operation in April, 1961 raised the most serious internal doubts about the wisdom of the President's Judgment . President's judgement, wisdom of his advisors, and their advice, was questioned .
 No subseqoent major issue of nationol security wab decided without the inclusion of Theodore Soreisen and the President's brother, KoberKennedy . No sub-national issue of national security was decided without inclusion .
 President and his advisors were left standing in a position not unlike fLt.mberlain's after Czechoslovakia . Third, by attempting to ov-erthrow Castro Wut then bungling the job, the President and . advisors are left standing .
 Having been tried and found war-ting once, the preisures to overreact in the next case would be overwhelming . Having tried and tried war-tried once, it would be overreacting to the case again .
 The months before the Cuban missile crisis were also awontha before the off.yvar Congressional elections . The months prior to the . Cuban missile . crisis also occurred before the . off-yvar congressional elections .
 Every headline about Cuba, every critic's cry -no matter how wild -flaunted the administration's heel . The administration has been criticized for its handling of the situation .
 His best hope was to overwhelm the critics by a barrage of official statements disclaiming any Soviet prorocation in Cuband thus deflating his opponent's case .
 The administration conducted a forceful campaign of denial designed to discredit critics' claims . President Obama's administration has denied the claims .
 The President himself manned the front I1ne of -47 this offensive . Almost all administration officials participated .
 Or, September 13, he lashed out at ""loose talk" calling for an invasion of Cuba . Or, he called for a Cuban invasion of the country .
 I know that there is no present evidence that the Cubans and the Cuban government and the Soviet government would, in combination, install a majur offensive capability . I think that . no present likelihood that the . Cubans . and the . Cuban government . would, for example, install
 Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin was called to the scene on Monday evening . A118 A118 was called by the State Department .
 October 15 to be Informed of the U.S. discovery of missiles, he was on the platform celivering a speech to the National Press Olub .
 Ll19i in this campaign to puncture the critics' charges and to reassure the public, the administration soon discovered that more than denials were required .
 Kennedy fell into a tenuous semantic distinction between ""offensive"" and ""defensive"" weapons . Kennedy fell under the tenuous distinction between "offensive" and "defensive"
 A number of Republicans tried to make electoral capital of this foreign policy issue, but provoked a response which had significant consequences for U.S. policy .
 To most of the Congressional participants, the character of this response was unanticipated and irrelevant to their purposes . The character of the response to the President's response was not unexpected and irrelevant .
 "action in the wings" occurred in the games inside the administration, says President Obama's administration .
 What the President least wanted to hear, the CIA was most hesitant to say plainly . What the CIA is most reluctant to say is what the President wants to hear . The White House has been tight-lipped on the issue .
 He bombarded his deputy, General Marshall Carter, with telegrams on September 7, 10, 13 and 16 . Fretting at Cap Ferrat, he bombarded the British leader's deputy with messages .
 The Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance convened on September 10 . Loss of another U-2 might incite world opinion to demand cancellation of U.2 flights . The U.S. Air Force says it will not cancel flights .
 President's campaign against critics' claims of Soviet provocation in Cuba had begun . The President's . campaign against . critics of . claims that Soviet provocation was . begun .
 To risk the downing of a U-2 over Cuba was to risk chopping off the limb on which the President was sitting, he said . To risk downing a U.2 . over Cuba would be " chopping off" a limb on the President's limb .
 The draft which they approved suggested both the bargaining from which the draft had emerged and the sensitivity of the players to the spectrum of issues . L1301 The draft was approved by the players on Thursday .
 On September 13, the President had asserted that there were no Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . The President had committed his administration to action if offensive missilvs were discovered .
 Administration officials being called to testify before Congressional committees were denying that there was any evidence whatever of offcn sive missiles in Cuba . Administration officials were denying there were any evidence of off-cannon missiles .
 National Intelligence -49Estimate which concluded that Soviets were introducing offensive missiles into Cuba was not lost on the men who constituted America's highest intelligence assembly . The implications of the N.E. estimate were not lost .
 McCone convinced that the Soviets were introducing missiles into Cuba, he was on the Riviera . McCone was in the midst of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The President had heard the hypothesis, so Deputy Director Carter was reluctant to come forward without harder evidence than was then available . The President was reluctant .
 USIB unanimously adopted the proposed National Intelligence Estimate . Given this climate of opinion and cluster of considerations, USIB adopted the proposal .
 The necessity of official intra-government adherence to administration guidelines led some members of the military and intelligence communities to resort to unofficial channels, particularly the Congress and the Press .
 Senator Keating, Representative Kitchin, and others were receiving information from within the administration . The Senate was informed of the information by the administration.
 The October 4 OJMOR decision to direct a flight over the western end of Cuba in effect ""overturned" the September estimate, without officially raising that issue . President Kennedy ordered special security arrangements to insure against leaks .
 McCone lobbied with the President before the September 10 decision, in telegrams and in person after his return to Washington . This decision represented McCone's victory for which he had lobbied with President .
 Though the politics of the intelligence community is closely guarded, several pieces of the story can be told . The politics of intelligence community in the U.S. are closely guarded .
 By September 27, Colonel Wright and others in CIA believed that the Soviet Union was placing missiles in the San Cristobal area . The Soviet Union believed to be placing missiles there .
 This area was marked suspicious by the CIA on September 29 and certified top priority on October 3 . The CIA has not ruled out any suspicious activity .
 By October 4 McCone had the evidence required to raise the issue officially . McCone: "By October 4, we have all the evidence we need to make a statement"
 Members of COMOR heard McCone's argument, but were reluctant to make the hard decision which he demanded . McCone: "I want to make a hard decision. I want to see the end of the war"
 American overflight of the western end of Cuba was a matter of real concern . The Cuban government was worried about overflight to Cuba's western end .
 Ten-day delay between decision and flight, but details of that bargaining must be held in abeyance . This hesitancy accounts for the ten day delay .
 This revelation fell upon highly politicized players in an extraordinarily complex context . The revelation was not the first time it had occurred in the U.S.
 What each of the central participants saw, and what each did to cover both his one and the administration's nakedness, provided a spectrum of issues and answers .
 Khrushchev had chosen the most unhelpful act of all . First, in terms of the President's attention and priorities at that moment, Khrushche had chosen to do so . President's priorities at the time were at the heart of the crisis, says historian .
 Kennedy was following a policy of reason and responsibility in Cuba, says historian John Avlon . Kennedy followed a policy in a highly sensitive domestic political context, Avlon says .
 The President drew a distinction between ""defensive"" and ""offensive"" weapons . The major thrust of his policy towards the Soviet Union was one of relaxing tension and building trust through trust .
 At considerable political cost, he was attempting to leash the anti-Communist Cold Warriors . He was trying to educate the government and the public out of prevailing devil theories of Soviet Communism .
 President Obama had made an effort to guarantee all communication between the President and the Chairman would be straightforward and accurate, he said .
 Khrushchev had assured the President through the most direct and personal channels that he was aware of the President's domestic political problem . Nothing would be done to exacerbate this problem, he said .
 Khrushchev had given the President assurances that the Soviet Union was not importing offensive missiles into Cuba . But then this.l1371 was .
 The alternatives of ""doing nothing"" or ""taking a diplomatic approach"" could not have been more irrelevant to his problem . The missiles must be removed. The alternatives are irrelevant .
 These two tracks doing nothing and taking a diplomatic approach were the solutions advocated by twc of his principal advisors, to the issues they perceived . The two tracks do nothing and take a diplomatic .
 McNamara: For Secretary of Defense McNamara, the missiles raised the spectre of nuclear war . McNamara says the missiles would have raised the possibility of war .
 To combat this spectre, he first framed the issue as a straightforward strategic problem . To combat the issue, he framed it as a simple strategic problem.
 To understand the issue, one had to grasp two obvious, but difficult points . To understand this, one has to grasp the point of two obvious and difficult points. To understand it, one must grasp the issue.
 The United States should not initiate a crisis with the Soviet Union, risking a -51probability of nuclear war . The President estimated the President estimated was ""etween one to three and even" over an occurrence which had such small strategic implications . The U.S. should not
 The perceptions of McGeorge Bundy, the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs, are the most difficult of all to reconstruct . Bundy's perceptions of him are difficult to reconstruct, says CNN's John Sutter . Bundy is a former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's deputy secretary of state .
 The Soviet Union should be arraigned before the court of world opinion . The U.S. should appeal to the United Nations or the Organization of American States for an inspection team .
 This should not be made an issue between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "This is not an issue," he says .
 The President's brother, Robert Kennedy, saw more clearly than McNamara the political wall against which Khrushchev had backed the President . Robert Kennedy's brother was more clearly seen by McNamara .
 Robert Kennedy was concerned about the prospect of nuclear doom . But like McNamara, he was worried about the threat of nuclear war .
 From the outset he probed for an alternative that would prevent the air strike, he said . He said he was looking at options to avoid the strike .
 The initial reaction of Theodore Sorensen, the President's Special Counsel and "alter ego," fell somewhere between that of the President and his brother . Theodore Sorennsen's reaction to the speech was somewhere between the two .
 If the President,was the architect of the policy which the missiles punctured, Sorensen was the draftsman . If the . President, .was the . architect of . the . policy which . punctured the . missiles, he said .
 Sorensen feared lest the shock and disgrace lead to disaster . But like Robert Kennedy, he feared for his life, his life would be ruined .
 Now is the time to do the job for which they had been preparing contingency plans . Now was the time for the job that they'd been preparing for .
 President recalled on the day the crisis ended, "An invasion would have been a mistake - a wrong use of our power"
 Rusk: "We have won a considerable victory. It was Rusk who remarked on the morning after the President's announcement of the crisis to the world"
 McCone's perceptions flowed from his confirmed prediction . He never wavered from his conviction that ""we must see it through,"" whatever the consequences . -52
 As the Cassandra of the incident, he argued that the Soviets had employed the missiles in a daring political probe . The U.S. must meet with force, he said .
 At the outset of the crisis, the individuals who convened at the President's discretion as the ExCom, whistled many different tunes . At the start of this year's crisis, many of them whistled different tunes, he says .
 The process by which this outcome emerged is a story of the most subtle and intricate probing, pulling, and hauling; leading, guiding, and spurring . The process of the outcome is the result of a series of intricate probing and pulling .
 What prevented the air strike was a fortuitous coincidence of a number of factors - the absence of any one of which might have prevented blockade of air strike .
 First, McNamara's vision of the spectre set him firmly against an air strike . McNamara: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it" McNamara says .
 Kennedy's initial attempt to frame the issue in strategic terms struck Kennedy as particularly inappropriate, given the President's problem . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do, but I'm sure we're going to have a problem"
 Once McNamara had appreciated that the name of the game was a strong response, he and his deputy Gilpatric conceived of the blockade as a fallback . The blockade was a response to the strong response to McNamara's proposal .
 Secretary of Defense -whose department had the action, whose reputation in the Cabinet was unequaled -marshalled the arguments for the blockade and refused to be moved . The blockade became a formidable alternative .
 His arguments against the air strike on moral grounds struck a chord in the President . The President said the President was impressed by the President's comments .
 President learned of the missiles on Tuesday morning . RFK had said that the President could not have persisted in his preferred course without, in effect, agreeing to become what he had condemned .
 On Wednesday morning, the President flew to Connecticut to keep a campaign commitment, leaving RFK as the unofficial chairman of the group . RFK was RFK .
 By the time the President returned on Wenesdav evening, a critical third piece of the picture had been added to the picture . The President returned to the White House that evening .
 A powerful coalition of the advisors in whom the President had the greatest confidence, and with whom his style is most compatible, had emerged . The President's style was most compatible with his style, says Mr. Obama .
 The coalition th&t had formed behind the President's initial preference gave him cause to pause . Fourth, the coalition has formed behind President Obama’s initial preference for the President .
 Who supported the air strike -the Chiefs, McCone, Rusk, Nitze, and Acheson -more than how they supported it, counted. Who supported it counted .
 A piece of inaccurate information, which no one probed, permitted the blockade advocates to tuel uncertainties in the President's mind. Fifth, a piece of false information, allowed them to mislead the President. Fifth .
 RFK and Sorensen met the President at the airport Wednesday evening . RFK: "When the President returned to Washington, RFK will be there to greet him"
 Sorensen gave the President a four-page memorandum outlining the areas of agreement and disagreement . The memorandum was signed by the President .
 Some of the members of the ExCom, however, met with the President that morning and afternoon . The ExCom met with President Obama on Thursday .
 ExCom convened not at State Department, but at The White House, with the President . ExCom convenes with President Obama at the White House Thursday evening .
 Kennedy declared his tentative choice of the blockade and directed that preparation be made to put it into effect by Monday morning . Kennedy declared that preparation had been made for the blockade .
 civilian experts examined the surgical air strike option, discovered that it could be chosen with high confidence . The surgical strike option was added to the list of possible choices for the end of the second week .
 That no one probed this estimate earlier poses an interesting question for further investigation . The estimate is an important question for more investigation .
 A coalition emerged from the President's initial decision that something be done; McNamara, Rubert -54Kennedy, and Sorensen's resistance to the air strike; . incompatibility between the President and air strike advocates; and in inaccurate piece of information .
 To get from this coalition to a government decision, the coalition had to get air strike advocates on board . To get to this coalition, the air strike advocate had to be on board, she says .
 Acheson, the leader of the air strike zamp, had attacked the Attorney General bitterly in a previous meeting . The Attorney General had also attacked the air attack zamp .
 The President listened to Acheson's argument, but left no question in his mind about where the buck stopped . He received an invitation from The White House .
 Friday morning's ExCom meeting reopened the matter . Otherwise, lie said, ""Delay and dissension would plague whatever decision he took"
 Sorensen's protest that a decision had been reached the night before, the air strike advocates continued to press their arguments . The air strike decision was reached the day before .
 The President could not possibly order an air strike . Sorensen agreed to write the first draft of a blockade speech .
 Dean Acheson did not return to the meeting, but instead, retired to his farm in Maryland . Saturday morning the group approved -or at least acquiesced in -r Sorensen's draft of a blockade speech .
 The National Security Council met for the first time Saturday afternoon in order to make the final decision . The meeting resembed a Greek play in which powers maneuvered according to the plot .
 At the conclusion of the presentations, there was an awkward silence which was broken by Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric . Kennedy nodded his agreement, but with reservations, with an agreement .
 First, the United States simply could not give up Guantanamo at this point . The U.S. simply couldn't give up Gitmo, it said .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has ordered withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Russia . Putin says withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles was not time for concessions that could destroy alliance .
 Instead of taking the diplomatic defensive, the President asserted that we should press our indictment of the Soviet Union for its duplicity and threat to world peace . President Barack Obama said we should continue to press the indictment .
 Lovett, McCone and others joined in a sharp attack of Stevenson's diplomatic proposals . Lovett and McCone attacked Stevenson's proposals in a letter .
 General Sweeny, Commander of the Tactical Command, asserted that the Air Force could guarantee only 90 percent effectiveness in a surgical air strike . He said that the U.S. Air Force can only guarantee 90 percent success in such a surgical strike .
 At least he would not be vulnerable to the charge that he had not heard the Air Force's case . His statement at the Saturday mecting end simply ""prepared the record"" in case his chosen course ran aground .
 The decisiun which Kennedy announced to the world on 'Tuesday evening, October 22, emerged -part resultant and part result, a melange of misperception, miscommunication, misinformation, bargaining, bargaining and pulling, hauling, and spurring .
 The standard frame of reference employed by foreign policy analysts in producing explanation has been raised to an explicit level . Foreign policy analysts have raised the level of reference they use to produce explanation .
 When one central puzzle of the Cuban missile crisis was fished with each of the models in turn, the catches were quite different . The catch was quite different, with each model catching a different one .
 Most analysts do proceed predominantly in terms of one model . Though the conceptual models are not exclusive, they are based on conceptual models .
 Different analysts rely on different models to produce quite different explanations . Different frames of reference should encourage analyst's selfconsciousness about the nets which he employs, he says .
 The effect of these ""spectacles"" in sensitizin~g the analyst to particular aspects of what is going on -framing the puzzle in one way rather than another - must be recognized .
 Models II and III may suggest additional, perhaps new, facets of problems, and perspectives from which they can be viewed . Models I and II may suggest new, perhaps different, new, perspectives of problems . Models III and IV may suggest more, perhaps more, new approaches to solving problems
 Inspection of these explanations, and articulation oi the conceptual models employed in producing them, is a first step . Inspection of the explanations is an important first step.
 Serious attention to the logic of explanation, and explicit formulation of the propositions relied upon in substantive studies, is a second . Serious attention is also needed to pay attention to logic of explanations, and explicitly formulation of propositions .
 Separation of the various intellectual enterprises in which foreign policy analysts engage, and specification of the logic of each, is a third . Separation is a key to separating foreign policy from foreign policy .
 Formulation of a common language and framework for self-conscious conversation about what foreign policy analysts do amounts simply to a start . Formulation is a start, but it amounts to a small start .
 We are left at a halfway house, built from a number of crisscrossing strands, each requiring further development, each on its way to separable conclusions . We are not at the halfway house but at the end of the first half .
 Articulation of conceptual models as paradigms sharpens differences and understates overlaps for the sake of expository emphasis and clarity . -57. -57 .
 Mixed models, e.g. combinations of I and III or II and III, must be considered . Mixed models must also be considered. Mixed models are needed to be considered, such as I and I .
 Each analysis concentrates on an area of importance to that particular type of analysis, relegating other important variables to a ceteris paribus clause . Each analysis focuses on one of the most important variables .
 Models II and III contribute significantly to an understanding of the U.S. blockade . Model TI should be especially powerful in explaining routine executionary activity and Model III in understanding ""solutions"" to issues .
 A typology of decisions and actions, some of which are more amenable to treatmenL in terms of one model and some to another, should be developed . TreatmenL should be able to use a typology to develop a model of the treatment of patients .
 These three models exhaust neither the dimensions on which they are arranged, nor the dimensions relevant to explanations of government behavior . The models exhaust either the dimensions of the models, nor are relevant to explaining government behavior, are .
 A cognitive model or a ""shrink"" model focusing on the psychological characteristics of central players should be considered . Further models, for example, a cognitive model, or a "shrink" model, should be discussed .
 Government behavior is but one cluster of factors relevant to occurrences in foreign affairs . Government behavior, government behavior and other factors are all relevant to foreign affairs, experts say .
 The dimensions of the chess board, the character of the pieces, and the rules of the game -factors considered by international systems theorists -constitute the context in which the chess pieces are moved . Nevertheless, chess board dimensions, character of pieces and rules of game are considered important factors
 The sensitivity of models of government behavior to facts about the international system must be investigated, the author says .
 The relevance of these three models to activities of foreign policy analysts is not limited to explanation . It is not only an explanation for the relevance of the three models, it is also relevant to foreign policy analysis .
 How the models can be applied to further ac-ivitles of prediction, evaluation, and recommendation provides a challenging problem for future research .
 Analogues of these conceptual models are employed in attempting to understand government policy in other substantive areas . Analogues are used in trying to understand policy in the real world .
 Anaccount of the blockade which drew heavily from all three would be preferred . Anaccount for the blockade is preferred .
 Perhaps this entails a comprehensive model in which each -58of the paradigms is but a building block . Perhaps this means that each paradigm of the world's most complex systems is but building blocks .
 A grand synthesis would seem, however, to be an issue for demonstration rather than assertion . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The subject matter may not permit anything grander than separate but strong building blocks . For the subject matter, there may not be much more than that .
 It's possible to speculate about several pieces from which a meager, ad hoc, working synthesis might be built . In either case, it is possible to speculate about the pieces .
 Model III analyst centers on emergence of the decision in the ExCom decision . Analyst: "The Model III analysis centers both on the emergence of a blockade decision"
 For Models II and III this strategic problem establishes the context within which investigation proceeds . For Models I and III, the strategic problem sets out the context in which investigation begins .
 That Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba posed a strategic problem which created high probability of U.S. reaction is the ballpark for all three models . That Soviet missile emplacements in Cuba pose a strategic threat which created a high probability .
 Given U.S. values and capabilities, the probability of a strong reaction, e.g., invasion, air strike, or blockade was considerable . Given United States values, capabilities, it was possible to expect strong reaction to the situation .
 Model II emphasizes organizational constraints in choice and organizational routines in implementation . Model II is based on a model of organizational behavior that emphasizes the organization's choices and routines .
 Organizational processes which produced awareness of the problem on October 14 (rather than two weeks earlier or later) Organizational routines which defined the alternatives, and organizational procedures which defined alternatives, were created by the same group .
 Model III accents the active games of individual players within the leadership group . Model III is based on the games played by individual players in the Leadership Group .
 Bargaining among players who shared power but saw separate problems yielded discovery of missiles on a certain date in a special context . A coalition of Presidential intimates set on averting holocaust, failure to probe a military estimate, and consequently a blockade .
 In the absence of a number of particular facts about players and games, the outcome would have been different . The outcome of the game against Manchester City would be different if the outcome were different .
 Had Cuba II occurred at the time of Cuba I Robert Kennedy and Sorensen would not have been members of the critical national security policy game . The military chiefs would have had more chips, and an air strike would have emerged .
 Strategic surrender is an important problem of international relations and diplomatic history . The U.S. has been involved in a major conflict in the Middle East for decades .
 Both diplomatic historians and strategists rely upon propositions which can be turned forward to produce predictions . Whether implicit in explanations or more explicit in analysis, these propositions can be used to make predictions .
 North Vietnam will surrender when she realizes that continued fighting can only generate additional costs without hope of compensating gains, this expectation being largely the consequence of the previous application of force by the dominant side . United States actions can increase or decrease Hanoi's strategic costs, according to U.
 Bombing North Vietnam increases the pain and thus increases the probability of surrender . Bombing increases the risk of surrender, says U.S. President Obama .
 Nations are more likely to surrender when the strategic cost-benefit balance is negative, is true . That is true. That -""other things being eqral"" -nations are more . likely to . surrender when they are at risk of a negative .
 Models II and III focus upon the government machine through which this fact about the ""international strategic marketplace"" must be filtered to produce a surrender . Models II, III focus on the fact that the world's "strategic marketplace" needs to be filtered through government .
 Analysts are less sanguine about the possibility of surrender at the point that the costbe.Iefit calculus turns negative . Analysts say the risk of surrender is not high .
 Never in history (i.e. in none of the five cases which I have examined) have nations surrendered at that point . Never in five cases have nations surrender at that time .
 When, depends on processes of organizations and politics of players within these governments -as they are affected by the opposing government . When, depending on processes and politics, depends upon processes of organization and politics .
 The effects of the victorious power's action upon the surrendering nation cannot be adequately summarized as increasing or decreasing strategic costs . Moreover, the effects of such actions cannot be summed up in a simple statement .
 Imposing additional costs by bombing a nation may increase the probability of surrender, says U.S. President George W. Bush . Imposing extra costs by . bombing a country may . increase the . probability of . surrender .
 An appreciation of the impact of the acts of one nation upon another requires some understand of the machine which is being influenced . The impact of one country's acts upon another thus requires some understanding of the nature of the act .
 Models II and III require considerably more information about the organizations tnd politics of North Vietnam than is publicly available . For more precise prediction, models require more information .
 On the bisis of the limited public information, however, these motOels can be suggestive . On the . bisis, the . data is limited, but it's not clear whether the . information is accurate .
 The government must know that the strategic cost-benefit calculus is negative . The government needs to know that, the government must be aware of the cost of the project .
 -60 of strategic costs and benefits are clear, but neither the categories, nor the indicators, are clear . -60of strategic costs, benefits and costs are clear. -60 .
 The sources of information about both are organizations whose parochial priorities and perceptions do not facilitate accurate information or estimation .
 Military evaluation of military performance, military estimates of factors like ""enemy morale,"" and military predictions concerning when ""the tide will turn"" or ""the corner will have been turned"" are markedly distorted . Military evaluations of performance are based on factors like "enemy morale"
 In cases of highly de-centralized guerrilla operations, like Vietnam, these problems are exacerbated . In Vietnam, the problems are often exacerbated by the lack of centralization of guerrilla operations .
 Only highly visible costs can have direct impact on leaders without being filtered through organizational channels . The cost of an organization can be seen as a direct and visible cost of leadership .
 surrender is likely to involve considerable bungling in the early stages of the operation . Second, since organizations define the details of options and execute actions, surrender will be bungled .
 "No organization can define options or prepare programs for this treasonous act," says President Obama . No organization can prepare programs or define options, says Obama administration .
 Early overtures will be uncoordinated with the acts of other organizations, e.g., the fighting forces, creating contradictory ""signals"" to the victor . Thus, early overtures may not be coordinated with other organizations .
 Model III suggests that surrender will not come at the point that strategic costs outweigh benefits, but that it will not wait until the leadership group concludes that the war is lost . Rather the problem is better understood in terms of four additional propositions .
 Strong advocates of the war effort, whose careers are closely identified with the war, rarely come to conclude that costs outweight benefits . First, strong advocates of war effort often come to conclusion that costs outweigh benefits .
 A number of members of the government are convinced that the war effort is futile . Second, they are often convinced that war is futile. Third, they're convinced that it's futile. Fourth, they say.
 Fourth, the course of the war, particularly actions of the victor, can influence the advantages and disadvantages of players in the loser's government . The course of a war can also influence the benefits and advantages of the losers' government .
 How U.S. bombing, threats, promises, or action in the South affect the game in Hanoi is subtle but nonetheless crucial . How United States bombing , threats, or promises, affect the South's influence in the region is subtle .
 That these three models could be applied to the surrender of governments other than North Vietnam shoLid be obvious . The three models were used to surrender governments .
 Horelick, A. Rush, A and M Rush, wrote a book on Soviet foreign policy in Chicago, 1965 . Rush was critical of U.S. relations with the West .
 An Analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior,"" World Politics, April, 1964. " World Politics" was published in April 1964 .
 A Wohlstetter, "The Delicate Balance of Terror,"" Foreign Affairs, January, 1953 . This proposition was formulated earlier by A Wohstetter .
 Though this was the formulation of the argument, the facts are not strictly accurate . The facts are that, though, they are not all true .
 President T Roosevelt applauded Japan's attack on Russia in 1904 . President Roosevelt applauded the attack .
 Bruck and B Sapin, Foreign Policy Decision-Making, Glencoe, 1962, constitutes a partial exception . Bruck, Sapin and Sapin wrote a book on foreign policy making .
 U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, Lterirn Roport on Cuban Military Build-up, 88th Congress, 1st Session, 1963, 2.2.3.4.5.5 .
 R. Wohlstetter, R. R., ""Cuba and Pearl Harbor,"" Foreign Affairs, July, 1965, 706 .
 U.S., Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 88th Cong., 1st Sess., 1963, 25ff. The House passed the bill to the Defense Appropriations Committee .
 Cuban Military Build-up; Department of Defense Appropriations Hearings . Cuban military build-up: Cuban military builds-up .
 For Hilsman: To Move a Nation, To Move A Nation, 186; Able, Missile Crisis, 24; Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 1-30 .
 A verbatim transcript of a presentation actually made by General Carroll's assistant, John Hughes; and Hilsman's statement, To Move a Nation, 186. The transcript is based on a presentation made by John Hughes .
 See McNamara's testimony under pressure, Department of Defense Apprcpriations, Hearings, 69 . McNamara testified under pressure .
 Testimony of General Carroll, Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 68. 68. Hearings of the Defense Appropriations Committee .
 General Carroll testified that this piece of information arrived on September 18 . Strictly, General Carroll said that this month's information arrived .
 The U.S. Proclamation on Interdiction of Offensive Weapons, October 23, 1962, Bulletin, XLVII, 717. United States Proclamation . The declaration was made in 1962 .
 This hypothesis would account for the mystery surrounding Kennedy's explosion at the leak of the stopping of the Bucharest Bucharest .
 "To Move a Nation. An L'tterim Report,"" Journal of Conflict Resolution, December, 1959; To Move A Nation. "To move a Nation" was published in 1959 .
 Inclusion of the President't Special Assistant for National Security Affairs in the tier of ""Cheifs" rather than amoig tie ""Staffers" involves a debatable choice .
 He is especially dependent on good relations with the President and the Secretaries of Defense and State . He is also dependent on relations with President and Defense Secretary .
 The decision to include this position reflects my judgment that the function which McGeorge Bundy served is becoming institutionalized . Bundy served as a member of the Kansas City Chiefs Chiefs .
 Hammond, P., P. Hammond, wrote, "Super Carriers and B-36 Bombers," in H Stein, ed., American Civil-Military Decisions, Birmingham, 1963 .
 For discussion of the accuracy and frankness of these remarks see Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 4Off.gov.com .
 Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Armed Services Committee, Appropriations Committee, House Select Committee on Export Control . Senate Armed Services Co.mmittee; House Committee on Appropriations Committee . Committee on Foreign Relations committee .
 For composition of IIS13 .ee -.epaitment of Defense Appropri;ti'ns, Heari•gs, 51, 51.5 . For composition, IIS2013 .ee .ee is the name of the organization responsible for the creation of the program .
 A basic, but somewhat contradictory, account of parts of this story . @me•-ges in the Department of Defense Appropriations. jearinio .
 My position is quite distinct from boch poles in the recent ""great debate"" concerning international relations. Thus my position is not that of that of the recent "great debate" regarding international relations .
 While many ""traditionalists"" of the sort attacked by Bull adopt the second posture, this third posture is relatively neutral with respect to whatever is in substantive dispute . Kaplan attacks the first posture and many ""scientists"" adopt the first .
 World Politics, April, 1966; M, Kaplan, ""The New Creaw Debate: Taitionalism vs. Taicism vs. The Case for a Classical Approach,"" World Politics," April, 1967; .