 The first two sources are the letters exchanged by the leaders of East Germany and the Soviet Union . Then we introduce sources that show the influence of the United States to the fall of the Berlin Wall .
 Letter from Ulbricht to Khrushchev on Closing the Border Around West Berlin . Letter from the leader of the German Democratic Republic Ulbrich directed to the Soviet Leader Khrushche .
 It emphasizes that it was a measure to protect the GDR from West Berlin . The GDR insisted it was an act to protect its citizens from the West Berlin.
 This letter repeatedly emphasizes the negative influence of West Berlin to the GDR including subversive measures . The letter also emphasizes the West Berlin's negative influence on GDR .
 People from West Berlin to East Berlin came to buy goods and services from East Berlin . After closing the border with a wall, there were still plenty of those left for East Berlin citizens .
 The GDR appeals to the Soviet Union to strengthen the ties between the two countries, the GDR and Soviet Union . The Soviet Union is the only country in the world to have a strong relationship with the West .
 He agrees with the idea that the border control would strengthen the GDR’s economic and political environment . The GDR says border control will strengthen the economy and political climate .
 "Letter from Khrushchev to Ulbricht Regarding the Situation in Berlin,” September 28, 1961, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, SED Archives, IfGA, ZPA, J IV 2/202/130 .
 Berliners blame Western powers and West Berlin for the decline of East Berlin . They blame the West Berliners for the fall of the city .
 The Berlin wall was built to protect East Germany from the West . It was a measure to protect the West from the East, according to the Berlin Wall .
 The letters suggest that the tie between The GDR and the Soviet Union would become strengthened in the future . These letters suggest the ties between the two countries would become stronger .
 Ronald Reagan’s speech at the Brandenburg gate, West Berlin, Remarks on East-West Relation . Reagan spoke at Brandenburg Gate, Berlin . Reagan made the remarks in a speech that was held in Berlin .
 Freedom replaces hatred among the nations with comity and peace . Freedom replaces the ancient hatred among nations . Peace replaces comity, comity among nations with peace .
 Alexander Schalck and Egon Krenz discussed GDR-FRG Economic Cooperation in Cold War era . U.S. influence, Cold War Conversation on GDRs Economic Cooperation between Schalcks and Krens .
 Discussion on generous travel regulation as to secure tourist and visitor traffic . Discussion also on generous regulation of travel regulation .
 Belgium's foreign minister submitted the report to the NATO council . Pierre Harmel, Belgium foreign minister, submitted it to the council .
 NATO should maintain military strength to deter possible aggression from the Soviets . NATO should keep military strength in order to deter potential aggression from Russia, author says .
 Harmel and his work team accentuated the importance of collective defense as a stabilizing factor in international relations . Harmel's work emphasizes the importance in stabilizing international relations in the U.S.
 They also advocated for detente policies, saying that the improvement of the relationship between the U.S. and the USSR would be the solution to the political issues in Europe . They also said that improving relations between the United States and the Soviet Union would be a solution .
 The report also put considerable emphasis on the problem of German reunification . The report was published by the German National Socialist Party .
 There would be no stable settlement without solving the question of divided Germany, says Jurgen Schauke .
 The significance of the Harmel Report lies in its inclination to detente policy . The report was published by the World Institute for Human Rights Studies in 2007 .
 It seems this report in part determined the subsequent diplomatic direction of NATO member states and encouraged the negotiation toward nuclear disarmament talks . The report was published in 1998 .
 The Treaty of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons reached an agreement between the US, UK, and Soviet in 1968 . The treaty was reached between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The strategic arms limitation talks began in 1969 between the United States and the Soviet Union . The talks began between the U.S. and Russia .
 New Eastern policy that was meant to normalize the diplomatic relations between West Germany and Eastern European bloc was also promoted at about this point .
 The Harmel Report marked the era of detente and proposed what the diplomatic strategy of NATO partner states should be . To sum, it marked the end of the Cold War era .
 This editorial cartoon by Herbert Block was published in the Washington Post, February 16, 1969 . Herbert Block: "Herbert Block was a good guy. He's a great guy. I'm a great person. I love you"
 In the cartoon, a pig wearing a military cap of the USSR holds a gun and whip . The cartoon is based on a cartoon of a pig with a gun, whip and a whip .
 The pig stands in front of other animals which represent Soviet satellites such as Rumania, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Hungary, and West European communist parties . The pig is shown with other animals representing Soviet satellites .
 The political cartoonist borrowed an idea from George Orwell’s satirical novel Animal Farm . Herbert Block borrowed the idea from the satirical novel written in 1945 . The cartoonist used the idea to create his own cartoon of the farm .
 Herblock showed the similarity between Joseph Stalin and Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the communist party of the Soviet Union of the time . Owell had criticized Stalin in his novel . Herblock also showed similarities between Stalin and the Soviet General Secretary .
 In the novel Animal Farm, animals govern themselves, independent of human farmers . Animal Farm is set up in Farm Farm, a fictional farm in the name of Farm Farm .
 They uphold the ideology of ‘Animalism’ which is the allegory of communism . The ideology is based on an ideology of 'Animalism' which is an ideology that upholds communism .
 Animalism justifies dictatorship by a privileged class and inflicts burden and distress on the rest of the animals in the farm . Animalism is a form of oppression by the privileged class, it says .
 Herblock used the idea of Animal Farm to criticize Soviet aggression . Herblock criticized the Soviet aggression in his book .
 Herblock condemned Brezhnev for suppressing the democratization movement in Czechoslovakia by dispatching Warsaw Pact troops in 1968 . Herblock also condemned Breznev's use of Warsaw Pact forces to suppress Czechoslovak democracy .
 What was criticized in this cartoon was the doctrine of limited sovereignty, so-called Brezhnev Doctrine . The cartoon was taken to task by Russian President Mikhail Gorchkov .
 Brezhnev tried to justify military intervention in Czechoslovakia by alleging that the interest of the entire Socialist bloc transcends the sovereignty of a state . The Soviet-era Soviet Union attempted to justify intervention by claiming that the interests of the Socialist bloc .
 Edward C United States Embassy, Iran Cable from Edward C Wells to the Department of State. Edward C U.S. Embassy . Edward C. Wells to State Department: "Iran is a nation of opportunity"
 This is a propaganda in 1950 having priority Aims and Objectives of USIE Program in Iran that enhancing U.S. Prestige and Demonstrating Communist Fallacies . This is an attempt to enhance United States Prestige .
 In particular, America more utilizes the various media for propaganda than Soviet propaganda than the Soviet Union . America uses the media more often for propaganda, according to U.S. officials .
 Hollywood's output of the 1950s and early 1960s was its promotion of “American” ideals . Walt Disney’s Americanization is most remarkable at that time because Hollywood’�s output was its promoting of ‘American’ ideals .
 Film executives recognize that their main role is to sell ‘people’s capitalism’ all over the world . In particular, Film executives say they are selling people's capitalism . Film execs recognize that they’ve been in the movies for decades .
 So, they can shift the idea not deny the communism but spread American ideology like capitalism like capitalism, they say . The idea is that they can spread the idea of communism, not denying it .
 The document is focusing on the Iran cable and therefore U.S. realize the importance of Walt Disney and the significance of the strategy in the middle east . In addition, this document is also focusing on Iran cable .
 This propaganda was published in May 1,1950 in the Department of State Airgram from Dean Acheson who is an American politician and lawyer who served as the 51st Secretary of State in the Truman administration . It was titled Anti-Americanism in the Arab World .
 The purpose of this propaganda is to resist Anti-Americanism rising in the middle East at that time . This propaganda was intended to resist the rise of anti-U.S. sentiment in the Middle East .
 Dean Dean’s policy is relatively generous although the Arab has the ideology of Anti-American . Dean has a relatively generous policy, but the Arab ideology is anti-American, he says .
 Despite the fact that Arab has a negative attitude toward U.S., Dean tried to find some amicable solution for breakthrough . In short, despite the . fact that . Arab has had a negative . attitude toward . U.K. President Obama .
 Republicans in the House of Representatives voted unanimously to remove Atchison from the parliament on December 15, 1950 . The Republicans voted to remove him from parliament .
 In other words, his policy is not accepted in the U.S. during the Cold War period . In other . words, he said .
 Mutual defense treaty between the United States and the Republic of Korea . United States responsibility to maintain democracy in the republic of South Korea to promote deterrent of communist idealism .
 The Korean War became the first major battle waged in the name of containment . North Korea invaded the South in 1950, supported by the Soviet Union . The U.N. joined the war on the side of the South .
 The United States and South Korea signed a treaty to strengthen the peace in the Pacific area . The U.S. and S. Korea. signed the treaty .
 Report: U.S. objectives for the Middle East in the cold war . Analysis there were anti-americanism prevalent in most Arab-nations . Report: The United States’ genuine view on the middle east .
 The United States seek cooperation with those nations by stabilizing the political and social progress of those nations . In order for those nations to take on the site of the United States, the U.S. seeks cooperation with them .
 The United States’ military-political objectives in the middle east during the cold war was to first mobilize strength for the containment of communism, and second, to restore and strengthen confidence in the West, and third build sufficient military strength in each country in order to maintain internal security, and
 Most of these objectives boil down to the United States strategy for the back up by insuring the middle east maximum support of the allied war . The U.S. strategy is to insulate the Middle East from most of the war's support .
 The report also exhibit that the US’s active support to Turkey is based on how Turkey is recognized and important to Middle East defense . Turkey is important to Mideast defense .
 By building up Turkey’s economy, the U.S. aim to gain regional military cooperation from adjacent receptive regions . The United States aim to to gain military cooperation with Turkey . The U.N. aims to build up Turkey's economy and deal with the exposed situation .
 The Cold War was fought from the political, economic, and propagandic perspectives, and there were only a limited number of situations in which weapons were employed .
 Cold War lasted for about half a century, but it does not mean that the extremely tense situation lasted throughout the period . The Cold War was the most tense period of the Cold War, but the situation remained tense .
 There was an intermittent detente in search of negotiations and dialogue for improving relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The tension was revived many times .
 It can be said that the Cold War was a repetition of tensions and detente . Thus, it can be . said that it was said that . the Cold . War was said to have been a repeat of tensions .
 On this page, we will introduce what happened between these repeated tense situations and detente, and how the U.S. and the Soviet Union dealt with them .
 We have chosen primary sources that symbolize the conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in the Cold War . The primary sources represent the conflict in which the United States fought the Soviet Russia .
 The posters that seem to criticize each other well represent the ideological conflict . The posters are meant to show the conflict between the two sides of debate .
 We look at the Sputnik shock from both the U.S. and Soviet perspectives . This week marks the 50th anniversary of the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan .
 The Cuban crisis was the most tense time during the Cold War . Telegrams and letters will be used to show the tense situation of the Cuban crisis .
 Ideological Conflict Anti-Communist Poster Made in the United States . Notice of rally at the Hippodrome to fight communism .
 This poster was displayed in the Truman Centennial Exhibit, and 4 years before that, the Moscow Olympics were held that many Western Bloc boycotted .
 Anti-communism was widely spread with an effort made by the government in American society during the Cold War . Anti-Communism was spread in the United States .
 This anti-communist propaganda poster symbolizes how the U.S. government wanted to depict Stalin as evil . The skull behind Stalin's face symbolized how the United States government wanted him to be evil .
 It can be said that the government of the United States tried to fear Communism with the use of the word ‘death’ and implant anti-comminist idea in the minds of American citizens .
 The pie chart at the top shows the transition of capitalist states’ industrial production from 1948 to 1960 . The chart is based on the transition in capitalist states' industrial production .
 The chart shows the transition of capitalist states’ export volume from 1948 to 1960 . The pie chart in the middle shows the change in the export volume .
 The pie chart at the bottom shows the transition of gold quantity from 1948 to 1960 . The chart shows the gold quantity of gold in the United States .
 Bar graph at the top shows the average economic growth rates of some countries from 1953 to 1960 . The bar graph is based on the average growth rates in some countries .
 The arrows show the next ten years’ economic growth of capitalist states and communist states . The arrows are shown to show the growth of capitalism and communism in capitalist states .
 The top arrow indicates capitalist states, and the bottom one indicates communist states . The bottom arrow indicates the capitalist state of China .
 This poster implicitly tells that communism is superior to capitalism in terms of economy . The poster implicitly implies that communism and capitalism are superior to each other .
 The pie charts indicate that capitalist states lost their national power in the field of industrial production, export volume, and gold quantity by 1960 . The chart shows capitalist states have lost their power in industrial production and export volume .
 From 1953 to 1960, capitalist countries developed their economy better than communist countries . But next ten years after 1960, it is predicted that communist countries develop their economies better than capitalist countries . The prediction is based on a study of economic development between 1953 and 1960 .
 The Soviet Union claims that a communist country, the Soviet Union, is greater than a capitalist country, using these data and predictions . The U.S. is the most populous communist country in the world, the United States .
 Dramatic accomplishments in space are being increasingly identified as a major indicator of world leadership . i) More resources and more effort need to be put into our space program as soon as possible. i. More resources should be put in space program . i.
 "We should move forward with a bold program, while at the same time taking every practical precaution for the safety of the persons actively participating in space flights," NASA says . The agency says it is taking every possible precaution for safety of astronauts .
 The news of the successful launch of the first artificial satellite “Sputnik 1” by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957 caused shock and a sense of crisis to the governments and societies of Western countries including the United States .
 The U.S. admitted that the Soviet Union was one step ahead in terms of space exploration . The Soviet Union succeeded in launching the first artificial satellite of mankind . This memorandum was sent to President Kennedy at the time .
 There was a sense of urgency that great efforts must be spent on the US’s space development programs in order to overtake the Soviet Union and become a world leader in space development .
 For several years scientific research and experimental design work have been conducted in the Soviet Union on the creation of artificial satellites of the earth . Pravda Newspaper Article, ‘Announcement of the First Satellite’
 The first launching of the satellites in the USSR were planned for realization in accordance with the scientific research program of the International Geophysical Year . As already reported in the press, the first launch was planned for .
 The first artificial satellite in the world has been created . It is a result of very intensive work by scientific research institutes and design bureaus .
 The scientific experiment accomplished at such a great height is of tremendous importance for learning the properties of cosmic space and for studying the earth as a planet of our solar system .
 During the International Geophysical Year the Soviet Union proposes launching several more artificial earth satellites . The Soviet Union plans to launch several more satellites during the year of 2009 .
 These subsequent satellites will be larger and heavier and heavier . They will be used to carry out programs of scientific research . The satellites are expected to be heavier and larger and will be heavier .
 Artificial earth satellites will pave the way to interplanetary travel and, apparently, apparently our contemporaries will witness how the freed and conscientious labor of the people of the new socialist society makes the most daring dreams of mankind a reality .
 The Soviet Union succeeded in creating the artificial satellite earlier than any other country . During the International Geophysical Year, the Soviet Union created an artificial satellite . The satellite was created during the IGY Year .
 The team says its contribution will be useful for subsequent scientific research held in the world . It says its contributions will be used for subsequent research .
 It seems that the Soviet Union tells how great the country is and how important it is in the world . The Soviet Union is the world's most powerful country .
 It is because it is a communist country that the Soviet Union made a great achievement, he says . The Soviet Union was a communist state of mind, he adds .
 The Soviet Union states that communism is superior to capitalism like the U.S. Implicitly, the Soviet Union says communism is inferior to capitalism . The Soviet State of the Union was founded in the 1930s .
 On October 14, 1962, a photo taken by a U.S. Air Force reconnaissance plane over Cuba revealed that a missile base by the Soviet Union was under construction .
 President Kennedy made a televised speech on the evening of the 22nd, declaring a sea and air blockade around Cuba to prevent offensive weapons being brought in . This would make it possible to attack the U.S. mainland with nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union had already sent ships loaded with equipment and weapons to Cuba . Any attempt to break through the United States sea blockade would have resulted in a direct conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . A nuclear war was imminent .
 According to information which we received, the USA policy toward Cuba occupied a major place in the work of the meeting . The meeting was held in Havana, Cuba .
 At present Cuba is a political problem, and not a problem of security of the USA . Thus, political, economic and other means are needed to solve it, rather than military, says Julian Zelizer .
 All this, in the calculations of the USA government, should cause serious economic and political complications for Cuba . It should lead to the outbreak of mass dissatisfaction and to huge anti-government demonstrations, he says .
 The West Berlin issue at present remains sharpest and most fraught with dangers . West Berlin is still the focus of the West Berlin debate . Berlin's West Berlin remains the most fraught issue in the world .
 The U.S. intends to achieve the greatest possible political, economic, and moral isolation of Cuba from other Latin American countries and other countries of the “free world,” is a good example of the distinction the United States makes between socialist and free countries . The part of
 Following Kennedy’s speech on the Cuban issue yesterday, a broad campaign was deployed here, called forth in order to impart to the developing situation even more extraordinariness and seriousness than was done in Kennedy's speech itself .
 McNamara categorically declared that the USA will not stop short of sinking Soviet ships which are bringing “offensive types” of weapons to Cuba, if those ships will refuse to obey the demands of American warships .
 The President’s official proclamation about the introduction into force of measures to assert a quarantine on the delivery to Cuba of offensive types of weapons will be published before the end of the day today or tomorrow morning .
 CNN's John Sutter asks him to imagine what it would be like if the U.S. and the Soviets were on opposite sides of the Cold War . He asks him what would it be like to imagine if the United States and the Soviet Union were on opposing sides .
 He goes on to say, “you are threatening that if we do not obey your orders, you will then use force.” He says he is threatening to use force if he does not obey orders .
 "Deep inside, you will admit that I am right. But from the part of the part, Mr President, I cannot agree to this,” she says .
 The use of the word “we’s” emphasizes that the Soviets and the Americans share the same goal . The word ‘we” is used in reference to the Soviet Union and the U.S. State Department .
 The structure of this letter is both logical and emotional, and each word is well chosen . Each word was well chosen, and the structure of the letter was both logical .
 The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan and the US’s Protests . Excerpt from the minutes of the minutes . ‘reply to an appeal of president carter about the issue of Afghanistan through the . direct communications channel’
 It is impossible to agree in any way with your assessment of what is going on right now in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan . The Taliban has been fighting in the country since 2001 .
 Afghanistan asked Russia to introduce a limited number of Soviet troops to the American side confidentially through the American ambassador in Moscow and to you personally . We have already given explanations about what is actually going on there based on the facts and also the reasons which caused .
 The request of the government of Afghanistan and the granting of this request by the Soviet Union are exclusively the business of the USSR and Afghanistan, who control their relations themselves by their own agreement . Afghanistan cannot permit any outside interference in these relations .
 Article 51 of UN Charter stipulates collective self defense stipulated in Article 51 . Article 51 was formulated by the USSR and United States themselves formulated . They, like any UN member, have the right not only of individual .
 In light of all this, the immoderate tone of some of the wording of your message is striking. It is striking that some of your messages are striking. We are happy to clarify this.
 I don’t think that the work to create more stable and productive relations between the USSR and the U.S. could become useless if, of course, the American side does not want this . I don't think that . The American side doesn't want this. I don
 I think that this would also not be to the advantage of the United States of America itself, says President Obama . I think this would not be good for the U.S.
 It is our conviction that it is a mutual matter how relations between the USSR and the U.S. develop. It is also a matter of how relations with the United States develop, it is said .
 "We think that they ought not be subject to fluctuations under the influence of any outside factors or events," the government says .
 The USSR claimed that it just accepted Afghanistan’s request . The United States has nothing to do with the matter between the Soviet Union and Afghanistan, the USSR said .
 If Soviet troops do not fully withdraw from Afghanistan within the next month, Moscow will become an unsuitable site for a festival meant to celebrate peace and good will . I therefore urge the USOC, in cooperation with other National Olympic Committees, to advise the International Olympic Committee that .
 Should the Soviet Union fail to withdraw its troops within the time prescribed, I urge the USOC to propose that the Games either be transferred to another site such as Montreal or to multiple sites, or be cancelled for this year .
 If the International Olympic Committee rejects such a USOC proposal, I urge the USOC and the Olympic Committees of other like-minded nations not to participate in the Moscow Games . The IOC should reject such a proposal .
 I call for your support and your help in rallying the support of the other Olympic Committees throughout the world. I call on your support . The Olympic Committee will meet in a special meeting on Monday .
 President Carter of the United States protested following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the previous year . President Carter called for a boycott of the country after the invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Many countries in Western Bloc such as Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, and Japan did not participate . As a result, many countries in West Germany and Japan were not participating in the event .
 If the Soviet Union became the host country of the Olympic Games, it would appeal its national power and the idea of ​​communism to the whole world, which the United States wanted to prevent . This Moscow Olympic Games were considered the worst of all, as international political conflicts were brought
 President Carter states that the Soviet Union’s hosting of the Olympics will destroy international friendship and goodwill . In this letter, President Carter says that the Olympic Games will destroy goodwill and friendship . President Carter: The Soviet Union's hosting will destroy our friendship .
 The United States is in direct opposition to the Soviet Union and its communist ideology . From this, it can be seen that the U.S. is in opposition to Soviet ideology .
 The interwar period is years after WWI and before WWII when the international system has been reorganized . America and transatlantic interactions are interwar interactions .
 Germany was especially economically destroyed for taking the burden of the Great War . Germany suffered economic ruin for taking part in the war effort .
 This article examines how the transatlantic regions looked like in the 20th century . It focuses on the interwar period and after the Great Wars by focusing on how people survived .
 The development of American film can be highlighted with the presence of Hollywood . Hollywood is a major source of inspiration in American film history .
 The film has become a popular mass culture in America, shared and enjoyed by many Americans and people in the world . The film is the subject of a new book, "American Horror Horror Horror"
 The Modern Times is unique for its critics of society . Charlie Chaplin, “Charlie Chaplin – Factory Scene – Modern Times” Chaplin is a modernist .
 Charlie Chaplin humorously criticizes the systematized labor condition under American capitalism . Chaplin criticizes American capitalism, which only aims for its production efficiency .
 By filming simple works such as fastening the screw, the film presents how a man becomes integrated into a part of the machine with an absence of human value .
 The American way of production has been criticized for its lack of consideration towards human rights and ethics . The U.S. has been accused of not considering human rights in its production .
 Modern Times successfully represented critics of the modernized American society with continuous and systematized works only aiming for an increase of productivity . Therefore, the film of the Modern Times .
 Non-American have contributed to the development of the film industry . Non-Americans have also contributed to film industry in the past .
 During the interwar period, when Germany has been experiencing economic difficulty from the loss in WWI, many have migrated to America . Many of the German immigrants to the U.S. came from Germany .
 Many of the German migrants have also impacted the film industry . The film industry has also been heavily influenced by migrants .
 Adam Kessel is one of the notorious pioneers producers of motion video, with roots in german immigrants . Adam is a German-born American who has roots in Germany . He is a pioneer in motion video .
 Adam Kessel proves how the American film industry has been built upon not solely by Americans but also by non-Americans . This news paper addresses how the U.S. film industry is built upon by Americans not only by Americans .
 Flapper culture was one of the expressions to obtain more independence and political and social rights . Flappers culture was an expression of freedom and social and political rights .
 This culture flourished in the 1920s, and it lasted until the Great Depression happened . This culture thrived in the 1930s and 1930s .
 Flappers were connected with various cultural aspects, lifestyles, and attitudes, such as jazz music, alcohol, and dance hall . Flappers are associated with various aspects of lifestyle, lifestyles and attitudes .
 Fashion was also a significant element that shaped what the flappers were . The flappers' fashion was also the significant element of their identity .
 There is no specific origin of flappers and their culture determined by past studies . The flappers appeared in the media in the transatlantic nations, including the United States and European countries .
 This paragraph comprehensively analyzed the penetration of flapper fashion in the United States, Germany, and France . It was mainly with the magazines and newspaper articles issued around the 1920s .
 The Ogden standard-examiner issued in 1922, flapper suits, business attire for flappers, were introduced by Lady Duff-Gordon, “Lucile” of London, a fashion designer . On the other hand, the Ogden Standard-examinations issued in
 In the same year, the magazine, The Flapper, published in November in Chicago, United States, informed the new moral norms of young women .
 According to the article, it emphasized flappers as ‘an act of rebellion” to insist on their freedom as women . The article said flappers were “an act’s rebellion’.
 The Weekly journal-minor, a weekly newspaper published in Arizona in 1922, defined 13 qualifications of typical flappers in its article .
 bobbed hair and knee-length skirts are the critical characteristics illustrated in every article . Bobbed hair is the most common characteristic of a bobbed hairstyle .
 There was no critical comment regarding the modern concept at that time . Instead, the article just explained their features .
 The article showed the photos of women, not looking like a teenager, as a representative of flappers .
 From this picture, the definition of flappers shifted to older women in the United States . b. The definition of the flappers in the U.S. became more prevalent in the 1920s .
 Germany's weekly newspaper, Berliner Illustrirte Zeitung, had critical views toward flappers .
 The article condemned the change from flappers to masculinization of women . The article condemns the change .
 For instance, bobbed hairs were replaced by male hairstyles, and they wore husband’s coats . They wore bobbed hair and wore husband's coats .
 “What started as a playful game in women’s fashion is gradually becoming a distressing aberration. Against the Masculinization of Women”
 With the hoop skirt the dictates of fashion brought the accentuation of the female form to an extreme, and now things are moving in the completely opposite direction . Not every woman should venture to display herself in pants or shorts, be it on stage or at sporting events .
 In 1924, the song “Elle s’était fait couper les cheveux” sung by Alexandre Dréan was published . Its lyrics represent the situation of flappers in France .
 The lyrics repeat, “she cut her hair” or “elle s’était fait couper les cheveaux” in French in the chorus .
 From these lyrics, bobbed hair was also famous in France, and it was the trend among young women in the early 1920s .
 Flapper fashions, such as bobbed hair and shortened skirts, made waves across the U.S. and European countries .
 The flappers desired to liberate themselves from traditional norms . They wanted to improve women’s political and social status and attitudes as equal as men . The women wanted to be more equal to men .
 Young women attracted to the trend, and newspapers and magazines reported the situation . Young women were attracted to it .
 Men regarded flappers as a threat to their status and accused them because it was apart from their ideal status of women . However, flappers were accused of being apart from women's ideal status .
 Flapper's fashion in the U.S. and Europe worked together with the women’s emancipation movements in the 1920s . Flapper’�s fashion in Europe and the United States .
 In 1965, a student-led organization SDS held ‘The March on Washington to End the War in Vietnam’ to protest against U.S. military presence in Vietnam . SDS was formed to liberate both Vietnamese and American people .
 Anti-war sentiment spread across the US, and gave rise to movements of not only anti-war but also resistance to the government and traditional values . Such anti-worship movements spread across US, giving rise to resistance to government and values .
 This brought about counterculture, and It revolves around hippie culture, rock’n’roll music, hallucinogenic drugs, free love, and so on . It revolves . around hippies culture and rock'n'roll music . This brings about counter culture, and
 Counterculture spread outside of the United States to Europe, and evolved into a transatlantic phenomenon . Eventually, counterculture spread to Europe . Counterculture evolved to become a trans-continental phenomenon .
 Underground Press emerged from the counterculture movement that was active during the 1960s . Underground Press was formed by the counter-culture movement . Underground press was formed from the 1960's counterculture .
 Underground press inherits the principles of the counterculture, by challenging structures of social and governmental orthodoxies . Underground press challenges social and government orthodoxies which appear to them as hypocritical, materialist and authoritarian . Underground Press inherits principles of counterculture .
 The underground press was more open to anyone, and any generation took direct control of the print communication media . As opposed to the establishment press which was hidden and restricted information to publish, the underground press is more open .
 The underground press advocated newly established liberal values such as anti-war, sexual freedom, Black Power and so on, in a unique form of its manifestation . The counterculture of the underground press was its form of manifestation .
 Image 1 comes from the book ‘SHOTS’ which collected photographs from underground press . Image 1 was taken from 'SHOTS' by underground press photographer .
 American News correspondents interview the dying NLF soldier . It shows a photo of a dying soldier and American News .
 The quote critiques how the establishment press frames Vietnam war in favor of the U.S. military aggression, by distributing information or contents that justify American oppression and fuel hatred towards Vietnamese “enemy” among American people .
 Image 2 from Shrew magazine depicts the struggles of women as being secondary to men in the hierarchy of gender .
 It illustrates that while men can pursue their career as scientists or engineers, women have no choice but to become secretaries or housewives . The final ‘goal’ is to get married to a man, the author says .
 Both images characterize underground press as resistance against establishment press, and social orthodoxies . Underground press disseminated underrepresented voices in the movement of counterculture .
 Counterculture diversified rock music and brought great enthusiasm among mass audiences . Rock Music Counterculture was formed in the 1960s and '70s . Rock music diversified into the 1970s . Counterculture brought in great enthusiasm .
 Psychedelic rock music emerged, and was widely adopted by popular musicians like The Beatles and The Rolling Stones . It was the first psychedelic rock music to be released in the 1960s .
 Later around the 1970s, punk music flocked in and became a central part of mainstream music . Punk music became a major part of the mainstream music scene .
 Punk music was not merely cultural but also a political movement, which was critical of establishment culture . Punk music encouraged the formation of a more liberal and better informed society, says author .
 Through listening to punk music, a significant part of a generation learned about gender inequalities, racism, civil rights, sex, and sex . punk music taught that these are unacceptable ‘crime’ in society .
 One of the greatest punk rock bands is Sex Pistles . Original lyrics of God Saves the Queen are from the original lyrics of the song .
 Image 3 is a sticker to promote one of their singles God Save the Queen . Image 4 is the original handwritten lyrics of the song . Image 5 is a photo of the band's album album cover .
 Image 3 depicts Queen Elizabeth and paints her eyes and mouth black with the song title and their name . Image 3 paints Queen Elizabeth’s eyes, mouth and eyes black with their name and song title . Queen Elizabeth is Queen of England .
 It looks as if Sex Pistles and the song made her blind and silenced, putting into a powerless being . It looks like she was silenced by the song .
 By covering her facial features but the crown on her head, it ceases her existence . It only shows the privileged ‘title’ as being a Queen . The Queen’s facial features are covered by the crown .
 While God save the Queen is the same title as the British national anthem, the lyrics assault the Queen and the monarchy . The lyrics are the same as the national anthem .
 It depicts the queen as facist and inhumane being, and that England’s future under her regime is gloomy . The queen's future is gloomy, says the author of the book .
 It implicitly depicts the dark history of the UK such as the period of imperialism and equates it as crimes that cannot be atoned for . It equates to crimes such as imperialism as crimes . The film also equates imperialism to crimes committed by imperialism and crimes that can't be at
 The lyrics are composed in a way that the same line has two parts which contrast each other in their meanings . Furthermore, the lyrics have two parts of the same song which are composed of different parts .
 The composition style and use of expression enhances the strong irony towards British monarchy . Such composition style . enhances the strength of British monarchy.
 This song is the representative of the Sex Pistles Anarchism attitudes through their punk rock music . This song was written by the punk rockers .
 The attitude of a large segment of young people shows that they have a proper and honest stance toward our Workers’ and Peasants’ State, says the author . Young people have an attitude toward socialism, he says .
 A segment of young people exhibit the tendencies of American non-culture, of Texas-style ideology, and of cowboyism . These tendencies have intensified in recent weeks and months, and have intensified .
 These phenomena profoundly contradict the civilized moral and ethical sensibilities shared by all decent people . These phenomena are profoundly contradicting our civilized moral, ethical sensibilities . We need to find out why these phenomena are happening .
 The enemy aims to bring about the weakening of our ideology, especially among youth, to foster intemperance and anarchy, he says . The enemy wants to pit segments of our youth against their own Workers' and Peasants' State .
 Deutschlandfunk is spreading this agitation through their radio and television stations, especially over Deutschlandsfunk, by smuggling indecent and inflammatory literature . It is also by utilizing the non-culture of Western music and dancing, Beatles-ideology and collecting fads, and by
 In West Germany, they depend on these ways of life to poison young people psychologically and prepare them ideologically for their criminal war plans . The West German government relies on brutalization and of stimulation of the basest instincts .
 It is our society’s duty to combat all influences and manifestations of Western non-culture . It is also our duty to fight all forms of non-Western non-cultural influences, says the author .
 Excesses such as Beatles-groups with American names 2 and almost exclusively Western and indefinable musical repertoires . have nothing in common with progressive life ideals, says author .
 We support modern and civilized dance music, but disapprove of those groups that violate all codes of morality and ethics, that perform barefoot and half naked, that contort their bodies and intoxicate our youth with agitating rhythms .
 Incidences of slander and agitation against leading party and state personalities are occurring at these events . Incidents of slander, agitation and agitation are occurring during these events. Incidences are occurring .
 Citizens are being harassed, accosted, and in some cases members of the security organs and party, state, and FDJ officers have been attacked . Citizens are also being harassed by the security forces, according to the report .
 The nature and frequency of these incidents in recent months prove that they are being purposefully organized and directed, but the masterminds and managers are remaining behind the scenes . The nature of these . incidents proves that these incidents are purposefully organized .
 This source illustrates the divided Germany due to the Cold War, and how young people in West Germany or German Democratic Republic are influenced by American counterculture in their attitudes .
 Socialist officers in East Germany aim to maintain and reinforce socialist working style . Officers recognize American culture tendencies that are exhibited by working young people, and regard it as a threat .
 By calling American/Western culture as ‘non-culture’ along with other expressions that show strong hostility and contempt, East Germany is depicted as more civilized, superior and decent people . East Germany portrays itself as civilized and superior people .
 Western culture is a threat that would threaten people's work, according to the author . Western ideology is a form of terrorism that threatens people's freedom of expression, he says .
 The officers repeatedly mention The Beatles or Beatles-ideology, and Western music, in the police interview .
 The last paragraph describes the “agitated’s youth behavior and their resistance or attacks against security or state officials . As a consequence, the last paragraph of this article describes the youth behavior of the ‘agitated' youth .
 Counterculture was disseminated even in East Germany where opposing ideology bound the people, and it became influential enough to change the youth behavior and challenge the social orthodoxies or state authorities . Counterculture became influential in the youth, changing the behavior of the youth and challenging the state .
 East Germany exhibits transatlantic influence and interaction through counterculture . This is exactly what counterculture aimed for, and this case of East Germany . This case is the perfect example of counterculture in the United States .
 Alexandre Dréan, “Elle s’était fait couper les cheveux ,” Youtube video, 2:34. References: “Couper couper le cheveaux’s’.”
 Berlin shoppers line up outside of the grocer in the morning and buy food as early as possible . People made a long line outside of a Berlin Grocer to buy food .
 Weimar government faced a series of problems starting from default on its payment or reparation in 1922 . Germany defaulted on reparation payments in 1922, and the Weimar defaulted in 1923 .
 French government occupied the Ruhr region, where the German industrialization was centered . German defaulted on reparation payment, forcing French occupation of the region .
 Losing the heart of its economy, it became more difficult for Germany to supply finance for the reparation . Germany's economy has been hit hard by the loss of its heart of the economy .
 Although the government promised to pay the worker’s wages in return to obeying the order of passive resistance, the government was not able to raise the money for that . The government was unable to pay workers’ wages .
 This rapid increase in the printed paper bill made the price of the mark out of control . It was made to stop the printing of the paper bill becoming more expensive .
 The more the government printed the bill, the less the value of money became . The value of the money became less dependent on printing money .
 The following document explains people’s lives under this hyperinflation . The document explains how people's lives are affected .
 I have lived through some very critical times during the Russian Revolution in 1917–18, but I do not remember a time quite as bad as this which has now befallen Germany . I have also lived during some critical times in Russia during the revolution in 1917-18 . I do
 Even in the worst times in Russia, one always had a feeling that the suffering was for some ideal which would make it all worthwhile . Even though the suffering in Russia was for the ideal, it was always worth the suffering .
 The mark has ceased to be currency and is merely a vast mass of paper packets representing so many dollars or pounds . The mark is no longer currency but it is merely the mass of money packets representing the value of each packet .
 The number of packets to the dollar varies every day . Those who are lucky enough to have foreign currency can get along, but even then with difficulty .
 Gustav Stresemann was a politician and the Foreign Minister of Weimer Republic . He was a member of the cabinet . He served as foreign minister of the Weimer republic .
 "Once again the feeling of being pillaged and plundered flared up in intense resistance," says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The feeling now began to differentiate between those nations which wanted to continue the conflict with Germany and those which held that a legal justification for the invasion did not exist . But this feeling was now beginning to differentiate .
 Voices were heard from the United States of America which made it clear that America wanted a peaceful and united Europe as a basis for mutual cooperation . U.S. wants a peaceful, united Europe .
 In his speech for Nobel Lecture, he mentioned the motivation to conclude Dawes Plan and Locarno Treaties and told that he considered the expectation of America .
 From this, it can be assumed that there was a sort of intervention by and influence of America in the conclusion of these treaties . The treaties were concluded by the Treaty of Peace and Peace .
 Among German’s immigrants, there are different types for instance voluntary or rather forced to have contribution to American business in the period of twentieth century .
 270,000 to 300,000 in 1935 Jew succeed in depart from Germany before Official Banning for Jewish emigration in 1941 . It is estimated to have left Germany in 1935 .
 Stefan Zweig sounds an alarm on monotonized culture of the whole world including Germany . Americanization in German culture is the result of the considerable influence of American culture . The Monotonization of the World Explanation .
 He claims that Americanization breaks the tradition and negates characteristics of Germany, focusing on four points; dance, fashion, cinema, and radio .
 Stefan Zweig considered this situation as the conflict between European countries with individualism and America with totalitarianism . Europe remains the last bulwark of individualism, perhaps of the overly taut cramp of peoples .
 The boredom that does not, like the earlier European variety, come from calmness, from sitting on the park bench playing dominoes and smoking a pipe . The boredom is a lazy waste of time indeed, but not dangerous, says author .
 American boredom is restless, nervous, and aggressive; it outruns itself in its frantic haste, seeks numbness in sports and sensations . – Stefan Zweig, “The Monotonization of the World” – As German people felt antipathy toward ‘Fordism�
 American culture and ideology connected with terms like “fast” or “efficient” was comprehended to be inhuman for them . Thus, in comparison, U.S. culture and . ideology connected to terms like "fast" or "efficient" was perceived as inhuman for
 Two American women photograph women from Spreewald, Germany, dressed in traditional clothing outside a hotel in Unter den Linden, Berlin .
 George Grosz, a German caricaturist, makes an argument about German traditional culture . He says it is destroyed by Americanization . He also makes a point about German ideology and economic policy .
 Not to be had for anything serious outside their nerve-grating businesses . Not to have any serious outside of themselves .
 The women, made-up, manicured, highheeled, and neglected, with gigolos in the hotels and at the tea dance .
 Then one takes a look at American magazines. What life? -George Grosz, “Among Other Things, a Word for German Tradition” – Then one looks at American mags.
 Through the life in America, he gradually lost his painting style as a caricaturist, assimilating with American style, ironically, ironically . He gradually lost the style as an American artist .
 The German spirit toward art, especially the field of film industry, had kept their feelings of pride . Having influenced by Americanization, however, the German spirit of art, was kept in Germany .
 American cinematic photography is regarded as the best photography in the world .
 The Americans have still not understood how to use their magnificent equipment to elevate the miracle of photography into the realm of the spirit . That means that the concepts of light and shade are not to be made mere transporters of mood but factors that contribute to plot .
 A young girl is chased through the catacombs of Metropolis in Metropolis . The beam of an electric flashlight illuminated the pursuit of a young girl through Metropolis.
 This beam of light pierced the hunted creature like the sharp claws of an animal, refused to release her from its grasp . It drove her unremittingly forward to the point of utter panic, driving her forward .
 The great German dramatic film of the future will have the thing play just as important a role as the human character, says the director .
 Actors will no longer occupy a space that they appear to have entered by accident . Rather the space will be constructed in such a way that the characters’ experiences appear possible only in it, only on account of it . Actors' experiences will not appear to be accidental, but
 Lang: The American film industry was characterized by its vast scale, numbers of equipment, and enormous financial resources, which the German film industry did not afford . Lang: Eureka Entertainment Ltd. According to Lang, the U.S. film industry lacked the financial resources of the German
 He predicted that the German film industry develops abstractly and synergistically cooperating with the performers in the films, the way, the Americans would not be capable of implementing it . On the other hand, he said that the U.S. wouldn't be able to implement it .
 This event was symptomatic of a decade of economic uncertainty that was precipitated by the crash in the fall of 1929 . U.S. stock prices declined dramatically in 1929 when United States stock prices dropped dramatically . July 22, 2020 Presidency of Franklin D, Roosevelt .
 The resulting panic devastated the fortunes of many investors and caused major declines in consumption, industrial production, and employment, which in turn affected the U.S. and world economy for the next decade .
 The United States stock market had expanded rapidly during the 1920s, attracting many inexperienced investors . The U.S. stock market was expanding rapidly during that period .
 George Mehales, a Greek immigrant who owned a diner in Spartanburg, South Carolina, began investing in the stock market just before the crash . Mehales: "I'm not going to be surprised if you're going to see what's going to happen again"
 "They told me I needed more cash to cover up. On that day of October 29, they told me they needed more money," she says . "On that day, they said they needed money to . cover up," she adds .
 Mehales had lost everything, including his restaurant, which he had to sell at a rock bottom price . Mehales was forced to sell his restaurant at rock bottom prices . His restaurant was the last restaurant in the country .
 In the early 1930s, the U.S. moved further into economic instability . The collapse of many banks, reduced spending on consumer goods, and increasing unemployment increased unemployment .
 President Herbert Hoover’s response to these crises disappointed many, including WWI veterans, many of whom found themselves impoverished . Hoover's response to the crisis disappointed many of these veterans, including many of them .
 They rallied in Washington in 1932, hoping that they might be able to receive their military pension funds early . In 1932, they gathered in Washington to see if they could receive their pension funds .
 When Congress rejected their appeals, some members of this so-called, “Bonus Army” reacted with frustration and violence . Members of this "Bonus Army" reacted to Congress rejecting their appeals . Some members of the “ Bonus Army’s” reaction was to be
 The image of U.S. Army soldiers confronting the veterans of the Great War in the nation’s capital did not sit well with the public . United States Army troops were called in, and the image of the soldiers confronting veterans was not well received .
 In the fall of 1932, President Roosevelt won by a landslide . Roosevelt was elected president of the United States .
 The 1932 Presidential campaign was one of the most momentous in American history . The 1932 campaign was a momentous election for the President of the Union .
 Republican President Herbert Hoover presided over a nation in economic collapse . Democrat would win the presidency in 1932 . Hoover was president of the United States during the Depression .
 The popular leader of the country’s most populous state, he attracted attention by aggressively using governmental power to help alleviate the suffering of the Depression . He attracted attention .
 President Hoover was deeply unpopular . Saddled with responsibility for responsibility for the Depression, Hoover was widely unpopular . Hoover was a deeply unpopular president .
 FDR relished campaigning and wanted to show the country he was up to the job . FDR relishes campaigning and was eager to show that he was ready to succeed . But he was not ready to give up his job as president .
 He traveled to 41 states, making major addresses and hundreds of whistle-stop appearances . CNN's John Sutter says he traveled 41 states and visited hundreds of states .
 His energy, charm, and commitment to action carried him to a decisive victory . His energy and charm, he said, carried out his victory .
 By 1939, the New Deal had run its course . The WPA Federal Theatre Playhouse was one of the most successful theatres in the country .
 In the short term, New Deal programs helped improve the lives of people suffering from the events of the depression . In the long-term, the programs helped help people with depression .
 In the long run, New Deal programs set a precedent for the federal government to play a key role in the economic and social affairs of the nation . The New Deal program is set to set a long-term precedent .
 "You have so many sheep and yet you want to take the last sheep of the poor man," he wrote . "So you said to the rich, to the Wall St. bankers: Leave the poor . man his last sheep," he said .
 Roosevelt is a damn good man — you take all these young fellows and you can’t talk to them like in the old days to swing them over . Frustration among people is a matter of frustration among people .
 I only have one son and believe me I am glad I can’t buy him the things he needs. 'I'm glad he can't buy him anything he needs,' she says .
 The Atlantic Charter was signed by Churchill and the U.S. President of the United States of America and the Prime Minister of the UK of the Atlantic Charter . It was the first time the two countries had met in the Atlantic .
 They will aid and encourage all other practicable measure which will lighten for peace-loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments . They will likewise aid and . encourage all . other practicable measures which will . lighten . peace-lovers . people's burden on armaments will also be
 This charter is consisted of 8 articles and all of them reflected the thought of the President in that they agreed with no expansion of territory, paying respect to self-determination, mutual economic co-operation and exclusion of military power as a method .
 This context can be seen as an emergence of concept for establishment of The United Nations . This context was seen as a potential for emergence of the UN .
 On December 7, 1941, the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan . The date will live in infamy .
 One hour after Japanese air squadrons had commenced bombing in the American Island of Oahu, the Japanese Ambassador to the United States delivered to our Secretary of State a formal reply to a recent American message .
 There was no threat or hint of war or of armed attack, it contained no threat . And while this reply stated that it seemed . seemed . useless to continue the existing diplomatic negotiations, it . seemed useless, it said .
 The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian Islands has caused severe damage to American naval and military forces . U.S. military forces have suffered severe damage from the attack .
 U.S. ships have been reported torpedoed on the high seas between San Francisco and Honolulu .
 As Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy I have directed that all measures be taken for our defense . I have ordered all measures to be taken .
 I believe I interpret the will of the Congress and of the people when I assert that we will not only defend ourselves to the uttermost but will make it very certain that this form of treachery shall never again endanger us . I believe that I interpret that I . assert . I assert
 Congress should declare a state of war between the U.S. and the Japanese Empire, Sen. Tom Coburn says . Coburn: Since the attack by Japan on Dec. 7, 1941, the war has existed .
 Franklin D Roosevelt The White House, December 8, 1941 . Roosevelt’s thinking about the way to make the public opinion stand with joining to war .
 Additionally, he wrote the words, “without warning,” but later crossed them out . He also crossed out the words ‘without warning’ without warning, but later deleted them .
 He made some minor changes following the update of the situation in Hawaii . He made a few minor changes to the status quo .
 A United Nations conference should be summoned for Wednesday, 25 April, 1945, and should be held in the United States .
 Delegates of the United Kingdom and United State of America will support a proposal to admit to original membership two Soviet Socialist Republics, i.e., the Ukraine and White Russia .
 Decisions of the Security Council on procedural matters should be made by an affirmative vote of seven members . Decisions should have been made by a majority of the seven-member body .
 The study of the procedure of the dismemberment of Germany was referred to a committee consisting of Mr Anthony Eden, Mr John Winant, and Mr Fedor T Gusev .
 This body would consider the desirability of associating with it a French representative . The French representative would be a representative of the French .
 Protocol On the Talks Between the Heads of Three Governments at the Crimean Conference on the Question of the German Reparations in Kind 1. Protocol on the Talks between the Heads . and the heads of three governments at the . Crimean Conference . on the question of the . Question of . the Question
 Germany must pay in kind for the losses caused by her to the Allied nations in the course of the war . Germany must also pay for those losses suffered by her during the war, says the German leader .
 Reparations are to be received in the first instance by those countries which have borne the main burden of the war, have suffered the heaviest losses and have organized victory over the enemy . Reparations will be received by those who have suffered heaviest losses .
 Removals within two years from the surrender of Germany or the cessation of organized resistance from the national wealth of Germany located on the territory of Germany herself as well as outside her territory . These removals to be carried out chiefly for the purpose of destroying the war potential of Germany .
 Annual deliveries of goods from current production for a period to be fixed for a fixed period . Annual deliveries to current production of goods will be fixed .
 Allied reparation commission will be set up in Moscow . For the working out on the above principles of a detailed plan for exaction of reparation from Germany .
 It will consist of three representatives – one from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, one from UK and one from U.S. of America . The United Kingdom and the United States of America will be represented .
 The British delegation was of the opinion that, pending consideration of the reparation question by the Moscow reparation commission, no figures of reparation should be mentioned .
 The proposal has been passed to Moscow reparation commission as one of the proposals to be considered by the commission .
 Conference agreed that the question of the major war criminals should be the subject of inquiry by the three Foreign Secretaries .
 Tito-Subasitch agreement should be immediately put into effect . New government should be formed on the basis of the agreement, he says .
 That the Anti-Fascist Assembly of the National Liberation will be extended to include members of the last Yugoslav Skupstina who have not compromised themselves by collaboration with the enemy, thus forming a body to be known as a temporary Parliament . That legislative acts passed by the anti-F
 Notes were put in by the British delegation and the American and Soviet delegations agreed to consider them and give their views later . Notes on these subjects were put into by British delegation .
 It was agreed that at the next meeting of the three Foreign Secretaries to be held in London, they should consider proposals which it was understood the Soviet Government would put forward in relation to the Montreaux Convention .
 The forgoing protocol was approved and signed by the three Foreign Secretaries at the Crimean Conference Feb., 1945 . The protocol was signed at a Crimean Conference in 1945 .
 It is understood that the agreement concerning Outer Mongolia and the ports and railroads referred to above will require concurrence of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek . The agreement is understood to have been reached by Chiang-Kiang-Shek .
 The President will take measures in order to maintain this concurrence on advice from Marshal Stalin . Marshal Stalin advised the President to maintain the concurrence . President Vladimir Putin is expected to make a speech on Thursday .
 The heads of the three great powers have agreed that these claims of the Soviet Union shall be unquestionably fulfilled after Japan has been defeated . The heads have agreed to fulfill these claims after Japan's defeat .
 The Soviet Union expresses it readiness to conclude with the National Government of China a pact of friendship and alliance between the U.S. and China in order to render assistance to China with its armed forces for the purpose of liberating China from the Japanese yoke . For its part, the Soviet
 Joseph Stalin was assassinated February 11, 1945 . Winston Churchill was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 This statement can be useful for knowing what superpower leaders thought when WWII was about to end . Analysis: This statement is useful to know how superpower leaders reacted to the end of WWII .
 Roosevelt used his power to get closer to making a global organization and realize world peace by involving Soviet into the agreement . Roosevelt was able to achieve world peace with the Soviet Union .
 At the time of the Yalta Conference, Roosevelt and Churchill thought Stalin would do what he promised . Stalin tried to make the Europe to communist’s nations, which became the beginning of the Cold War . Also, it can be seen that, at the time, Churchill thought
 FDR aboard HMS Prince of Wales with Winston Churchill, Harry Hopkins, W Averell Harriman, Ernest King, George Marshall, General Dill, Admiral Starck & Admiral Pound at Atlantic Charter Conference . FDR was aboard the ship at the time .
 U.S. Resettlement Administration rescues victims, restores land to proper use . Ben Shahn. Shahn, B & United States Resettlement .
 The End of the Cold War and Transatlantic History through NATO . The Cold War mainly happened between the United States and the Soviet Union . The end of this Cold War will be shown in 2020 .
 NATO was established within American-led alliances . To be against the power from socialism countries . NATO established within U.S. to be against socialism .
 The Establishment of NATO NATO was formed led by British and America in the North Atlantic Treaty signed in 1949 . NATO formed in 1949 led by Britain and the U.S. in North America .
 At the beginning, it used to be an intergovernmental military alliance of the West to compete with the East communist area led by the Soviet Union . The West and the Soviet-led Soviet Union used to compete .
 In May of 1955, at Warsaw in Poland, socialism states followed by Soviet Union made a military alliance which is called Warsaw Pact . Warsaw Pact was formed by socialism states and the Soviet Union .
 NATO started to have strong power around Soviet Union and other socialism countries . This alliance was established against NATO, because NATO started having strong power . NATO has been established against the Soviet Union, because of this .
 With this Warsaw pact, the world officially had to confront the society with Bipolarity . Main global economic, military and cultural influence is held between two states, the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Warsaw Pact in accordance with the principles of respect for the independence and sovereignty of states, and also with the principle of noninterference in their internal affairs . Article 1. In the interests of further strengthening and promoting friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance, the Warsaw Pact was founded in 1961 .
 The contracting parties undertake, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations Organization, to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force, and to settle their international disputes by peaceful means so as not to endanger international peace .
 The contracting parties declare their readiness to take part in the spirit of sincere co-operation . Contractors declare readiness to participate in international undertakings intended to safeguard international peace and security .
 The contracting parties shall work for the adoption, in agreement with other states desiring to co-operate in this matter, of effective measures towards a general reduction of armaments .
 The contracting parties shall take council among themselves on all important international questions relating to their common interests, guided by the interests of strengthening international peace and security . Contractors will also be able to discuss matters with each other .
 They shall take council among themselves immediately, whenever, in the opinion of any of them, there has arisen the threat of an armed attack on one or several states that are signatories of the treaty . In the interests of organizing their joint defense and of upholding peace and security, they shall
 Bush aimed to show the United States idea of supporting Gorbachev’s reform in this meeting . Bush presented twenty specific proposals, including normalizing trade and arms control agreements .
 There is virtually no problem in the world that improvement in the U.S.-Soviet relationship will not help to ameliorate, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: There is no world problem in Europe that improvement is not helping to improve relations .
 "Our meeting was characterized by openness, by a full scope of the exchange of views," she said . "We were open to each other," she added .
 "Perhaps there is no sense, to explain the entire range of issues that we have discussed. Today it is even difficult, and perhaps there are no sense" to explain .
 The President and I myself also felt it necessary to exchange views on our perception, both from Moscow and Washington, of the hot points on our planet . Russia and the U.S. are the world's two most powerful countries .
 President Bush called on you to end the cold war once and for all. Chairman Gorbachev, President Bush said, "President Bush called for you to ... end the Cold War once and all"
 In the first place, I assured the President of the United States that the Soviet Union would never start a war against the U.S. of America, and we would like our relations to develop in such a way that they would open greater possibilities for cooperation .
 "We sought the answer to the question where we stand now. Naturally, the President and I had a wide discussion," she said .
 We stated, both of us, that the world leaves one . epoch of cold war and enters another . epoch . Both of us said the world . leaves one epoch of . cold war, enters another epoch .
 "We're just at the very beginning of our long road to a long-lasting peaceful period," says President Obama . Obama: "We’re just starting the long road" to peace .
 Three nations joined this partnership in 1999, followed by Seven nations in 2004, and two more in 2009, two more nations joined in 2009 .
 Article 10-2 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty was invoked in response to the terrorist-related terrorist attacks in the U.S. in 2001 . The treaty was invoked after the 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States .
 NATO instructors in the new Afghan army’s training are NATO instructors . While agreeing to the war on terror, the countries continued to participate voluntarily .
 Any such armed attack and all measures taken as a result of such an attack shall immediately be reported to the Security Council . The Security Council will be informed of the incident .
 President Trump did not hide his discontent with the disparity between the U.S. and the other countries ‘ military spending’ In 2017, when Donald Trump became president, he said he was unhappy about the disparity in military spending .
 It was reported that Trump leaked his intention to disengage from NATO in 2019/1 . It was also reported that he leaked his plans to pull out of NATO .
 I just left recently and we’re going to pick up at least another, close to a $1 billion extra, says President Obama . "We’ve got a lot of extra money to spend," he says .
 The United States is paying close to 90% of the costs of protecting Europe . The U.S. is paying nearly 90 per cent of the EU's costs .
 Small countries, big countries, all these countries we are supposed to protect them. Small countries . Small countries ... we should protect them," says President Obama . "Small countries" should be protected, says Obama .
 Now we are in World War III and protecting a country that wasn’t paying its bills, he says . Now we’re in a world of war, he adds .
 This situation almost caused a nuclear war . However, the communication between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev prevented it .
 The missiles in Cuba were returned to the Soviet Union, contrary to Castro’s will . Although the U.S. invasion of Cuba was prevented, the missiles were returned back to the Soviets .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev letters will be analyzed by analyzing letters between Kennedy and Castro . The letters will answer questions about Kennedy and his relationship with Castro . Kennedy's letters to Castro's letters will also be analyzed in a new book .
 The analysis of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro through letters reveals their aim or feeling towards this crisis . The analysis reveals their aims or feelings towards each other in letters . The letters reveal their aim and feelings towards the crisis .
 In this letter, Khrushchev strongly opposes the blockade of cargo to Cuba announced by President Kennedy on October 22 . Khrushchen strongly opposes this blockade of Cuba .
 For Khrushchev, the United States action was regarded as the act of ultimatum rather than quarantine referred by the President and criticizes it as a violation of the freedom of navigation guaranteed in international law . The United States took action as an act of threat rather than a quarantine referred
 Khrushchev intends to blame the U.S. for threatening the sovereignty and right of other nations, writes the letter . The letter was published in Moscow on November 4, 1959 .
 Through the harsh tones in his usage of words, the high tension between the Eastern and Western bloc during the Cold War could be implied . A slight misunderstanding or acts of aggression could lead to a nuclear war that would cause huge destruction to the whole world .
 Khrushchev depicts himself as a strong leader of the Soviet Union . His role is to face the United States in a resolute manner and never compromise from his side .
 The letter was the official beginning of the Cuban missile crisis, the period with the highest tension during the Cold War . Therefore, this letter demonstrates the strong attitude of the Soviet Union countering the United States, the letter says .
 Khrushchev suggests a way to relieve tension by agreeing to remove weapons from Cuba in exchange for the United States retreating their counterparts from Turkey under the surveillance of the United Nations . The Soviet-U.S. agreed to the removal of weapons in Cuba in return for the U.S
 U.S. bases in Italy and Turkey threaten nuclear weapons by the United States . At the same time, he also explains the Soviets being in a similar situation as the U. States .
 The tone of his letter is more softened and demonstrates his willingness to somehow tackle the ongoing tension through negotiation . One significant shift from his last letter is that he becomes more softened .
 Khrushchev showed the Soviet’s willingness to accept the deal with the United States could be evaluated as a significant step to avoid physical war . The deal was seen as a step toward avoiding physical war in the 1960s .
 By offering a deal, Khrushchev might attempt to demonstrate himself as a reasonable leader who is seeking international peace, writes David Frum . Frum: By making a deal with the Soviet Union, he would show himself as reasonable leader .
 Khrushchev's intention to justify the Soviet’s action of deploying missiles as defensive measures to protect the people of Cuba could be implicated . The letter could have been written by the Soviet leader to justify his actions .
 He emphasizes the Cuban people’s desire to maintain their national security, and the role of Soviet to protect their interest as a natural action .
 Khrushchev indirectly criticizes the U.S. action as aggressive and violating the sovereignty of other countries . At the same time, by justifying their construction of a military base in Cuba, Khrushchen criticizes their construction in Cuba .
 The United States is also threatening the security of the Soviet with deployed missiles in Italy and Turkey . Furthermore, he repeatedly emphasizes the similarity of situation and interest between the two countries .
 This suggests that Khrushchev’s offer of making a deal does not necessarily mean that his recognition of the United States has changed dramatically . Therefore, this suggests that this . suggests that . this . possibility of a deal with the U.S. does not mean that . Kh
 Kennedy agrees that they must find an immediate solution to this problem . He suggests that the first thing that should be taken care of is the weapons in Cuba and they must immediately make them inoperable .
 Kennedy writes down what he comprehended from Khrushchev’s letter from October 26 . Kennedy: ‘I don’t know what I’ve got out of the letter,’ he says .
 Khrushchev must agree to remove weapons in Cuba under the observation by the U.N. and stop the further introduction of weapons in the country . The U.S. must also remove weapons from Cuba and stop further introduction .
 If he does so, the United Nations will give assurance that the U.S. and other western nations will not invade Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Cuba is a key ally of the United States, Sutter says .
 Kennedy is accepting Khrushchev’s suggestions and stressing that by working together they can achieve the reduction of tensions . In this letter, Kennedy says he is accepting the suggestions .
 The removal of the weapons must be done under the observation of the United Nations . Kennedy agrees with Krushchev's idea .
 The way it is written is as if they are collaborative solutions, however, we can see that all actions must be observed by the U.N. All actions must have to be observed, the UN says .
 Kennedy stresses that the removal of the weapons and the cooperation of Krushchev is a must in order to reduce the tension . The letter says reducing tension is a common goal that Kennedy and Krushchechev have .
 Khrushchev reconfirms that the Soviet Union would terminate the “further work on weapons construction sites” and “dismantle the arms” to be returned to the Soviet U.S. The arms would be returned back to the USSR .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the weapons once President Kennedy guaranteed that “there would be no attack” in his last letter . Since those weapons were only for “defensive purposes”, they were removed from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev welcomes the U.S. positive response to his deal to remove weapons in Cuba in exchange for the United States guaranteeing the security of Cuba and the Soviet Union . In this letter, Khrushche writes: "The United States responded positively to our positive response"
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union have agreed on the importance of maintaining international peace as the leading power of two blocs . It seems that both leaders of the United States and the former Soviet Union agree on the need for peace .
 This letter implies that such a consensus does not necessarily mean that the Soviet’s attitude toward the U.S. has become positive . At the same time, this letter implies . Such a consensus doesn’t necessarily mean . The letter also implies that .
 Khrushchev wrote that the U.S. side conducted aggressive actions that led to tension . Khrrushchev made it clear that it was the United States side who caused tension .
 Khrushchev claims that the Soviet’s economic and military assistance for Cuba is to protect them from external invasion . Once again, the Soviet leader says that the aid is needed to protect Cuba from an external invasion.
 Khrushchev attempts to blame the United States for their aggressiveness that threatens the sovereignty of other nations with contentious violation of their territory . The U.S. is responsible for their actions that threaten other nations' sovereignty .
 He insists on the positive and virtuous image of the Soviet Union as a country that respects international peace and moral values . In contrast, he insists that the image of Russia is positive .
 This letter could be regarded as evidence of unsolved ideological divide between the two blocs . Therefore, this letter could indicate an ideological divide, even after the avoidance of physical conflict .
 Kennedy makes sure that they are on the same page that suggestions made in previous letters will be carried out at once so the United States can remove their quarantine measures . Kennedy hopes that the U.S. can remove its quarantine measures so that the quarantine will be lifted .
 U.S. aircraft only made an error and mistakenly violated the Chukotska Peninsula . Emphasizes that the plane only made a mistake .
 Kennedy once again stresses that they can make real progress towards peace . Kennedy: "Peace can be achieved in the long road to peace"
 Also discusses further possible problems that should be solved among the two countries . Discusses possible problems and when to discuss them . Also discusses possible problems to be solved between the two nations .
 The letter was sent to Kruschev before their official reply from the previous letter . It was sent before the official reply was made . The letter shows the urgency of the problem of the aircraft .
 Kennedy did not want to ruin the progress he had made with Kruschev . In order to do so, he needed to clear any misunderstandings that might have .
 Kennedy mentions further problems that need to be solved other than the removal of weapons in Cuba . Kennedy: "There are still many unanswered questions about what happened to the aircraft"
 Kennedy is trying to show that he wants to make peace with Kruschev . He does not want the aircraft incident to get in their way . He says they can collaborate on solving many different problems .
 The Cuban crisis is towards the end and they can afford to think about problems other than the problems in Cuba . Second, the Cuban crisis will end soon, and they are able to focus on their own problems .
 If the U.S. were to invade Cuba, the USSR should never allow it to happen and should strike first with their nuclear artillery . The USSR should not be allowed to attack Cuba and should never let it happen .
 Even if the USSR were to strike first, it was justifiable as the U.S. is aggressive, dangerous, brutal, brutal and violates international law and morality . The United States is aggressive and extremely dangerous .
 This is probably used to depict the U.S. as colonizers that are trying to steal land and Cuba as the country being colonized . Cuba is Cuba, Cuba is the country that was colonized by the United States, the author says .
 Castro depicts the USSR as the “defender of peace” and the U.S. as the bad guy in this scenario . The USSR is portrayed as the USSR and the United States are the bad guys, Castro says .
 It is possible that Castro wanted the USSR to hate the U.S. more than it actually does . The usage of nuclear weapons is for defeating the bad guys and for justice which is in Castro’s best interest .
 Castro alluded in the letter that the USSR is the defender of peace and Cuba is there to help them realize it . Also, Castro alluded to the fact that Cuba is helping the USSR realize peace . Castro alluded the letter to the Soviet Union as a defender .
 This connotes that although Castro is willing to retaliate to the USA it is mainly the USSR whose gonna do all the dirty work . The USSR is likely to do the most of the damage to the US .
 Khrushchev warns Castro not to provoke the United States by any means because it can lead to an agreement that is disadvantageous to the USSR and Cuba . After the U.S. decided not to invade Cuba However, a United States airplane flew over the territory of Cuba and it was
 Cuba's cooperation with Cuba for not answering any American provocation was necessary, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "In order to fulfill this objective, the cooperation of Cuba ... is necessary"
 Khrushchev saw this Cuban action as an answer towards American provocation and against his will . The Cuban action was seen as a response to American provocation . Khruschev saw it as a provocation against him .
 Cuba never shoots commercial airplanes with civilians on board . Cuba has never shot commercial planes with civilians aboard .
 Cuba took down a U.S. aircraft because it was planning to ambush Cuban troupes so it was for self-defense . Cuba said it was self-defence because the aircraft was going to be ambushed by the Americans .
 Castro requested that Cuban troupes be allowed to shoot down enemy aircraft and soldiers if it is for the sake of self-defense . Castro also requested that the Cuban military should be able to use the power of the armed forces .
 It will be guaranteed that every move that Cuba took will be conveyed to the USSR authorities . Cuba's move will be relayed to USSR authorities, it is claimed .
 The USA violated the airspace law therefore Cuba had to take precautionary measures . Although it is in the best intentions of Cuba to resolve the conflict with a peace treaty .
 Castro seeks permission to launch antiaircraft weapons in the U.S. aircraft . Castro also seeks permission for launch of anti-aircraft weapons . Castro wants to launch anti-war weapons in aircraft .
 This speaks on so many levels on the kind of relationship that the USSR and Cuba have, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The relationship between the two countries has been described as one of the worst in history .
 The USSR remains the head of the operations for the cold war . Cuba’s geographical proximity to the USA might be the one factor for being its ally . Cuba's geographical proximity .
 Due to this, it can be said that both countries use each other for their own advantage . Both countries are known to be very friendly and friendly .
 Cuba uses the USSR for beefing up its military power . The USSR uses Cuba as a strategic location to launch missiles if a war were to occur . Cuba uses Cuba to beef up military power against the Soviet Union .
 The alliance is based on personal benefits that each party can gain rather than actually caring about the mutual benefits of each other . Therefore it can be said that the alliance is . based on the personal benefits of the parties .
 This is an exchange with the United States promising not to invade Cuba and lifting quarantine . This is a deal with the U.S. promising to lift quarantine and lift quarantine . The United States also promised to not invade Cuba .
 USSR continues to support Cuba but Cuba also needs to support itself with the weapons already given by the Soviet Union . Cuba must also support itself in order to keep its weapons from being given by Soviet Union, says Cuban president .
 Khrushchev was pleased with the result of the conversation with Kennedy and the need to prevent Cuba from violating the agreement with Kennedy . There are mainly 2 thoughts conveyed through this letter .
 The letter aims to explain the decision Khrushchev and Kennedy made, which is the Soviet Union removing the missile base in exchange for the United States lifting ‘quarantine” and promising not to invade Cuba .
 Even though he does not trust the United States especially for the invasion, he accepts this deal with Kennedy . "Even though he doesn't trust the U.S., he accepts it with Kennedy," he says .
 He values the fact that the Cuban invasion and the nuclear war were prevented . As he states “we have succeeded” in this letter, “We have succeeded,” he writes .
 This phrase “we have succeeded” might entail the meaning of the act of persuading Cuba to follow this decision . This phrase may be the true meaning of "We have succeeded"
 Khrushchev must have understood the fear of the United States invasion in Cuba which led Cuba to shoot down a United States aircraft . The fear of a U.S. invasion led to the shooting down of the aircraft .
 Cuban acts of attacking the U.S. under any condition can violate the agreement built by Kennedy and Khrushchev . However, such attacks could violate the deal built by the two leaders . The United States is not allowed to attack Cuba under any conditions .
 Khrushchev tried to convince Castro to follow this agreement through this letter by showing sympathy with Cuba and pointing out the importance of Cuba as the reason for avoiding nuclear war . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Castro begins with the question as to why the USSR withdrew its nuclear missiles from Cuba . Castro says the Soviet Union withdrew its nukes from Cuba in order to avoid further damage .
 The Cuban citizens had enough hardship and that they are ready to topple down the imperialism nation . The Cuban people had enough . They are ready . to topple . down imperialism nation, the Cuban citizens .
 Castro, later on, posed a question to Krushchev that what if they were attacked by America they would be armless thus more casualties in the process . Castro later asked if they would have armless so more casualties would be suffered .
 Some of the USSR's troops are stationed in Cuba and their lives should also be protected, he said . He also pointed out that it is in the best interest of the Soviet Union to protect Cuba .
 The U.S. forces are posing a threat to invade Cuba and now more than ever Cuba needs the protection of the USSR and its missiles . Cuba needs to protect itself from the United States and its missile missiles, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Castro implores Krushchev that it is in the best interest of the USSR to never let the U.S. launch a missile in Cuba . The USSR troupes are also present in Cuba as well as the United States . Castro: "Never let the United. States launch
 It could be inferred that Castro knows that Cuba alone could not stop the forces of the US, therefore, hiding behind USSR’s back and teaming up with them is the most strategic thing to do . Castro knows Cuba alone cannot stop US forces from stopping them .
 Cuba’s president even goes as far as saying that the usage of a nuclear weapon can be justified because of the US’ action . In this letter, Cuba's president shows a great deal of aggressiveness towards the Imperialists .
 This just shows the dissent that Castro has for the United States and it shows that he is not afraid to take matters into his own hands . Castro has a history of dissent against the U.S.
 The prior year during the bay of pigs invasion, the U.S. tried to topple down Castro’s regime in order to stop communism . This is due to the fact that the prior year, the United States tried to overthrow the Castro regime . The United States was trying to
 This resulted in the country’s antagonistic relationship with the U.S. and fear for another colonization . The country's antagonism with the United States has led to an antagonism .
 Cuba made it seem like the USSR has the most to lose when withdrawing the missiles, it is actually Cuba that is geographically closer to the US, therefore, easier to invade . Cuba is the most likely to be invaded by the US .
 The USSR knew that the U.S. cannot easily launch missiles to them therefore having a more laid back attitude of withdrawing the weapons . Russia knew that regardless of circumstance the United States cannot launch missiles .
 Kennedy is the most secretive and political in his letters . Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro Castro are the three most secretive men in the world .
 Throughout his letters, he stresses the common goal of achieving peace . He stresses what must be done to achieve peace and reducing the tension .
 Kennedy puts emphasis on what is the best for U.S. citizens . Khrushchev and Kennedy say Cuba and the United States will both benefit from the suggestion .
 Khrushchev is presenting himself as a leader of Eastern bloc who confronts the Western bloc, particularly the US, in an equal position . The Russian leader presented himself as the leader of the Eastern bloc .
 Even though the tone of his language becomes more moderate from his second letter, it could be implied that he does not fully trust the United States as a potential partner .
 His attempt to present the Soviet Union as a virtuous nation and criticize the American aggressiveness remains consistent . Despite the shift in his attitude, he remains consistent.
 As a representative of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev needs to present him as a strong leader who can confront the U.S. in a rigorous manner, writes David Frum .
 The Soviet Union Secretary-General of the Soviet Union criticized the U.S. blockade . The letter to Kennedy on October 24 was written in his first public statement since the war .
 His intention as well as the responsibility to be the strong leader with confidence, he said . His intention is to be strong leader, he added . He said: "His intention is as important as being the strong .
 Khrushchev assumes the role to always portray the Soviet Union as being both materially and spiritually superior to the United States . The Soviet Union portrayed the U.S. as both material and spiritual superior .
 Khrushchev clarifies that the U.S. to be blamed for the cause of this crisis . Throughout the letter, he says the United States should not be blamed .
 On the other hand, he justifies the Soviets as a country that respects the sovereignty of each nation and protects international peace by citing the Soviet assistance of Cuba .
 Letters between political leaders were used as a device to promote the ideology of their blocs and demonstrate its superiority .
 Khrushchev offers the deal to solve this crisis with negotiation, but his use of vocabulary and expressions remains within the ordinary — as international leader . The deal was negotiated by negotiation, not by negotiations, but by international leader.
 Khrushchev deliberately chose his words deliberately as not to be found fault with his words . Even in the letter directed to Kennedy, which could be regarded as a more personal way of communication, he deliberately chooses his words carefully .
 The relationship between the Soviet and U.S. remains somewhat superficial . His remarks could be regarded as a usual expression as the representative of the leading power .
 Khrushchev shows his desire to place Cuba under his control for the better compromise with Kennedy . Through his letters to Castro, he shows how he wanted Cuba to be under him .
 Khrushchev only saw Castro as the leader with a similar vision in the practical region . In other words, he only saw him as a leader who had similar vision to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev changed his standing point after the agreement with Kennedy . This perspective can be understood from the comparison of the letters on Oct. and 30 to see how he changed his view .
 Khrushchev wished not to give any harmful elements to Kennedy . As the agreement with Kennedy was under discussion, he wanted to avoid harmful elements . The agreement was discussed at the time of Kennedy's assassination .
 Khrushchev saw some actions and proposals by Castro, such as the shooting of American aircraft, as troublesome in the negotiation with Kennedy . The shooting of U.S. aircraft was one of the key issues in the negotiations .
 In the letter of Oct. 31, the main message was the contents of the concluded agreement . The main message of the letter was that the agreement had been reached, the letter said .
 Khrushchev’s goal was achieved, but he had to change his attitude after it was achieved . The change was remarkable to see the change in his attitude towards Soviet Russia .
 Khrushchev only took advantage of Castro and did not consider him as vital as Kennedy . In this case, his goal was to get a successful negotiation with Kennedy . The goal of this was to reach a deal with Kennedy, but not a deal .
 Castro wanted to take aggressive measures in order to ensure Cuba’s safety . Therefore, Castro decided to take more aggressive measures . The Cuban leader wanted to ensure his country's safety, Castro said .
 Since the geographical location of Cuba is what makes it a key country in the cold war, it poses a big threat on Cuba’s behalf . Cuba's geographical location is the key to its survival in the Cold War . Cuba is a key ally of the U.S. in
 Castro was furious about the withdrawal of the nuclear missiles in Cuba . That is why Castro was angry at the withdrawal, he says .
 Cuba probably wanted more conflict between the USA and USSR hence portraying the U.S. as imperialists bad people and USSR as the good people bringing peace . Cuba was probably trying to portray the US as imperialist bad people .
 This is due to the fact that if the USSR were to win, the major threat that poses menace on their country would be annihilated . The USSR would have been annihilated if they defeated the Soviet Union in the war .
 Cuba knew the military prowess that the U.S. has in the past, Cuba knew that the United States has . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Castro feels like there is a need for more aggressive actions, says Castro . Having the geographical disadvantage and historical background of being under the tutelage of the USA made Castro feel like there was a need to act more aggressively .
 The History of U.S. colonizing countries poses a big threat to the sovereignty of Cuba . The history of colonizing nations poses a huge threat to Cuba's sovereignty .
 This has been done through the rhetoric of portraying the U.S. as an imperialist country and Cuba as an underdog country trying to protect its autonomy . Cuba has been portrayed by the United States as an imperialist country .
 The USSR withdrew the missiles this made Castro feared that it would make Cuba vulnerable to U.S. invasion like the prior year with the bay of pigs invasion . Castro feared the withdrawal would make the country vulnerable to the United States invasion . The USSR pulled the missiles from Cuba in order to
 More radical measures needed to be taken to ensure that the invasion that happened a year before will not happen again . Therefore more radical measures were needed to prevent the invasion from happening again .
 Castro had taken aggressive measures to ensure Cuba’s self-autonomy will not be infringed again, Castro said . Castro said: “I’m not going to let it happen again. I’ve taken aggressive steps to ensure that it won’t
 Cuba’s long history under imperialist countries like Spain and the U.S. made its relations with the USA antagonistic . Cuba's long history made it antagonistic to the USA .
 A year before the whole missile crisis the bay of pigs invasion took place to oust the Castro regime . The Bay of Pigs invasion was a year before Castro's regime was ousted .
 Rather than Castro being a radical belligerent leader, Castro did what every leader would have done to ensure the sovereignty of the nation . I believe that Castro did not be a radical belligerent leader, rather than a radical .