 The Security Council focuses on maintaining international peace and security . The Council determines the existence of an act of aggression or threat to peace .
 The council must call upon the parties to settle their disputes in a peaceful manner, recommending methods of adjustment or settlement . When such risks are detected, the council will call upon them to settle them in peaceful manner .
 The council has the authority to impose sanctions or authorize the use of military action for the purpose of maintaining order . In extreme cases, the council can impose sanctions, impose military action .
 It is made up of 5 permanent member states and 10 non-permanent members . The U.N. Security Council is one of the world's most powerful powers .
 The rest of the SC members are elected by the General Assembly and serve for two-year terms . SC members serve for a total of six years .
 Non-member state may participate in the discussion but cannot vote on a resolution . Non-members of the Council can only participate in discussion but can't vote on resolution .
 At least 9 of the 15 members of the Security Council need to approve the proposal . The resolution would need to be approved by a majority of the council's 15 members .
 During the Cold War, newly elected president John F Kennedy had promised to be tougher with the communist Soviet Union . The 1961 Vienna Summit left him frustrated and unsatisfied with the result of the 1961 Vienna summit .
 Kennedy withheld all aid meant for Cuba and all imports of Cuban sugar, the backbone of their economy . Fidel Castro's nationalization of American companies led Kennedy to withhold all aid from Cuba .
 On October 14, 1962, the U.S. sent a U-2 spy plane to Cuba and discovered a nuclear missile site being built by the Soviet Union . The missile site could be used to target anywhere in the United States .
 President Kennedy secretly met with several advisors before October 22nd, and on that day, he called a meeting with the National Security Council to publicly announce that American citizens were under threat by both the Soviet Union and Cuba . Kennedy was worried about the repercussions of his past actions .
 After the United States failed to overthrow Fidel Castro’s regime at the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Soviet government came to an agreement with Castro that the Soviets could install nuclear weapons in Cuba due to its proximity to the U.S.
 This was done in order to ensure that the United States would not try to invade Cuba like they had attempted previously . The U.S. did not invade Cuba in the past .
 The United States and allies had a clear advantage when it came to nuclear threats . The U.S. and the allies had an advantage in nuclear threats, experts say .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy appeared on National television informing the general American public about the things that were currently happening between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The threat of quickly reaching eastern U.S. hovered over every single American . Since the missiles were placed just 90 miles from the south of Florida, the threat of reaching the eastern United States hovered .
 Americans faced the omnipresent threat of being annihilated by a nuclear weapon . As tensions between both countries continued rising, Americans faced a constant threat to be annihilated .
 In 1961, the USA failed to overthrow Cuba’s communist government dictated by Fidel Castro with an invasion known as the Bay of Pigs, given the location of the invasion . In 1961 the U.S. failed to topple the communist government in Cuba .
 Cuba sought out support from the USSR, which they undoubtedly agreed to provide, as they could then secretly transfer nuclear missiles to Cuba . As a result of the deal, Cuba sought support from Russia, who agreed to give them nuclear missiles .
 They did this not only to protect Cuba, but most importantly to counter USA’s missiles located in Italy and Turkey . They did not only protect Cuba but also to counter U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 On October 14, 1962, U-2 spy planes controlled by the USA flew over Cuba and took pictures of Cuba . The U.S. government controlled the U.2 planes over Cuba .
 This revealed medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles under construction . The missiles are believed to be under construction in South America .
 Nikita Khrushchev, former USSR leader who had previously stated that there were no offensive weapons being transported to Cuba, had been caught lying . President Kennedy was furious and President Kennedy had been furious .
 Khrushchev had told Kennedy that the weapons were only defensive, that they were only meant to avoid another U.S. invasion, and that it would not include missiles . The weapons were intended to avoid an invasion of the United States .
 Initially, Kennedy had pledged to take action if the USSR sent nuclear weapons to Cuba, and because Khrushchev did, he had to do something about it . Kennedy had vowed to act against the USSR if it sent nuclear arms to Cuba .
 Defence Secretary mentioned that if the president decides to send an airstrike, it must occur before the nuclear weapons are functional . Their Defence Secretary said that if . the president decided to send a . strike, it would occur before . the nuclear . weapons were functional .
 The photos show evidence that the warheads are not yet assembled, nor on sight of the military base . The photos of the U-2 spy planes show evidence of the warheads being assembled .
 Defence Secretary believed President Kennedy still had time but Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff disagreed . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 The missiles were very near completion, it was only a matter of time until those missiles were used . The missiles are now being used in the United States .
 Joint Chiefs believed an airstrike would not be efficient because Khrushchev could easily send more missiles to replace the damaged ones . The Joint Chiefs thought an airstrike was not an efficient . The joint chiefs believed that a strike would not have been efficient .
 General McNamara said, “General Taylor will wish to comment on this, but the Chiefs are strong in their recommendation against that kind of an attack, believing that it would leave too great a capability in Cuba undestroyed” General Taylor .
 It seems highly unlikely that that number would be required to carry out that limited an objective . But at least that capability is available in the Air Force alone, and the Navy sorties would rise .
 Other members of the meeting pointed out that airstrikes are not always fully effective . Some missiles may survive the damage and be launched to counterattack, they said .
 This plan had a low chance of success, but it also has a low risk of starting a war . This plan was a low-risk of starting war, but also had a risk of war .
 The third option was the previously mentioned airstrike-invasion on Cuba . The U.S. bombed the island nation in 2009 .
 On October 17, 12:00m. in the Caribbean, the United States sent forty warships just in case they were going to approach with the third plan . The U.S. sent 40 warships to the Caribbean in case of the attack .
 Two days later, on October 19, 9:45 PM, the White House received reports of two finished medium-range missiles . Two days after the missile was reported, the U.S. President Barack Obama ordered the missiles .
 Days prior, EXCOMM had been neglecting the third approach of the airstrike-invasion . Days prior to the airstrike invasion, ExCOMM was neglecting its third approach .
 The Joint Chiefs were still inclined to war, but Kennedy was not in favor of this because another war could still lead to the death of millions of citizens . Even though they had won a nuclear war, another war still could lead to millions of deaths .
 President Kennedy decided to go with the second approach, and the blockade started on October 21 . The blockade started October 21, 1962 .
 The next day, on October 22, President Kennedy alerted and informed Americans on the current situation . President Kennedy informed Americans that the situation was under way .
 He called on Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to eliminate the missiles or they would suffer from a counterattack from the United States . In addition, he called on the Soviet Premier to eliminate missiles or risk a U.S. counterattack .
 Khrushchev saw this and realized that the Americans knew about the missiles . The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in the 1960s and 1960s .
 The United States embassy had also told him to expect a communication one hour before the broadcast . Moscow time is Moscow time, and the U.S. embassy also said to expect it . The broadcast will be broadcast at 8 p.m. Moscow time .
 Option two was to give the missiles to Cuba in order to defend themselves . Option two would have been to give them missiles to the country to defend itself .
 Instead of choosing between one of these options, they waited for the broadcast first . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world on iReport .
 On October 24, when Soviet ships were going to Cuba they were faced with the line of United States vessels enforcing the blockade . U.S. ships were facing the blockade of Cuba .
 If the Soviets had attempted to destroy the blockade, it would have likely led to a military confrontation that could have become a nuclear exchange . The blockade was likely to have led to military confrontation .
 The U.S. didn't do anything to address the problem of the missiles that were already located in Cuba . Although what happened at sea went as planned, the United States didn’t .
 It turned out that Kennedy was not planning on an invasion, so there would be no war on that day . The war would have been over in a matter of days .
 Khrushchev was furious because of the U.S. blockade on Cuba, he still considered it as an act of war . Still, he considered the blockade as a 'act of war'
 The missiles continued to be armed, so the United States prepared for an invasion . The U.S. continued to prepare for invasion .
 On October 27, 1962, a spy plane was shot down by Soviet missiles, killing the pilot . Major Rudolph Anderson was killed by the Soviet missiles .
 A few hours later, a Soviet nuclear submarine was hit by a small depth charge from a U.S. Navy ship . The submarine was struck by a United States Navy ship, a few hours after the attack .
 Since the submarine was too deep for radio communication, they thought war had already started so they prepared to launch a nuclear torpedo . The torpedo was launched by a submarine too deep to communicate .
 The call to launch the torpedo had to be decided by the three officers on board . The call was made by the captain of the ship's crew .
 The captain and political officer decided to launch, but Vasili Arkhipov, who was second in command, disagreed . The captain of the Soviet Union was killed by a rocket attack on the Crimea in 1998 .
 His decision was called and perhaps saved the day, as it prevented the beginning of a nuclear war . But the crisis was not over yet yet .
 The United States Military was put on DEFCON 2, an alert state used by the military to imply that they are one step ready for nuclear war . The alert state is used to indicate that the U.S. is one step away from nuclear war.
 There were hundreds of nuclear missiles ready to launch from both parties . Both parties are expected to launch nuclear missiles from both sides .
 The metaphor of the Doomsday Clock was not far from reality, and was a minute before midnight . The Doomsday Clock is a minute away from midnight .
 "What will happen next could possibly decide the fate of the entire world," says President Obama . "The world is about to get ready for the end of the war," says Obama .
 The Cuban Revolution took place from 1953 to 1959 and it was mainly organized by Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 The event left him ruling from 1959 to 1976 as Prime Minister and from 1976 all the way to 2008 as a dictator . He ruled from 1959 until 2008 as the dictator .
 In 1944, he lost control of the government and moved to Florida . However, he later moved to the state of Florida . In 1944 he was forced to give up control of his government .
 Fidel Castro came from an anti corruption party, something that was extremely needed at the time . Fidel Castro's opposing candidate turned out to be Fidel Castro who came from a corruption party .
 Batista took power before the election through a violent, yet bloodless coup . However, Batista did not win the election . He took power in a violent coup .
 Castro built an army and when Bautista lost the support of the Cuban army due to heavy taxes, poverty, and corruption, he fled the country . After 2 failed attempts to get political power, Castro built a political party .
 Castro took that as an opportunity and arrived in Havana two days later . Castro gave a presentation to Cubans filled with allusions about a brighter future . Castro took the opportunity to give a presentation about the country's future .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was a failed attempt to penetrate Cuban borders in April 1961 . The invasion was an attempt to break Cuban borders .
 Americans were outnumbered by Cubans and they had to surrender after less than a day of fighting . Americans had been fighting against Cubans for more than a year .
 Castro came to power by highlighting the corruption of Batista in his dealings with American companies and his anticommunit sentiments . Castro was the first president of Cuba to take office .
 After Kennedy was elected President, he decided to launch this invasion of Cuba to prove to the world that he would go all in to win the Cold War . The invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 The invasion was staged not to look like an American attack on Cuba . The Cuban refugees were the ones fighting so it would not look as an act of war . The invasion would not have looked like a war .
 America had their planes painted as Cuban planes so it would look like they were stolen from Cuba . America painted them as Cubans so they could look like stolen planes . America's planes were painted as Cuba planes so they would look stolen .
 Kennedy wanted to pull out but it had become too late because of Castro’s previous knowledge of the attacks . After a failed attempt to destroy Cuban airfields due to Castro's previous knowledge, Kennedy pulled out of the mission . Castro had already known about the attacks on Cuban airfield
 Two days later, this brigade arrived on the shore of the Bay of Pigs and was received by Cuban forces and a radio station broadcasting this event to people all across Cuba .
 The disaster that was the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, made the young president look weak . It gave initiative to Cold Warriors in both parties who could not stand the presence of a Soviet-aligned, cominunist dictatorship just ninety miles south of Florida .
 General Maxwell Taylor created a special investigation on the faults of the Bay of Pigs . The Bay was the site of the Cuban invasion of Cuba in the 1960s . General Taylor created an investigation into the fault of the bay of Pigs.
 This investigation ignited the flame inside the Kennedy administration, and prompted the idea of doing something to undermine Fidel Castro . This investigation led to the idea that the government would try to undermine the Castro family .
 Pressure from both political parties in the U.S. to do something to undermine Castro, prompted “Operation Mongoose” on January 19th, 1962 .
 A CIA National Intelligence Estimate said that the Cuban dictator enjoyed too much support in Cuba to be overthrown, the operation continued . The operation continued, brushing aside a CIA estimate that the dictator was too popular to be ousted .
 This operation was organized by Robert F Kennedy, president John F Kennedy’s brother, and the plan was to create small, specific duties; not large-scale military invasion . The plan was not to invade the country, but to create specific, specific jobs .
 Robert Kennedy chose Edward Lansdale to take charge of this difficult task . Lansdale was chosen by Robert Kennedy to succeed him in the Kennedy administration . He was assassinated in 1968 .
 His knowledge of fighting communists came from his work in the Philippines in the 1950s . His knowledge came from working for the government in the country's Philippines .
 All in all, this operation did little to no help in the crisis, and ultimately caused the American people more money . The operation was a waste of money .
 History has revealed that Operation Mongoose was, in its own way, every bit as disastrous as the Bay of Pigs . Though this operation was “under the radar”, it was ‘under the . radar’, history has shown that Operation . Mongoose . was
 President Kennedy and the other representatives had decided to approach the situation with the ‘quarantine’ tactic . President Kennedy’s speech to the nation was JFK's first public address .
 All ships bound to Cuba will be inspected and returned if they contain offensive weapons . This means that a naval blockade, named ‘quarantine’ in order to prevent an impression of an act of war, will be executed .
 On October 22, 1962, it was time to say this publicly in a televised speech . Now, it's time for President Nixon to say it publicly .
 He already decided the course of action, and the Government would report the crisis in extreme detail for everyone to be informed .
 The Soviets had already supplied Cuba with medium and long range missiles that could destroy any major city in the Western Hemisphere from Hudson Bay, Canada, to Lima, Peru .
 Kennedy quoted that the Soviet Government had claimed that the missiles were only planned to be used in self defence . Kennedy said that the Soviets have missiles capable of so far ranges that there would not be a need to deploy these missiles outside the Soviet boundaries .
 The news was in the front pages of many countries including France that supported America, China that stood with the Cuban people, and many others .
 Pope John XXIII sent a letter to Soviet embassy in order to be sent to the Soviet Government in which he said, “We beg all governments not to remain deaf to this cry of humanity. Even more, he said that the Soviet government should not be deaf to the cry of
 Thant sent appeals and messages, and relayed proposals for all parties . Thant relayed proposals and offers between all parties in order to reach out to Thant .
 He advanced the “noninvasion for missiles” formula which then formed the basis of the final agreement between the parties involved .
 Thant was a major player in the formation of a resolution . He was shuttled to Cuba to mollify Castro, and helped secure a verification agreement for all three parties .
 During the crisis, the Kennedy administration relied heavily on the UN Secretary-General for communication and accurate diplomacy . The Kennedy administration used to rely heavily on UN for communication during the crisis .
 It was until the world was in the midst of a possible nuclear war that Secretary-General Thant had to act as an intermediary .
 The UN Secretary-General sent the first message on October 24th, only a few hours after the imposed quarantine had taken effect . The first message was sent by the secretary-general just hours after quarantine began .
 The message contained an urgent halt of all arms shipments that were on their way to cuba . The message was sent to the White House .
 This bought time for both the parties in order to create a peaceful solution . This bought both parties time to work out a deal .
 The international community hailed Thant’s initiative and quick wit, which ultimately gave all parties more time to create a peaceful solution . Thant's initiative was hailed by the international community .
 The delegates who participated were Adlai Stevenson, who was confronting the Soviet ambassador Valerian Zoran . Stevenson was confronted by Zoran, who later died in Soviet war .
 The United States ambassador, Adlai Stevenson, asked for an urgent meeting of the Security Council . The U.S. ambassador asked for the meeting, which was held in 2007 .
 This was done to bring attention to the threat to the Western Hemisphere . This is done to raise awareness of the threat in the Western hemisphere .
 President of the U.S. reported dangerous military developments in Cuba . President of Cuba reported dangerous developments in the country . President Obama has been critical of the situation .
 Mr Stevenson stated that they could either decide to take action to bring peace, or they could stand by . Mr Stevenson said they could take action, or stand by.
 This is why the United States took action and created a blockade around Cuba . The blockade was created by the U.S. government in order to keep Cuba from going to Cuba .
 Russian ambassador, Valerian Zoran, said by placing the blockade on Cuba, the US government was disregarding the rules of international conduct . On the other hand, the Russian ambassador said that the blockade is disregarding international rules .
 The delegate declared that there should be a consequence against the aggressive actions that the U.S. was taking against Cuba . He declared that the actions should be met with consequences .
 The Soviet Union is one of the key powers taking role in this situation . The situation has been described as a humanitarian crisis .
 Tension between the USSR and the United States has been escalating for a very long time . Tensions between the U.S. and the USSR have been escalating since the Cold War .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev states that the missiles are only for self defence, yet that promise can be broken any second .
 Despite being furious, Khrushchev logically does not want war, “The Soviets never thought war was inevitable” , but will do anything necessary to protect its country . “Krushchev will do . anything necessary,” he said. “We will never think
 The USSR is open for negotiation, but at the same time ready to unleash all missiles in a call of war . The USSR was open for negotiations, but open for war with the West .
 Castro requested that Nikita ​Khrushchev place Soviet Union nuclear missile facilities on his island as preparation for future invasions . Castro asked for the facilities to be placed in place during a meeting with Khrushchev .
 Cuba was the route to war between both countries . That was very beneficial for the USSR during the Cold War . The United States was now in threat, and Cuba was a key link .
 The main problem for the U.S. was that after the new leftist ruler of the country came to power, and he allied with the Soviet Union which was the largest communist regime at the time and the United States’ rival in the ongoing Cold War .
 When the Soviet Union decided to install their missiles in the island of Cuba, the United States and President John F Kennedy immediately thought of this as a threat . The Soviet Union installed its missiles in Cuba in the 1960s .
 The missiles were 90 miles south of Florida and had the capability of reaching targets in eastern states . The missiles are believed to have the capability to reach targets in east states .
 Up until that point, the United States had been dominating the nuclear race . The crisis put the Soviets close to the Americans and severely altered the rivalry between the two countries .
 They held United States nuclear missiles ready to fire at United States President John F Kennedy’s command . The missiles were held at the hands of President Kennedy .
 Turkey is a very close country to the USSR, meaning that it is within missile proximity of destroying all of the country’s important cities . Geographically speaking, Turkey is very close to the Soviet-held territory .
 Turkey is metaphorically what the U.S. is using to keep the USSR in check, which is similar to the way USSR is using Cuba . The United States is using Turkey as a tool to keep Russia in check . For this very reason, Turkey is a metaphor for the United
 The main solution which the U.S. could offer would be to remove the missiles from Turkey . The missiles would be removed from the country . The United States could offer a solution to the situation .
 For this to work, the Soviet Union would have to agree to extract their missiles from Cuba as well . For this, it would also have to be agreed to extract the missiles from the USSR .
 Both extractions can be done under the supervision of the U.N. for a fair and secure deal . Both of these extractions should be done with the United Nations supervision .
 Both nations would need to agree to the extraction of these missiles in order for this to work . This can be frowned upon by the pride of American and Soviet citizens who do not like leaders forming relationships with the enemy .
 This issue as a whole is one that concerns every single country that is present in this committee, and should be taken with the appropriate seriousness . This issue should be addressed with appropriate seriousness, the committee says .
 A nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union would have disastrous consequences on the global community . The United States and the USSR would be at risk of a nuclear war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The casualties that would result from a detonation and the subsequent effects that it has on the population is something that we unfortunately witnessed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki . We unfortunately witnessed the devastation of the population in Nagasaki.
 Citizens from all countries are terrified by this threat, regardless of their alignment to a certain country . Citizens from across the world are terrified, even if they are not aligned to the U.S.
 The committee must come together to be a buffer between the U.S. and the USSR to de escalate this situation . The committee should come together, the committee says .
 Both countries must come to an agreement and avoid putting their own and other citizens at risk . The U.S. must avoid putting its own and others around the world at risk, CNN says .
 Countries within the committee must not be focused on their allegiance to any of the parties involved in this crisis . Countries must not focus on allegiance to each other, the committee should not be .
 Seeing as the repercussions for this conflict would affect all citizens of the world. Seeing as as a result of this conflict . Seeing as a war that would affect the world would affect citizens of all citizens, the repercussions would affect everyone .
 Compromise is the most important thing that all parties will need to consider in order to deal with this issue fairly, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .