 Kruschchev was determined to support Castro and keep a Communist regime alive in Cuba . He had a plan to keep the Castro regime alive, and he had to back him .
 Despite several CIA-sponsored assassination attempts and the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, Castro had evaded death on every occasion the U.S. had sent it to him .
 President John F Kennedy and his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, were pursuing a two-track strategy to get rid of the regime of Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro's regime was overthrown by the Kennedy brothers .
 The Kennedy brothers and the U.S. military made the destruction of Castro and his regime their number one priority . Almost before the last of the blowback from the Bay of Pigs fiasco was over, the Kennedy brothers made it their top priority .
 The Kennedy Administration began a two-track campaign to deprive Fidel Castro of his regime and life in 1961 . Fidel Castro was the subject of the campaign .
 Both OPLANs were designed to rapidly mobilize an invasion force roughly the size of the U.S. force on D-Day . The only real differences between the two are the duration of the mobilization and the forces available at the end of that period .
 For over a year in 1961 and 1962, Mongoose teams conducted a variety of raids and strikes on Cuban infrastructure targets including oil refineries, sugar mills, and maritime targets, including cargo ships .
 Dozens of additional assassination attempts against Castro were considered, planned, and attempted . Dozens of other assassination attempts were considered and planned .
 Edward Lansdale, USAF and William Harvey of the CIA, with the actual forces being drawn from CIA resources, including the anti-Castro Cuban expatriate community . The actual forces were drawn from . CIA resources .
 Castro or Khrushchev had few doubts about the intent toward Cuba by the Kennedys or the U.S. The plans were hardly a surprise to both Castro and Khrushcherchev .
 For Khrushchev, the Cuba problem was just the latest challenge to his tenuous hold on power as the leader of the Soviet Union and the Communist World . The Cuba crisis was the biggest challenge to Khrushchchev's tenuous grip on power .
 Nikita Khrushchev was a man badly in need of a ‘Hail Mary’ pass just to get some breathing room to operate . With his own strategic deterrent force in tatters, growing vulnerability to nuclear blackmail from the West, growing political pressure from the Stalinist wing
 Khrushchev was a survivor of Josef Stalin’s homicidal and paranoid rule, 20 years earlier had been the political force behind the Soviet victory at Stalingrad . 20 years later he was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 In early 1961, he began to devise a spellbinding idea that might solve all his problems in a single stroke . And in early 1961 he devised a stroke-solution .
 Khrushchev began to tell members of his inner circle of a plan to forward-base a number of medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles to Cuba in May 1962 . A large joint task force of ground, air, naval, and air defense forces was also planned .
 The 50,000-man JTF would provide a bulwark against any American attempt to invade Cuba, and thus preserve the Castro regime . In addition, the JTF could also preserve the Cuban regime, as well .
 The target date for completion of this deployment would be October 1962, and it would be known as Operation Anadyr . The target of completion of the deployment was October 1962 . The operation would have been known as 'Anadyr' and 'Anatyr'