 Dokkio will organize your files for you . Whether you use Dropbox, Drive, G-Suite, OneDrive, Gmail, Slack, Notion, or all of the above, it will do so .
 It all started with the failed U.S. invasion of Cuba’s the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The failed United States invasion was a failed invasion .
 October 15, 1962 is when the crisis started for the U.S. of America and the date was October 15 . The leader of Cuba Fidel Castro approved Soviet leader Nakita Khrushchev plan to put missiles on the island .
 President John F Kennedy met with his advisors for several days to solve the problem of having missiles on Cuba . President Kennedy met his advisors to resolve the problem .
 These missiles were a problem for the U.S. because of their closeness to the states and the treat of necular war . The missiles were also a problem .
 The U.S. placed a naval blockade surrounding Cuba to prevent the shipment of missiles from the Soviet Union to Cuba . After long difficult meetings The United States placed the blockade around Cuba . The blockade was designed to prevent shipment of Soviet-made missiles from Cuba .
 An agreement was reached on October 28, 1962 between the U.S. and Soviets that the United States would not invade Cuba as long as the missiles were removed from Cuban soil .
 The installation of nuclear missiles on Cuba was a result of Fidel Castro’s fear of invasion from the U.S. Fidel Castro feared invasion of the United States . Fidel Castro was afraid of invasion .
 Castro became paranoid when the U.S. did a mock invasion on a Caribbean Island with the intention of overthrowing the leader “Ortsac” Castro was paranoid when he saw the mock invasion of a Caribbean island .
 Nakita Khrushchev proposed an alliance to Castro, the Cuban general immediately agreed to it . This is why, when Nakita  proposed, the leader of the Soviet Union, agreed to an alliance .
 The nuclear missiles were then shipped from Europe to Cuba in secret and installed in several places on the island . They were shipped to Cuba from Europe in secret .
 A U.S. spy plane “U2” spotted medium range ballistic missiles in Cuba . October 14th, 1962, A United States spy plane "U2" spotted the missiles . The U2 plane was sent to Cuba by Fidel Castro .
 Despite Andrei Gromyko’s denial President Kennedy decided to put out a naval quarantine or a blockade around Cuba, in order to avoid too much violence .
 President Kennedy announced that the missiles are destructive regardless of USSR’s statement that these weapons were only for defensive reasons . After putting up a blockade around Cuba, Kennedy announced the situation to the American people .
 By the end of President Kennedy’s announcement Cuban troops was getting ready to defend Cuban from U.S. attack . President Kennedy announced Cuban troops were ready to fight back .
 U.S. set up blockade around Cuba demanding no more weapons in Cuba from USSR or else United States would invade Cuba . President Kennedy announced the situation to the public causing Fidel Castro, Cuban communist leader, to mobilize his troop . Fidel Castro mobilized his troop.
 After four long days of challenging each other at the quarantine line, finally a solution was found . After four days of challenges, a solution has been found .
 Secretly, John F Kennedy also agreed to withdraw from the American nuclear-armed missiles at the iron curtain . Secretly he agreed to pull out of the U.S. nuclear weapons .
 When the agreement was finalized, the ships were sent back and the relationship between Russia and the U.S. changed positively .
 They promised, among others, to resume their explorations together, in order to avoid a similar situation .
 It is now thought that a nuclear war between these two countries is almost unlikely to ever take place .
 Fidel Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev suggesting an attack on the U.S. because they were going to invade Cuba . Fidel Castro suggested an attack because of the threat of an invasion of Cuba .
 After many days of tension, the U.S. and the USSR seemed to have finally reached an agreement . The USSR refused several times to listen to the United States proposals for the missiles to be removed from Cuba .
 U.S. troops were ready to invade Cuba if the missiles were not to be removed, but what they ignored was that the Cubans had several missiles ready to launch . The missiles were tipped with a nuclear point that would destroy all the major cities . Kennedy, and the United States
 The USSR finally reacted to the U.S. demands of removing the missiles from Cuba . The USSR was forced to remove the missiles, if the US promised to not invade Cuba .
 The USSR asked the U.S. remove their missiles in turkey in exchange for the soviet ones in Cuba . The USSR agreed to remove the missiles, but then the USSR asked in addition to the removal of the missiles in Turkey in exchange .
 The Soviets trusted the U.S. that they would not invade Cuba and removed the missiles from Cuba . The missiles were removed by the Soviets in the hope they would be safe in Cuba .
 U.S. agreed in removing missiles in turkey, along with promising to not invade Cuba . This was not made public until later on, but the war was avoided because of the agreement .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev are considered as heroes for having found a compromise, since this is the closest the world has ever come to a nuclear war . Kennedy is considered as hero for having agreed to a compromise .
 After a long and tensed nuclear war United States and USSR finally reached an agreement of removing missiles from Cuba and Turkey and not to invade Cuba . U.S. and USSR agreed to remove missiles from Turkey and Cuba and not invade Cuba.
 The prisoners of the war remained in custody for 20 months, as the U.S. negotiated a deal with Fidel Castro . However, the prisoners were held for more than 20 months . The prisoner of war remains in custody .
 A week later, on December 29th a ceremony was held where the surviving Brigade members gathered for a ceremony in Miami’s Orange Bowl . A week after the ceremony, the survivors of the Brigade gathered in Miami for a memorial .
 The failure of the Bay of Pigs still had an impact on Kennedy’s administration . Kennedy's administration was still reeling from the tragedy of the Pigs War .
 A commitment was made to erase the record of Bay of Pigs, the destruction of the Cuban government and economy along with the possible assassination of Castro . Therefore a commitment was . made to . erase the . record of the Bay of . Pigs . The Cuban government was destroyed and the Cuban economy
 After 40 years the relationship between Cuba and United States still remained tensed and weak . After 40 . years, Cuba and U.S. relations still remained tense and weak.