 Chapter 1, “How to Think About World Politics’s, now surveys social scientific approaches to studying international relations . Chapter 1 of ‘How to think About World politics’ is now a social scientific approach to studying world politics .
 Chapter 4, “War and Violence in World Politics,” includes expanded coverage of asymmetric warfare and terrorism . Chapter 4 also includes an expanded look at the U.S. government’s involvement in the Middle East .
 Chapter 7, “Economic Globalization” analyzes the challenge of economic development and North-South relations . Chapter 7: ‘Economic globalization’ analyzes economic development, North-south relations .
 Important developments in world politics are discussed throughout the book . The book includes the Google/China standoff, the war in Gaza, the ongoing global economic crisis, and more .
 The addition of two new photos per chapter complement the text and bring key ideas and events to life . Two new photos each chapter will be added to the text .
 A marginal glossary puts key concepts at readers’ fingertips and encourages review within the larger context in which the concept is first discussed . New marginal glossaries are available in the next edition of this week's book .
 This page intentionally left blank . Please donate to the site. Use this page to help us understand the issues we face .
 Photo Editor: Vikram Mukhija, Beverly Fong, Lindsey Prudhomme, Denise Phillip and Denise Phillip . TexTech Inc. is the company behind the project .
 For permission to use copyright material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copyright holders credited throughout the book, which are hereby made part of this copyright page . John Callahan is the author of the book .
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher .
 Longman is an imprint of PEARSON for Candace . For Candace ; Laura Samantha , and Alexandrathe lights of my life.
 The Realist Paradigm is a theory theory of international relations and world politics . Realism and its Critics are discussed in this article . The theory in Practice is presented in the following articles .
 An Analogy to International Relations 16 ALTERNATIVES TO REALISM 19 Liberalist 19 Liberalism 19 ■ Theory in Practice 1. An An analogy to international relations 16. ALTERNATION TO REALISTANISM 16 . An An Analog to International relations 16 .
 Iraq and the Democratic Peace 23 Constructivism 24 Feminism 27 Neo-Marxism 31 Neo- Marxists 31 .
 39 1648: THE BIRTH OF THE STATE SYSTEM 40 1815: THE CONCERT OF EUROPE 44 1919: THE EXPERIMENT IN COLLECTIVE SECURITY 47 1945: THE POSTWAR BIPOLAR SYSTEM 50 ■ Theory in Practice 2: Theory in
 THE POST-COLD WAR ERA 56 2001: The World After 9/11 60 ■ Theory in Practice 2. 2. 3. 5. 4. 5 . 5. 6. 5th. 6th. 4th. 3rd. 4 . 5th . 4th .
 Soft Power and the Obama Effect 63 CONCLUSION 64 DOWNLOADED FROM LIBGEN.ORG Please donate to the site .
 Theory in Practice 3. The Making of Foreign Policy . The International System Level of Analysis . The State Level of Analysts . The Individual Level Of Analysis 76 .
 Realism and the Levels of Analysis 77 FOREIGN POLICY DECISION-MAKING 81 The Rational Actor Model 81 ■ Theory in Practice 3. 3. The rational actor model is based on the model of a rational actor in a rational world .
 Teachers of international relations are fortunate to have the media do such a good job of marketing their courses . I n the preface to the first edition of this text, I noted that teachers of international diplomacy are fortunate .
 Students eager to make sense of world politics and implications for their own lives . The constant swirl of news about global events provides a steady stream of students .
 Since the publication of the first edition, that swirl of events has continued unabated . Since the . publication of . the . first edition of this week's edition of the . edition, the swirl of . events continues unabated since .
 The Obama presidency, the Gaza war, the Greek crisis and the general escalation of the global economic crisis, Climategate, and the Wikileaks publication of Afghan war documents are just a few of the noteworthy developments to take place subsequent to the completion of the first edition .
 Second edition provides an opportunity to make more general improvements to the book . Even more important, this second edition provides a chance to improve the book itself .
 Teachers can't get a firm read on what works and what does not on manuscripts until students use them over the course of a semester . You can have dozens of reviewers provide suggestions and comments on a manuscript, but until teachers get the book in the hands of their students .
 Having been in use now for several semesters at numerous colleges and universities, I have useful feedback to help guide this second edition of this book .
 In revising the text, however, the central goal of the first edition has remained unchanged . The central goal in revising this edition of this edition is to improve the quality of the book .
 The goal of this book is to tap into and maintain the interest in global events that leads students to enroll in international relations classes . That goal is to translate that interest into a conceptual and theoretical sophistication that will remain useful .
 How the World Works provides the detailed micro-level knowledge and information that is necessary to understand world politics .
 Students will read about the structure of the United Nations, trends in international conflict, the sources of international law, and the role and functions of the World Trade Organization . Students will also learn about the role of the U.N. and role and function of the WTA .
 Students should not become lost in the thicket of world politics to the extent that they lose sight of the forest for the trees . In acquiring a new vocabulary and in learning about the details of institutions and events, it is important that students not get lost .
 A larger framework that provides context and meaning for the data, trends, and terminology to which they are exposed is needed . Thus, they also need a larger framework for them to understand .
 In teaching over the years, I have found that most beginning students of international relations and world politics come to the first class already in possession of predispositions regarding how the world works .
 Some students are inclined to accept conflict and violence in international life as inescapable . This leads to a reliance on military power and suspicion of global institutions, they say .
 These students are “instinctive realists,” even though they may never have encountered the “realist’s perspective on international relations as a formal theory .
 Others are more inclined to eschew power-oriented approaches to foreign policy . Others favor working through institutions such as international law and the U.N.
 These students are “instinctive critics of realism” even though they too have never formally encountered ‘realism’ as a concept in international relations theory . These students could not tell a “liberal” from a ‘constructivist” approach to world
 XV How the World Works helps students examine their natural inclinations, question their assumptions, and subject their conclusions to the fire of classroom debate and discussion . XV How The World Works is available in print and on display at the end of the month .
 The most general goal of the book is to get students to think about how the world works, author says .
 The book is organized around the story of realism and its critics, conveying the message that scholars disagree among themselves about the world’s political and economic interactions and trends .
 It is important to note that this is not a “realist’s book, and it does not attempt to profess the merits of any single paradigm .
 The goal is to expose students to contending perspectives and to provide the empirical and conceptual foundation upon which they can begin to develop their own assessment of how the world works . The goal of the program is to provide students with an empirical foundation .
 The second edition of How the World Works features a number of pedagogical and substantive revisions . The book is available in the UK and Australia .
 The two major pedagogical changes are two new photos in each chapter (in addition to the chapter opening photos carried over from the first edition) and moving the glossary from the back of the book to the margins .
 The photos and captions are placed where they can complement the text and help bring ideas, events, or concepts to life for the students .
 In moving the glossary to the margins, the goal is to place the definitions of the key concepts in the larger context of the chapter . The glossary is now in the margins of each chapter .
 Instead of just memorizing definitions, hopefully students will review the context in which the concept or term is discussed .
 The first edition of the book was published in 2009 . The book is published in the UK and Australia . It is based on the first edition .
 How the World Works begins by laying out the central assumptions of the realist paradigm in Chapter 1 . Chapter 1 discusses the challenges posed to the . realist worldview by the paradigms that have emerged as alternatives to realism .
 Each chapter examines a specific issue in the real world of international politics to shed light on the differences between the realist approach and the alternative paradigms . The next chapter examines the differences in the approach to international politics .
 The essential subject matter may seem to privilege one theoretical perspective or another, but there will be enough competing evidence and perspectives provided . Students will be encouraged to think about and question the various worldviews .
 Chapter 2 examines the history of international relations and the related rise and fall of the theoretical paradigms over time . Chapter 2 of the text examines the rise of the theory of the past and present of the world's most powerful institutions .
 Chapter 3 looks at foreign policy-making and the several levels of analysis that are involved in shaping state behavior . Chapter 4 looks at domestic sources of state behavior that realists traditionally have tended to downplay . Chapter 3 focuses on foreign policy making and domestic sources that are often overlooked .
 The discussion of war and violence in Chapter 4 takes place on realism’s turf, though there is plenty in the chapter to provide ammunition for critics of realism .
 Chapter 5 moves to the turf of liberal institutionalism as the focus shifts to international law and organization . Chapter 5 then moves on to the topic of international law .
 Constructivism gets the homefield advantage in Chapter 6, with its focus on international human rights . Constructivism is the focus of the chapter 6 .
 Chapters 7 and 8 examine economic globalization and transnational issues . Topics include the liberal commercialist and neo-Marxist perspectives . The tension between globalization and realist assumptions is discussed .
 Chapter 9 concludes the book with a set of hypothetical histories . Each one is written from the perspective of an observer looking back from the end of the twenty-first century .
 Each of these seven different visions of our possible global future extends the logic of a different theoretical perspective on world politics . Each vision is different from a different perspective on the future of the world .
 The goal of this chapter is to bring back the reader full circle to the theoretical perspectives presented in Chapter 1 . This chapter is the first chapter of Chapter 2 .
 On the basis of these hypothetical histories, the reader should be in a good position to articulate ahd.i@^li(S,QADfi(Bablf^oyV1stlid&©SHi^Rf or her own theoretical preferences for ;'
 Each chapter in How the World Works is structured not only to address the central question of that chapter but also to contribute to an understanding of the book’s larger themes and goals .
 The result is a book that hangs together and that is more than just a collection of useful concepts and pieces of information examined in isolation .
 The approach to each chapter reflects an assumption that for beginning students, theoretical sophistication must be based on an understanding of the real world of international relations and world politics .
 Students must examine record of liberal institutions such as international law and organizations in practice . For example, if students want to decide whether liberal institutionalists best explain how the world works, they have to examine the record .
 Each chapter begins and ends with a reminder of the larger theoretical debate . The bulk of each chapter focuses on the empirical record of the topic at hand .
 Each chapter begins with two quotations that comment on the general topic of the chapter from a realist and nonrealist perspective . Each quote is taken from the same realist perspective as that of the realist .
 Quotes frame the issue in terms of the general theme of the book, and they are referred to in the text of the chapter . These quotations frame the topic of the section .
 The goal is to reinforce the idea, stressed throughout the book, that international relations concepts and theories have direct relevance to the world in which students are living .
 Notes in the margin direct students to provocative articles and book excerpts that expand on the ideas raised in each chapter . Students can also use the margin to help students understand the content of the book .
 All of the readings suggested in How the World Works are also included in a companion reader . The companion reader is available for course adoption .
 marginal notes helpfully link the concepts discussed in each book . For instructors and students using both books, the marginal notes are helpful for students .
 Each chapter includes an opening photo and two interior photos related to the substance of the chapter . Each book includes a photo and interior photo .
 Figures are included to help visualize key ideas or put them into quantitative context . Where appropriate, figures are included in the article .
 In each chapter, key terms are highlighted and then listed again at the end of the chapter . Key terms highlighted and again listed at end of chapter .
 A marginal glossary provides brief definitions of those terms for quick reference in the context of the chapter . The book ends with a new chapter in the first chapter .
 Through the key terms and glossary, students have a comprehensive list of the key ideas and concepts necessary to understand world politics . Students will be able to use the glossary to understand the world's political landscape .
 Four-color maps of the world, North America, South America, Africa, Europe, Asia, and Australia and Oceania are included at the beginning of this book .
 Maps are intended to put basic geographical knowledge within students' immediate reach . Basic geographical knowledge is essential in the study of international relations . Maps were created to put this knowledge within the reach of students .
 How the World Works strives for a conversational style that keeps its student readers in mind . It strives for the same style of writing to students .
 The clearer the writing, the better the organization, and the more accessible the style, the more one can succeed in conveying sophisticated content to the reader . On the contrary, the clear writing is the best way to convey sophisticated content .
 There is no reason that a text on the topic cannot be intellectually sophisticated and, at the same time, readable, engaging, and even fun . Especially in a field as intrinsically interesting and compelling as world politics, world politics is fascinating, compelling .
 This text introduces students to the concepts and developments at the core of the discipline of world politics . Students will be able to understand the concepts in a new way .
 While How the World Works is perhaps half the length of many introductory textbooks, it has the advantage of focusing attention on the most salient issues and concepts that often get buried in longer texts .
 Brevity also provides greater opportunity for instructors to assign supplementary readings that reinforce and develop concepts and issues discussed in this text .
 There is such an array of good writing, accessible at the undergraduate level, on issues of world politics and international relations that it would be an omission not to be able to incorporate as much of it .
 Students will be armed with the basic concepts and issues from reading this text . Students will also learn basic concepts from reading the text .
 Teachers can assign additional readings by proponents or critics of a particular theory to extend the discussion beyond the text . This can be used to help students understand and understand theories .
 A collection of such readings is available in the accompanying Readings on How the World Works . The book is published in the U.S. edition of this edition .
 These readings bring different voices and perspectives to bear on the ideas and controversies discussed in How the World Works .
 While some of the readings explicitly extend discussion of the main macro-level paradigms, most are in the realm of applied theory .
 They examine concrete issues in world politics and offer a context that resonates with students . They examine larger conceptual and theoretical issues, and offer larger conceptual issues .
 Longman is pleased to offer several resources to qualified adopters of How the World Works that will make teaching and learning from this book even more effective .
 MyPoliSciKit for How the World Works includes multimedia and interactive activities to help students connect concepts and current events . This premium online learning companion features multimedia and . interactive activities .
 The book-specific assessment, video case studies, mapping exercises, simulations, podcasts, Financial Times newsfeeds, current events quizzes, politics blog, MySearchLab, and much more .
 With Grade Tracker, instructors can easily follow students’ work on the site and their progress on each activity . Grade Tracker is free to download and track students' work online .
 Passport for International Relations With Passport, choose the resources you want from MyPoliSciKit and put links to them into your course management system . Passport is a passport for international relations .
 If there is assessment associated with those resources, it also can be uploaded . The results feed directly into your course management system’s gradebook .
 Instructor's Manual/Test Bank includes lecture outlines, multiple-choice questions, true/false questions, and essay questions for each chapter . This resource includes learning objectives, lecture outlines and questions for students .
 Pearson MyTest is a powerful assessment generation program . It includes all of the items in the instructor’s manual/test bank . Pearson's test bank includes all the items from the instructor's manual .
 Questions and tests can be easily created, customized, saved online, and then printed . This allows flexibility to manage assessments anytime and anywhere .
 PowerPoint Presentation Organized around a lecture outline, these multimedia presentations also include photos, figures, and tables from each chapter . PowerPoint presentations are organized around the lecture outline .
 This resource provides suggestions for assigning content from this book and MyPoliSciKit . Sample Syllabus provides a sample sample of the content of this book .
 The Economist analyzes the important happenings around the globe . Every week, The Economist analyses the world's most important issues .
 From business to politics, CNN's iReporters connect seemingly unrelated events in unexpected ways . CNN.com's coverage of events in the U.S. appears on CNN Tech .
 Use ISBN 0-205-07437-5 to order a 15-week subscription with this book for a small additional charge . Use the ISBN to indicate a buyer for a subscription to this book .
 This excerpt includes critical thinking exercises to promote a deeper understanding of how geography affects many global issues . Featuring maps from the latest edition of The Penguin State of the World Atlas, this excerpt is based on maps from The Penguin .
 First published by Rand McNally in 1923, Goode’s World Atlas has set the standard for college reference atlases . Goode's World Atlas was published in 1923 .
 It features hundreds of physical, political, and thematic maps as well as graphs, tables, and a pronouncing index . The map is a collection of maps, graphs and tables .
 The Penguin Dictionary of International Relations is published by Graham Evans and Jeffrey Newnham . It includes hundreds of cross-referenced entries on the enduring and emerging theories, concepts, and events that are shaping the academic discipline of international relations .
 The guide offers the step-by-step guidance and essential resources needed to compose political science papers . The guide includes current and detailed coverage on how to start research in the discipline’s major subfields .
 This text focuses on areas where students often need help: finding a topic, developing a question, reviewing the literature, designing research, and writing the paper . This text includes topics such as finding, developing, reviewing and designing research .
 Vikram Mukhija provided expert guidance and helped turn the early draft chapters into a finished manuscript . Eric Stano provided support in the early stages, but most of the heavy lifting was done by Vikram . Beverly Fong, Toni Magyar, Denise Philip, Wendy Freder
 Susan Messer did a superb job as development editor in helping to polish the writing and presentation . Her efficiency and attention to detail were much appreciated by the editors .
 I would like to thank my colleagues Douglas Stuart, for his thoughtful comments on Chapters 1 and 3, and David Strand for his useful suggestions on Chapter 6 . I would also thank Douglas Stuart for his helpful comments on Chapter 3 .
 "I have been sustained in the long process of writing and revising this book by the memory and thoughts of those people (Rosemary, Serf, Sam, Tina, Tina) whom I have cared most about in this world," he says .
 This edition, like the first, is dedicated to my three daughters, Laura, Samantha, and Alex, who give meaning and purpose to everything I do, and to Candace L Bova, my wife, my best friend, and my partner-in-life .
 Shetland (jol Yatti North Sea IRELAND® 1^7 Baltic enhagen Sea 20“W neth.neth.h. EUROPE / 20°W /icrw Sea / 4o""w Sea 1C ELAN I kW7»
 This page intentionally left blank . Use this page to help people understand today's featured images . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page .
 How the World Works is available on CNN.com/Heroes of the World . Please donate to the site to support our work .
 To this war of every man against every man, this also is conseguent; that nothing can be unjust . This also also includes that this also means that nothing cannot be unjust.
 "The notions of right and wrong, justice and injustice, have there no place," says President Obama . "Justice and injustice" has no place in the world, says Obama .
 There is no common power, there is no law; where no law, no injustice, injustice . Where there are no common powers, there will be no justice, says the U.S. president .
 A ll politics is global . A league of peace would be distinguished from a treaty of peace by the fact that the latter terminates only one war . The former seeks to make an end of all wars forever .
 Global events continually reverberate through our lives, even during more ‘normal’ times . However, even in more “normal” times, global events continue to affect our lives .
 How much it costs you to travel to school could be affected by political instability in an oil-producing country located far from where you live and study . Political instability could also affect how much you pay for school .
 Whether you will be able to afford to study abroad during your college career can be affected by the value of your country’s currency in global currency markets . The value of the currency in your country's currency can also affect your ability to study overseas .
 Getting the job of your choice when you graduate might depend on the evolving patterns of global trade . Getting a job at the top of your career depends on the changing patterns of international trade .
 The quality of the air you breathe can be a direct consequence of pollutants poured into the atmosphere by factories located halfway across the world . Pollution levels depend on the success or failure of global efforts to regulate the environment .
 The level of respect given to your human rights increasingly depends on emerging global human rights norms and institutions that go beyond your own government’s policies, says the U.S. State Department . The U.N. Human Rights Council says it has been criticized for its lack of transparency
 Your physical security as you go about your daily life can be affected by trends in global terrorism or the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . The U.S. government has issued a warning to citizens about the threat of terrorism .
 As many discovered after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, you don’t have to be a direct victim of global terrorism to feel its impact . Indeed, as many found after the attacks of 9/11, 2001 that you don't need to be directly a victim of
 Increased security at airports, tightened immigration rules have affected Americans as well as those who want to visit or study in the U.S. Increased security has affected Americans and visitors to the United States .
 Global events have always affected individuals’ lives, particularly through war, conflict, and trade across national borders . Global events are always affected by global events, such as war and conflict, according to experts .
 Developments in the technologies of transportation and, especially, telecommunications have shrunk the world and allowed individuals to become increasingly interconnected . However, in recent decades, developments in technologies of transport and telecommunications have shrink the world .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century, being an informed individual requires understanding the larger world in which we live, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Having such an understanding requires more than accumulating information, facts, and details about the world, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Having such a knowledge of the world requires a deeper understanding"
 It also requires a more generalized understanding of how the world works, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 International relations is what formal study of international relations seeks to attain. That is what academic study of world politics seeks to achieve. International relations and world politics is what it is called .
 The phrases “international relations” and “world politics” are often used interchangeably, including in this book, to refer to the whole gamut of political, military, and economic relations and interactions between nation-states, such as the United States, Russia, and
 At the same time, the two phrases do not have precisely the same meaning . The two phrases have the same meanings, but have different meanings .
 The study of international relations and world politics is not the same as journalism or political punditry . Studying international relations is not just journalism or world politics, it is not a form of world politics .
 Political scientists look for patterns and generalizations that can illuminate how the world works . Journalists and many other commentators on contemporary history are usually content to describe and analyze specific, discrete events .
 A political scientist will try to understand more generally the causes and consequences of terrorism . For example, a journalist might describe and explain al-Qaeda’s terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, a political scientist .
 International relations scholars generally agree that their work is different from that of journalists . Those scholars disagree among themselves on a number of fundamental questions over how best to study and understand how the world works .
 The study of international relations has been marked by a series of grand debates, says David Frum . Frum says the debate on international relations in the U.S. has been heated up in recent years . He says the world has been gripped by debates about international relations .
 Study of international relations dominated by analysis of diplomatic history, international law, and international institutions . Positivist science is the subject of much of the twentieth century's study of international diplomacy .
 The emphasis was on description of historical events and trends combined with interpretation of those events by scholars, with an eye toward providing advice about how states and their leaders should act .
 In this era, the most influential scholars were those whose historical narratives and institutional analyses seemed most persuasive . The most influential scholar in this era was those who had historical narratives, institutional analyses most persuasive.
 By the 1960s, a new generation of scholars had become dissatisfied with this approach . By the 1970s, scholars had been dissatisfied with the approach to the study of science .
 The study of international relations is modeled on the natural sciences, the authors say . They wanted to transform the study into a more rigorous enterprise modeled on natural sciences .
 In particular, they embraced an approach to science known as positivism . They embraced a philosophy of positivism, which is based on a belief in science .
 Positivist science emphasized the development of scientific laws of international relations developed on the basis of the systematic collection and rigorous analysis of large bodies of hard data about state behavior .
 To understand why, for example, states go to war, it is not enough for intelligent scholars to describe and ruminate over the causes of World War I . Instead, what is necessary is to collect data about multiple wars, searching for observable patterns in the attributes and behaviors of states or
 Traditional scholars resisted, suggesting that the study of human behavior is fundamentally different . Traditional scholars suggested that studying human behavior was fundamentally different from studying natural behavior . The study is fundamental to understanding human behavior .
 A good example of this new, more scientific approach was the ascendance of rational choice theory . The rise in rational choice theories is the result of the rise in scientific thinking .
 Theory of rational choice stood in sharp contrast to the historically grounded descriptions characteristic of the study of international relations in the first half of the twentieth century . The theory of rational choices is a theory of choice, not rational choice .
 rational choice assumed that individuals were rational actors whose primary commitment was to the advancement of their own interests . The idea of rational choice was based on the discipline of economics, which is based on economic theory .
 Economists had long developed laws of economic behavior that are deemed to hold true regardless of historical and cultural context . On that basis, economists have long held economic behavior to be true .
 In international relations rational choice theorists sought to develop laws of international behavior with universal applicability across time and place . Likewise, in international relations rationality theorists developed laws that could be applied to the world .
 In the 1990s, a backlash emerged against the dominance of the positivist approach in international relations theory .
 A new generation of “post-positivist” scholars argue that because the study of international relations is about the actions of human beings, it is a mistake to try to mimic positivist natural science .
 Positivists seek to explain international behavior by reference to objective causeand-effect relationships present in the external world . Positivistists believe that international behavior is based on objective relationships .
 A positivist might argue that when one country acquires nuclear weapons, its neighbors will seek to acquire them in self-defense . For example, a positivist may argue that such a move would be self-defence .
 For a post-positivist, that conclusion cannot be formulated into a general law . The conclusion is not a general rule, but it can be made into law .
 One's reaction to arms acquisition of a neighboring state will be determined by one’s own subjective understanding of the neighbor as a friend or foe, the history of relations between the two states, and the preconceived perceptions .
 One can come to “understand the nature of a state’s behavior but one cannot “explain’t explain’ it by general laws applicable across time and place . Thus, one can come . to ‘understand’ the nature . of
 The Debate Over Methods is a second area of debate among international relations scholars . The debate over method is related to method .
 The search for objective laws of international relations requires one to analyze large numbers of cases using sophisticated statistical techniques . Some, though not all, have argued that the search for an objective law requires analysis of large numbers .
 Purely qualitative methodologies cannot allow one to formulate general laws about when wars will occur . Purely case studies of a particular war can provide interesting insights into those cases .
 Many scholars argue that one needs to analyze large numbers of cases via quantitative methods . To be able to generalize in that fashion, many scholars argue, many of them argue .
 Erappmmufim' direction cf an MswetcQ is unlikely to be conclusive . Looking at a handful of cases is unlikely .
 Studying International Relations and World Politics 7 perhaps hundreds of cases . Studying international relations and world politics . 7 cases. 7 cases .
 One might start by defining terms such as democracy and authoritarianism, placing countries into one category or the other . Then looking at the relationship between regime type and frequency of involvement in wars, he says .
 Any such study would quickly become more complex than that as one would have to consider how much fighting is necessary to consider an event to be a war as well as differing degrees of democracy and authoritarianism .
 One would have to account for other causal factors that might influence the propensity to fight wars, including level of economic development, preexisting arms races, etc. Then, one would also account for factors such as economic development and arms race levels .
 Teasing out the impact of all of these factors is not easy, and the most effective way to do that might well be via sophisticated statistical analysis .
 The turn to greater use of quantitative methods was accompanied by much dissent from scholars who argued that quantitative analysis sacrificed the richness of case studies and other forms of research .
 Critics complained that there were many aspects of political life that could not be reduced to quantitative data analysis . Those critics complained that statistical techniques were producing scholars who knew more about the methods of data analysis than about the real substance of political history .
 A recent survey of international relations scholars suggests that the field remains “overwhelmingly populated” by those who use qualitative methods in their research . A significant percentage (about a quarter in the case of U.S.-based scholars) specialize in quantitative methods .
 A paradigm is a way of thinking about and approaching an area of scientific or scholarly inquiry that is widely accepted within a particular discipline and that guides the direction of scientific research . A paradigm can be thought of as an approach to scientific research that is accepted in particular discipline .
 In the natural sciences, scientists typically operate within a single paradigm . In this case, scientists operate within the paradigm of the natural science .
 If at some point the paradigm no longer explains new information or discoveries, a scientific revolution occurs in which scholars develop a new paradigm to replace the old . The new paradigm is created by scientists to explain new discoveries or discoveries .
 Einstein’s theory of relativity overturned the existing Newtonian paradigm of physics, providing a new framework within which subsequent research would be conducted . For example, it provided a framework for subsequent research to be conducted by subsequent research .
 Several competing paradigms typically coexist and compete with one another . However, in the social sciences in general, and in the study of international relations in particular, they often coexist . The social sciences are concerned with the possibility of finding a new paradigm for international relations .
 The main competing paradigms adopted by scholars of international relations and world politics provide different ways of understanding how the world works . To relate this to the larger theme of this book, this book explores the different ways to understand the world's workings .
 The so-called paradigm wars that have characterized the field of international relations were particularly heated in the 1980s and 1990s . The paradigm wars have characterized international relations .
 A 2008 survey of international relations scholars found that three-quarters of those scholars continued to see their research as rooted in one of the major paradigms . Still, a 2008 survey found that .
 To be valuable, a paradigm of world politics need not explain every event, says David Frum . Frum says. To be valued, world politics must not explain everything, he says .
 The test of a paradigm, and your assessment of its utility, is how much of the reality of world politics it does manage to capture and how efficiently it does so, says CNN.com .
 The paradigm that one adopts should be the one that, in comparison to others, most comprehensively and efficiently explains how the world works . The paradigm should be that, compared with others, best explains how world works, says author .
 The various paradigms offer different descriptions of how the world works, not how you might wish it to work . The paradigmas offer different versions of how it works, and not how it should work .
 There are competing descriptions of jobs in the U.S. government that can also give rise to prescriptive guidelines for formulating policy . However, those competing descriptions can also be given guidelines for policy .
 You embrace the paradigm you embrace will affect the policy choices you might recommend . Thus, the paradigram you embrace may affect the policies you might choose .
 Understanding and evaluating the competing paradigms is more than an academic exercise . That is why understanding and evaluating these paradigrams is more important than academic exercises .
 It has implications for your view of what constitutes wise policy-making in practice . It's implications for what it means in the world of policy making .
 The paradigms presented below are what social scientists would call ideal types . Social scientists would say ideal types would be ideal types of people .
 "For purposes of analytical clarity and conceptual comparison, they are defined and stated in a pure and almost exaggerated form," they say . That is, for purposes of analysis and conceptual . comparison .
 Scholars working within different paradigms will often learn from each other, borrow from one another, and modify their theories on that basis . Scholars will often borrow from each another's theories and modify them to suit their interests .
 While the ultimate goal might be the emergence of a single paradigm that all scholars in the field can embrace, we are not yet at that point . The ultimate goal is to find a new paradigm that can be embraced by all scholars .
 In this chapter, we will look first at realism—the paradigm that dominated the field of international relations in the era following World War II . The pessimistic view reflected in the quotation from Hobbes at the beginning of this chapter is reflected in Hobbes quote .
 Following that, we will turn to a variety of competing paradigms that have arisen to challenge the realist view . We will also look at a range of alternative paradigmas that challenge realist views .
 Many of these contending paradigms, as we will see, embrace the more optimistic view expressed in the quotation from Kant, that peace and cooperation are possible . We will see that many of these contend with the view of Kant that peace is possible .
 In completing this chapter, you will not yet be in a position to decide whether you are more persuaded by realists or critics . You will not be able to decide if realists are more convinced by critics .
 Realists and their critics think differently about how the world works . What you will have by the end of this chapter is a sense of where and how realists and critics are thinking differently .
 The dominant paradigm in the field of international relations was realism . From the end of World War II at least through the Cold War, realism was the dominant paradigm . Realism was a dominant paradigm for international relations .
 Realist scholars see international relations as driven by the unrelenting and competitive pursuit of power bwstat^s in the effort to-se^ure state interests . Realist scholar: International relations is driven by an unrelenting pursuit of state power .
 For-jpalists, the most important source or pbwertHimrtary capability, and trie acquisition and use of that militai^l^^SfeilifloWSlShtoeltlSsBiiteld one prone to violence .
 The Realist Paradigm 9 Human nature realists see world politics driven by certain characteristics of human nature . World politics is driven by essential characteristics of the human nature, realists say . Realist realists believe world politics will be driven by the characteristics of humanity .
 For them, states seek power and use violence because human beings are essentially violent, power-seeking beings . For them they use violence, they say, because they seek power .
 Theirs is a pessimistic worldview, as war and violence in world politics are viewed as an inherent part of the human condition . Theirs view of world politics is viewed as a pessimistic view of the world .
 The behavior of states has less to do with essential characteristics of the human species than with the structure of the international system within which states operate, says the author .
 For most contemporary realists, the most important thing is to remember is that world politics takes place within a context of anarchy . For most, it's important to remember that anarchy is a context for world politics .
 In international relations, anarchy refers to the absence of any world government . An anarchy is an absence of a world government in the world .
 This situation differs significantly from what we are accustomed to in our domestic political life, where functioning governments provide rules and laws to govern individual behavior and institutions, such as police, courts, and prisons, exist .
 After all, you could do as you pleased, unhampered by the countless rules and constraints imposed by governmental law and regulation . After all the rules and regulations imposed by the government were supposed to allow you to do what you wanted .
 You could drive down the street at 90 miles per hour without fear that a police officer would issue a ticket . You could also drive 90 mph without fear of being hit with a ticket. You could not be issued a ticket for 90 mph .
 You would not need to pay taxes out of your hard-earned income, and if you wanted something but could not afford it, well, you could just take it without fear that the police would arrest you .
 It would also mean you could read what you wanted, drink what you want, smoke what they wanted, and in general, do what you did without restrictions imposed by a government . It would be a free reading, drinking, smoking and smoking without restrictions .
 You would be subject to greater and more unpredictable threats from others . After all, though you would be free of governmental constraints, you would have to be under greater and unpredictable threats .
 Your ability to do what you want might be constrained not by a government but by a powerful neighbor . And that neighbor might decide to benefit in some way at your expense, he says .
 Hobbes suggests that people choose to live under the constraints imposed by government . Hobbes says people choose the constraints of government to live with them .
 "The sacrifice of some liberty to that government is the price we pay for order and security," says President Obama . The sacrifice of liberty to the government is a price for order, security, says Obama .
 Individuals have made and accepted this trade-off in the domestic political realm, but states have not yet been willing to do so in the international realm . States are not yet willing to trade off their trade-offs in international politics, says David Cameron .
 The creation of a truly powerful and effective world government is still seen as not worth the limiting effect on the ability of states to do what they want, when they want .
 Thomas Hobbes posited that humans once existed in a state of nature but elected to create governments, thereby surrender some personal liberty, in exchange for order and security . Hobbes: Human sovereignty is supreme political authority answerable to no higher authority .
 The death and destruction that often accompany world politics reflect the “war of all against all” that international anarchy directly implies . In international relations theory, states are often regarded as sovereign .
 The term reflects the fact that “supreme and independent political authority” rested in the hands of the one person who occupied the throne . The term reflected the fact . “Supreme . independent political . authority’s . authority .
 In a democratic political system, sovereignty can be said to rest collectively in the people who exercise political power through a democratically elected and constituted government . In a democracy, sovereignty rests in the power of the people, not the people .
 At the global level, no supreme sovereign authority exercises all-encompassing political authority . At the . global level of no supreme . sovereign authority exercise all the . power of the . world, the world's only sovereign authority is not sovereign . authority .
 As noted above, the international system is, instead, characterized by anarchy . The international system, however, is characterized as anarchy .
 Those sovereign states range from large superpowers like the United States to small city-states like Singapore .
 International legal norms recognize that each of these duly recognized states has equal right to govern the affairs taking place within its borders . Irrespective of size, wealth, or military power, each state has equal rights to govern its affairs, the UN says .
 The behavior of one state inevitably affects the well-being and interests of others, whether through trade and economic interaction, or through the influence that a state’s culture, ideology, and values have on others . Of course, each state's behavior inevitably affects its own interests .
 The absence of a world government means that we have no overriding sovereign authority to regulate and resolve disputes . And the absence of an international government means we can't regulate disputes . We need to find a way to regulate disputes and resolve them, says David Cameron .
 In proposing that states are unitary actors, realists say they have core interests that transcend special interests . Realists are saying that states have a set of core interests, not special interests associated with individuals and groups .
 Realists say that an ends-means relationship exists between core interests and foreign policy choices . They say that states are rational actors who make foreign policy decisions to reach those ends .
 Both these points can be illuminated by a comparison with domestic politics . Both the points are important to understand how domestic politics has evolved .
 Domestic politics is a constant pulling and hauling in different directions of various individuals, interest groups, political parties, and government institutions trying to shape public policy . The essence of domestic politics, especially in democratic states, is the pull and pull of different directions, writes Julian Zelizer .
 The essence of politics, from this view, is a struggle between competing interests . Politics is the result of a struggle of competing interests, he says . He says .
 The Realist Paradigm 11 struggles among various interested parties over the decades . The realist paradigm has been in the news for decades .
 It would be hard to detect a consistent and rational relationship between the tax policies adopted and a single, unified concept of the national interest .
 Most realists would concede that some of this political tug of war plays itself out in the shaping of a country’s foreign policy as well . Most realist would concede .
 Realists insist that states have a set of interests that rise above the ‘special interests’ found within domestic society . However, at the core, realists insist states have interests in the world arena .
 The country's core state interests include, at a minimum, the integrity of the county in the face of potential threats of foreign aggression and the promotion of the country’s general level of prosperity .
 Of course, actors within a state can differ regarding how best to secure core interests . Of course they can differ on how much those interests might be under threat at any time .
 The debate over the U.S. decision to go to war in Iraq illustrates just how contentious foreign policy can be . The debate is just as contentious as the debate over Iraq war continues .
 Politicians and pundits disagreed over whether Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, whether it could be deterred from using them, whether economic sanctions or the UN could sufficiently contain Saddam Hussein’s international ambitions .
 Realists would argue that there remained a set of truly “national interests” preventing another 9/11, maintaining access to Persian Gulf oil, limiting the spread of weapons of mass destruction . Realists argue that these interests transcend the particular interests of subnational groups .
 The debate was less over whether these interests mattered than over how much they were in jeopardy and how best to defend them . The debate is over whether the interests of the U.S. interests matter more than whether they matter .
 Given acceptance of the three essential assumptions of anarchy, state sovereignty, and rational unitary state actors, the next four points examine the implications for understanding the behavior of states . The next point is the implications of these assumptions for understanding state behavior .
 In domestic society, where effective institutions of law and order exist, individuals can rely on those institutions to protect their legitimate interests and security . Individuals can rely upon those institutions for protection of legitimate interests, security .
 If someone is breaking into your house, you dial 911, and hopefully a police car quickly arrives . If you have a home invasion, dial 911. Call the National Crime Line on 1-800-273-8255 .
 As long as citizens maintain confidence in the efficacy and fairness of the central authority, most of them refrain from arming themselves for self-defense . Citizens should not arm themselves, as long as they maintain confidence of the authority .
 When confidence in central authority breaks down, attitudes and behaviors change, attitudes change . However, when confidence in authority is broken down, people's attitudes and behavior change .
 If crime in your neighborhood increases dramatically, and you become increasingly uncertain about the willingness or ability of the police to come to your aid, you might decide to act to protect yourself .
 Realists refer to this effort by states to defend their own interests as self-help . Realists call this effort to defend its own interests selfhelp . States should be able to protect their interests, say realists .
 First, it can accumulate military assets—troops, tanks, warships, and even nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons . It can also accumulate nuclear, biological, and nuclear weapons . The U.S. has a history of stockpiling military assets .
 Realists would suggest it is a predictable example of a state engaging in self-help . The notion that what one state does for purely defensive purposes might appear to . appear to other states as threatening to their security and interests . on a central authority that stands above that of independent sovereign states
 If you rely on your neighbors for protection during a crime wave, that is fundamentally different from relying on the police . If you have a problem with crime, call the National Guard on 1-800-273-8255 or go to the National Suicide Prevention Hotline .
 The neighbors in the watch group are legal equals who voluntarily come together to achieve a common purpose . Neighbors in the group say they're legal equals .
 The police have authority above all neighbors, and adherence to police directives is not voluntary . The police, in contrast, have authority over all neighbors . Admiring police directives not voluntary. Adminding police directives does not have to be voluntary .
 The military hardware and alliances that one country accumulates for defense may be seen by another country as useful for offensive purposes . It may be useful for another country to use as a weapon for defense .
 This is one reason arms races and tensions they produce can be so hard to regulate . Arms races are often difficult to regulate because of the tensions they create . This is why arms races are hard to enforce .
 Country A builds up arms because it fears Country B, then Country B responds in kind because of its escalating fear of Country A . In this way, two countries with no offensive intentions toward one another can end up in an expensive arms race that neither wants .
 The police suspect that the two are guilty but have no hard evidence; thus, they need a confession from at least one suspect . The police say they need to confess to the two suspects . Police suspect that they have no evidence that they are guilty .
 They bring them to the police headquarters, place them in separate rooms where they cannot communicate with one another, and begin the interrogation . The interrogation is the first time the two men have been held together in a single room .
 Without a confession, there cannot be a conviction, and each prisoner goes free . The confession is a crime, but the confession does not mean a conviction .
 In simulations of this situation, both sides end up confessing, leading each to receive a five-year jail term . Yet in simulations, each side ends up receiving five-years jail terms .
 In those cases, where one confesses but the other remains silent, the former receives a reduced sentence as a reward for helping the police close the case . Meanwhile, the one who remains silent gets a 10-year sentence for failing to cooperate .
 Each prisoner cannot be sure what the other is doing, the safe strategy is often seen as confessing . Because each prisoner cannot know what is happening, it is often considered a confession .
 India and Pakistan, two countries with nuclear weapons, are prisoners in the world of international relations . Substitute the two prisoners for nuclear weapons . Now, return to the real world, substitute India for Pakistan and India .
 One might argue that India and Pakistan would both be better off without those nuclear weapons . India's nuclear weapons are not the answer to that question .
 Nuclear weapons are very costly, and the money used to develop, produce, and maintain them might be better spent on education, health care, road construction or other pressing domestic needs .
 Military leaders might view diversion of scarce resources from more usable conventional weapons to nuclear programs as a poor use of those resources . Military leaders may also view the diversion of resources as a bad use of resources .
 Ending the nuclear arms race in South Asia would reduce and perhaps eliminate the prospect of nuclear war between India and Pakistan . Both countries presumably want an end to the arms race that they presumably want .
 The reason is that neither country can't be sure the other country will disarm . Neither country can be sure that the other will disarm, the U.S. won't be able to disarm .
 If only one country disarms, it would be vulnerable to nuclear blackmail by the other in some future crisis . The U.S. and South Korea could be at risk of nuclear blackmail, experts say .
 As in the prisoner’s dilemma, we end up with outcome 1 because of the fear of outcomes 2 and 3 . The prisoner's dilemma is similar to the prisoner's dilemmas of prisoner's .
 While outcome 1 is arguably inferior to outcome 4, it does assure equality between the two countries . It avoids the possibility that one can be subject to nuclear blackmail .
 If the two countries had some authority to prevent them from cheating and secretly maintaining a nuclear arsenal, the possibility of solving this dilemma would be greater . Of course, if the two nations had some higher authority, and if that authority could punish the cheater and protect the potential victim, then
 The Security Dilemma assumes that a rough equilibrium among the great powers helps to maintain stability, since no state can initiate war and be confident of victory . Realist approach to order; assumes that no state cannot initiate war .
 The points discussed above lead to the conclusion among realists that war is unavoidable and natural part of world affairs . Realists believe war is inevitable and natural in world affairs, and that it is inevitable .
 This conclusion does not imply that every state is in a shooting war all the time . It does not mean that all states are in shooting wars, it does mean that every one is shooting war .
 All states continue to view war as a viable option to resolve disputes when the interests at stake seem sufficient and are deemed unachievable by other means . Nonetheless, virtually all states still see war as an option .
 For Clausewitz, war was simply one more instrument on the shelf that could be taken down and dusted off, so to speak, when needed to achieve some important foreign policy goal . War was one of Clausewitz's favorite tools to use to achieve foreign policy goals .
 Realist perspective: If countries are not always in a state of shooting war, they are always in state of potential war . In effect, then, according to the realist perspective, countries are always at risk of war . The realist view is that potential war is always a state
 That is not to say that Clausewitz or Hobbes or anyone else ‘likes’ this fact of international life . That's not true, but it's a fact of life in the world .
 Realists see this as how the world works, as long as international anarchy and state sovereignty continue to prevail . The point is that realists see it as how they see the world work .
 Realists see a path that can minimize the frequency and dimensions of future wars . Realists assert the inevitability of war, but they see a way to minimize the number of wars .
 If states are rational actors, they would only choose to initiate a war in which they had a reasonable chance of victory . This would be the case of statesmen in the Middle East .
 The power of any one state can be roughly balanced by the power of another state or alliance of states . Neither side could be guaranteed victory, and the incentive to begin a war is reduced .
 According to the classical mocel of balance of . balance of financing in the international OE automatically . The balance of balance in the . international OI automatically takes place automatically . According to . the classical . mocel . of balance, financing in . the international . OE .
 The Realist Paradigm 15 is the balance of power shifting in the direction of another state (or alliance of states), will increase their own power or forge coalitions with other potentially threatened states to restore the balance .
 Note that this is a dynamic process; it never reaches a state of final equilibrium . The process is dynamic and never reaches an equilibrium state .
 The power of individual states is always ebbing and flowing in comparison to that of others . The power in individual states always ebbs and flowing, says the author .
 According to the classical balance of power model, states affected by the rising and falling power of others react in ways that, on average, maintain a systemwide equilibrium . But, according to the model, the average state is affected by its power, and that equilibrium is maintained .
 If that is the case, then the chances of war, though never totally eliminated, are minimized . If that's the case it means that war is likely to be avoided .
 Some international relations scholars maintain that balancing might not always occur automatically . International relations scholars say balancing is not always always a given .
 Individual states, whether because of miscalculation, domestic problems, or limited resources, may fail to adequately balance . Individual states may not be able to balance the balance of their resources .
 A state might be tempted to engage in bandwagoning, joining sides with the rising power, in order to be on the winning side of a future conflict . In fact, rather than balancing a rising power it might be tempting to join forces with a rising state .
 Some realists note the importance of having at least one key state in the system that has both the will and ability to act as the balancer state and balance the power when things shift .
 With its significant military power, including the world’s greatest navy, Britain could maintain the balance in continental Europe . Britain could keep the balance with continental Europe, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If the balance began to tip in favor of one country or one coalition of countries, Britain could restore it by siding with their opponents . The balance of power could be restored if the balance tipped against one country .
 Britain would do this because if one country or alliance dominated continental Europe, that country could then threaten Britain . Britain would then do it because of the threat posed posed by one country .
 It was clearly in British interests to maintain the balance of power on continental Europe . It was in Britain's interests to keep the balance in continental Europe, he says .
 Countries choose alliance partners not because of political or ideological affinity but on the basis of what needs to be done to maintain the power balance . Countries choose alliances based on what is needed to maintain power balance, not ideology or political affinity .
 An old rule of thumb in balance of power politics is that in international relations, there are no permanent allies, only permanent interests . In international politics, there is no permanent ally or ally in the form of allies, as well as allies .
 Realists maintain that in the long run, the possibility of war can never be completely erased . Balance of power can minimize the chances of war in the short run, realists say .
 Balancing efforts may be inadequate, leaders may miscalculate, or balancer states might lose their will to act . Balancer states may lose the will to work, and leaders may be miscalculated, say experts . Balancing states may be at risk of losing their will
 In fact, small wars might sometimes sometimes be necessary to maintain the balance of power . Small wars might be necessary in order to maintain balance, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 At best, balance of power can prevent a particular war, but it can never make war in general obsolete . Balance of power is best, according to realists, but can never prevent a war . At best it can prevent war, balance can never be made obsolete, realists say
 The discussion of realist assumptions and their behavioral implications to this point has ignored normative considerations of ethics and morality in international relations . Note that the discussion has ignored .
 The realist paradigm does address such matters . However, as the next two points indicate, the realist paradigms do address such things .
 In a balance of power system, a balancer state is one with both an interest and capability to ensure that power is kept relatively in balance . It is the opposite of balancing . The theory in theory in 16th chapter How to Think About World Politics .
 Many American cities have been plagued by the problem of youth gangs and their violence . An Analogy to International Relations is an analogy to international relations .
 Insofar as most victims of gang violence are gang members themselves, the question of why one creates or joins such organizations might seem puzzling .
 This is not the place to attempt to attempt a full explanation of this phenomenon . Instead, it's a good place to discuss the phenomenon .
 Inner-city gangs might be viewed as simply a more violent equivalent of the suburban neighborhood watch organization . Both are related to the alliances that states form in international politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 All three are responses to a context of insecurity in which institutions of law and order do not seem sufficient for one's protection . Gangs, neighborhood watch groups, and international alliances are responses .
 The tension and wars that ensue become the inevitable, paradoxical result of efforts to achieve security via self-help in an environment of anarchy . Thus, the tensions and wars resulting from self-helping in anarchy are inevitable .
 Melians appeal to the justice of their position and the honor found in seeking to protect their independence . In the excerpts from the dialogue below, the Melians call for justice and honor in seeking independence .
 Athenians consider justice and honor irrelevant in a world where power prevails . The Athenians, in contrast, consider honor irrelevant .
 We both know that into the discussion of human affairs the question of justice only enters where the pressure of necessity is equal, and that the powerful exact what they can, and the weak grant what they must .
 To you the gain will be that by submission you will avert the worst; and we all shall be the richer for your preservation . To you, the gain is that by submitting you will aver the worst, and we will be the richest .
 "How base and cowardly would it be in us, who retain our freedom, not to do and suffer anything rather than be your slaves," says the author of the book .
 You are not fighting against equals to whom you cannot yield without disgrace, but you are taking counsel whether or not you shall resist an overwhelming force . Not so so, if you calmly reflect: for you . You are . not fighting . against equals, you are . taking counsel . whether
 The Realist Paradigm 1 7 . After some further back and forth, the Athenians dismiss all such talk of honor, justice, and righteousness . The Melians must make a decision .
 You ought to see no disgrace in yielding to a great city which invites you to become her ally on reasonable terms, keeping your own land, and merely paying tribute . You will certainly gain no honour if, having to choose between the two alternatives, safety and war, you obstinately prefer
 To maintain our rights against equals, to be politic with superiors, and to be moderate toward inferiors is the path of safety . To maintain rights, we must be politicized with superiors and be moderate .
 "You are deliberating about your one and only country, which may be saved or destroyed by a single decision," he says . Reflects once more when we have withdrawn .
 Melians refused to capitulate to the Athenians . The Melians stood by the justice of their cause and refused to surrender .
 Athenians surrounded the town of Melos with a wall to serve as a blockade . They eventually put to death all Melians of military age and made slaves of all the women and children . The Athenians also put all the Melians who were military age to death .
 In relating this story, Thucydides clearly demonstrates that power trumps justice in international relations .
 The high-minded rhetoric of the Melians did not save them, the Athenians might have told them, it was the weakness of the position that caused them, foolishly, to seek refuge behind the walls of justice and righteousness . The Melians were foolishly seeking refuge behind walls
 The realist notion that power trumps justice in world politics sometimes leads to the conclusion that realists are completely amoral . Realists are not just amoral, they say, but they are often amoral.
 Realists would have little hesitation in condemning the Nazi Holocaust as evil . Most realists would be reluctant to condemn the Holocaust, but would condemn it .
 Realists perceive a line between personal morality and state policy . At the same time, realists see personal morality as a matter of state policy, they say .
 While individual might sacrifice himor herself in pursuit of some higher moral cause, states cannot let moral considerations interfere with their survival . State must not let moral concerns interfere with the survival of its own people, the author says .
 Individuals mi^EK3W>N lnQ>AffDikld3) bfy aK3M)lutl&(BfcH:d3y^^3tes must be guided also bp uit ct-f^ on,a
 All peoples and their leaders tend to use the language of good and evil in the conduct of their foreign policy . For example, your war is fought for a noble cause, theirs for aggressive purposes . You seek to defend human rights, but they engage in ethnic cleansing .
 Realists suggest that characterizations that justify one’s own policies and demonize opponents should be viewed with some skepticism .
 Many conflicts and wars are about claims to land, resources, or security in which both sides can make legitimate claims . No state or people has a clear monopoly on either vice or virtue when it comes to how such claims are pursued .
 The nature of the international system often leads to highly destructive actions and behaviors by states and their leaders . The point is that the world's international system is often more destructive than ever before .
 As individuals, leaders might find such actions morally reprehensible; as leaders, however, they may find them necessary . As leaders, leaders may find it necessary to take action .
 Realists arrive at the conclusion about the possibility of cooperation and change, they say . Realists say that cooperation is possible in the future and that it is possible to change .
 The realist paradigm rests on the very first assumption of international anarchy . Virtually everything discussed above rests on an assumption of anarchy .
 The need to accumulate and balance power, the inevitability of war and the minimal role assigned to justice and morality in world politics all flow from the assumption that there is no higher power to maintain order, to stifle aggression, or to enforce global standards of justice .
 Eliminate anarchy and it’s a whole new global order in which all the other realist assumptions begin to unravel, says Julian Zelizer . Elimination anarchy is the key to creating a new world order, he says .
 Realists would say as much, but they would also suggest that the elimination of anarchy to the degree sufficient to render realism obsolete is highly unlikely . Realists say that eliminating anarchy is unlikely to be enough to make realism obsolete .
 As realists recognize, we can offer plenty of examples of international cooperation among nations . This is in areas ranging from trade to human rights to international peacekeeping .
 Short of eliminating sovereign state’s near monopoly on the legitimate use of violence in world politics, the essential anarchy of the international system will remain unchanged . The sovereign state has a near monopoly of violence, but short of eliminating that monopoly, the anarchy of international politics will remain .
 Realists contend that such a transfer of power is not only highly unlikely; it might not even be particularly desirable . Realists say such a change of power might not be desirable, or even desirable .
 Such a global entity, charged with maintaining stability over the planet, is unlikely to be a paragon of democracy . The UN is not likely to be an ideal democracy, it has been suggested .
 Maintaining order in a conflict-ridden world would likely require a highly oppressive and dictatorial central authority that, in turn, would likely engender all kinds of violent resistance . On the contrary, maintaining order in such a world would probably engender violent resistance, he says .
 In its own way, such a world would be as unappealing as the current world as understood by realists, realists . Such a world could be as much unapp appealing as current world, realist says .
 Realists perceive a big difference between domestic politics and international pbltics . Thus, realists think that domestic politics is more important than international politics .
 A higher power in international affairs means cooperation and the possibility of fundamental change in the world will always be limited . Alternatives to Realism 19: 'A higher power means that cooperation and possibility of change in world is limited'
 Leaders and states, like Melos, that do not understand and operate according to this understanding will run the risk of conquest, subjugation, and even elimination as sovereign entities, realists say .
 Although realism has long been the dominant paradigm, not everyone accepts its assumptions as essential truths . Not everyone accepts realism as an essential truth . There are alternatives to realism, including alternative realities .
 Realism has always had its critics, and that criticism has become especially loud and sustained in the post-Cold War era . Realism is always criticized, but it has become more pronounced in the past .
 The dramatic events of recent years have led many to question whether realism is equipped to explain the world of the twenty-first century . The end of the Cold War, the spread of democracy, economic globalization, and the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the U.S. have led to
 Given the degree of flux in the contemporary global landscape, it is not surprising that a once dominant paradigm would come under challenge . At this point, however, no single paradigmatic challenger to realism has emerged .
 What one finds is an array of competing perspectives that all reject realism even if they disagree about what should replace it . What is the result of these competing perspectives on realism?
 In each case, we will highlight their differences from realism as well as their differences and similarities in relation to one another .
 Liberalism was the major challenger to the realist perspective in the period between World War I and World War II . Idealism was idealism, idealism and idealism. Liberalism is a form of idealism .
 Idealists questioned many of the basic tenets of realism and suggested that it would be possible to transform the world of powerseeking and war into one in which peace and cooperation among states might prevail . Idealists suggested that the world could be transformed into a place of peace among states .
 Calling adherents of this view idealists idealists, however, seemed to give an advantage to ‘realists,” the latter term suggested a perspective well grounded in the “realities” of the world . The term "realist" suggested a view grounded in reality
 Idealism suggested a well-intentioned but utopian perspective that was out of touch with how the world really operated . Idealism, in contrast, suggested that idealism was out-of-touch with the reality of the real world .
 Liberalism is currently the most well-developed paradigmatic challenger to realism . Liberalism has been a paradigmatic challenge to realism, says Julian Zelizer . The U.S. has a long history of liberalism .
 Unlike realists, liberals believe that significant global cooperation is possible . Realists assert that the competitive, power-oriented, and violent character of world politics is unchangeable fact of life .
 For liberals, the assumption is that peace and cooperation among states can produce absolute IgUuls for iUQ^OiligEk l^cidQtktls b 1 EtMdDfrGu 1 1 of cooperating with oth^Kj^jh^
 Realists are concerned with the balance of power among states . What matters most is not whether your state benefits in absolute terms but, rather how much it benefits in comparison to other states .
 International trade allows a state to grow in wealth and prosperity . But that state should be wary if other states become wealthier and more prosperous . So from that realist perspective, the realist view is to be wary of trade .
 Economic wealth can be translated into military power that could put the first state at risk . That is because economic wealth can't be translated to military power . The first state could be put at risk by economic wealth translating into power power .
 The liberal focus on absolute gains is clearly more conducive to international cooperation than is the realist focus on relative gains . The realist approach to relative gains is more likely to help international cooperation, says Julian Zelizer .
 The prisoners would be maximized when each of them remains silent and refuses to confess to the police . Absolute gains for the prisoners were maximized if each one remained silent .
 Each prisoner fears that if he or she remains silent, the other will confess and maximize his or her relative gains at one's expense . The prisoners fear that if they remain silent, they will be able to maximize relative gains .
 Even if the prisoners would like to cooperate with one another, there is no higher authority to enforce that agreement . Even if prisoners had a prior agreement to cooperate, they would not be able to do so .
 In a famous study of prisoners’ dilemma strategies based on computer simulations, political scientist Robert Axelrod found that cooperation is possible . The study was based on a computer simulation by computer simulations .
 The key is to think in terms of what he calls an ‘iterated prisoners’ dilemma’ in which the game is not a one-time event but a repeat of the same players repeatedly play the game .
 A ‘tit for tat’ strategy can elicit cooperation in the game, says author . He found that one can elicit a good deal of cooperation by following a 'tit-for-tat' strategy .
 One starts out with a cooperative strategy, and from there one mimics whatever the other player does . One player mimics what he does with a strategy, from then mimics the other .
 The other player learns that cooperation breeds cooperation and that defection breeds defection . Eventually, the other player will learn that cooperation breed cooperation .
 Axelrod’s book, The Evolution of Cooperation, aptly summarizes the lesson that cooperation can emerge even when not present at the outset . Axelrod: Cooperation can emerge when not there at the beginning of a relationship .
 liberals argue that cooperation can evolve in international relations as well . Because interactions between states are not one-time events but a series of ‘iterated” interactions across a range of issues .
 liberals would argue that there are countless examples of cooperative relations among states in the international system that defy realist expectations of mistrust and defection .
 One of the strategies for getting adversaries to “learn” to cooperate is to start with more limited confidence-building measures such as notification of troop movements or minor limits on armaments .
 The material structure of that international system will have a large impact on the extent and depth of that cooperation . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the world .
 The origin of much contemporary liberal thinking about international relations can be traced back to Immanuel Kant, the German philosopher . The origins of modern liberal thinking can also be traced to Kant's work on international relations .
 Kant argued that the natural state of humankind is one of war and conflict . In his 1795 essay To Perpetual Peace, he argued that humankind's natural state was one of conflict .
 Unlike modern realists, he also suggested that a state of peace can be established . However, unlike modern realist, he suggested that peace can still be established in the Middle Ages .
 To be maximally effective, those legal rules require the establishment of international organizations that can adjudicate, monitor, and enforce the rules . International organizations must be able to enforce, monitor and enforce those rules .
 The ultimate fulfillment of the liberal institutionalist road to peace would be something along the lines of Kant’s “federation of free states” in which members agree to avoid the use of violence in resolving their differences and to work cooperatively .
 This Kantian ideal was at least imperfectly reflected in the creation of both the United Nations and its predecessor, the League of Nations . The United Nations was created by the French Revolution in 1903 .
 In the twenty-first century there also exists an extensive body of international law . Hundreds of international organizations are intended to regulate state behavior . Issues range from trade to human rights to weapons proliferation .
 The goal in all this institution-building is to provide an opportunity for actors in the global system to escape from the Hobbesian state of nature that realists take as a given . The goal of all this is to create a free environment for realists to escape Hobbes' Hob
 International law and UN are key to assessing the effectiveness of international law and the UN in limiting international anarchy . But they differ in how they assess the effectiveness in limiting anarchy . The possibility of improving on the record of institutions is discussed in detail in Chapter 5 .
 Idea that democracies tend not to fight wars against one another and that the spread of democratic government can be the antidote to war in the international system . In particular, it is associated with the theory of democratic peace .
 Idea that international institutions, economic interdependence, and the diffusion of democratic government are mutually reinforcing and together support liberal notions of a trend toward peace and cooperation among states . Kantian triangle: International institutions and economic inter-dependence .
 In other words, war is bad for business in a capitalist, market economy . War is good for business, but it's not good for the rest of the world's economy . In the U.S. it's a good time for war to be profitable in the market .
 War disrupts profitable trade and investment opportunities, and denies entire societies the economic gains that free trade and commerce produce . War disrupted the profitable trade, investment opportunities in war .
 Governments as well as the private sector have a significant stake in global peace . Governments and private sector share a stake in world peace, says Peter Bergen .
 The economic globalization that has characterized the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries has reinforced the position of liberal commercialists . The world's economic globalization has been characterized by liberal commercialism .
 This expansion of global trade, production, and investment has raised the costs of disruption to such a level that war in many cases has become almost unthinkable, the authors say . This expansion has, in their view, raised the risks of disruption .
 Some nations resist the trend toward interdependence and choose to remain outside the global economy . North Korea remains a problem whose solution in the long term is their integration into the globalization system .
 Liberals and realists disagree on the extent to which economic interdependence and globalization do, in fact, change the nature of world politics . The debate will be examined in more detail in Chapter 7 of this book .
 Kant argued that in places where government is based on consent of the citizenry, there will be a reluctance to go to war because of the hardships that war invariably imposes on those citizens . Kant argued in his book that war inevitably imposes hardships on the citizens .
 Kant’s federation of free states was premised on the assumption that its members would be republics with this domestic political disincentive to go to war, he says . Kant's federation of . free states premised . on the idea that its . members would not be republic
 The key to peace from the liberal internationalist perspective is expanding the number of republics . Thus, the key to the peace is expanding republics, he says. Thus, he writes .
 Kant was wary of democracy in which citizens made decisions directly . In the modern world, states characterized as liberal democracies generally equate with what Kant meant by republican government .
 Democracy has spread to a number of new locations in Latin America, Eastern and Central Europe, and many countries in Asia and Africa . And trends in the late twentieth century provided Kantians with reason for optimism .
 The strongest statement of the liberal perspective emerges when we combine the essential assumptions of all three liberal subgroups discussed above . The Kantian Triangle is the result of the three subgroups of liberals .
 institutions, economic inter-ependence, and democracy not only do so indirectly by mutually reinforcingjop.e anptf^ij. Furthermore, institutions and democracy are mutually reinforcing each other's decisions .
 A central argument offered by some who favored the 2003 U.S.-led invasion of Iraq is that it would allow for democracy to emerge . Iraq and the Democratic Peace is discussed in a new book, "Iraq War"
 The assumption was that the Iraqi people wanted democracy and would be able to achieve that goal if Saddam Hussein was removed from power with U.S. assistance . Saddam Hussein, the major obstacle to democracy, was removed .
 The hope was that Iraq could serve as a model for Arab and Islamic democracy that would spread to the rest of the region . The hope is that Iraq's democracy would serve as an example for the Arab world's future .
 The democratization of the region would provide, as liberal adherents to the democratic peace idea suggest, the long-elusive solution to the problem of war and conflict in the region .
 This policy of promoting democracy through the use of military power is a tenet of neoconservatism . It was central to U.S. thinking about foreign policy during the presidency of George W Bush .
 Political scientists argue that trade is strongly associated with democracy . That trade, in turn, increases the prosperity that political scientists argue is linked to democracy . Political scientists say trade increases prosperity that increases democracy .
 Economic interdependence increases the need for institutions and international organizations to regulate economic relations . Once established, those institutions further ensure that economic interdependency proceeds without interruption or crisis .
 The vicious circle of fear, mistrust, and conflict characterizes the realist “security dilemma” can be replaced by a “virtuous circle” of mutual interests and cooperation produced by the mutually reinforcing impact of all three points of this Kantian triangle .
 Adapted from Bruce Russett I and )ohn Oneal, ""International Systems: Vicious Circles and Virtuous Circles,"" in Russett and Oneal's Triangulating Peace (Norton, 2001 ), 35 . chapter 1 How to Think About World Politics .
 A more recent challenge to realist orthodoxy comes from a perspective known as constructivism . Constructivism is a theory of constructivism that challenges realist views .
 The “constructivist turn” in international relations theory dates to the end of the Cold War in the late 1980s and early 1990s . Critics argued that neither realist nor liberal understandings of how the world works led us to anticipate or explain the sudden and peaceful end of
 Constructivist critics believe realists failed to explain the improvement in the deeply adversarial U.S.-Soviet relationship . They say they also fail to explain how those two countries escaped the “security dilemma” in which they had been trapped for almost half a century .
 Realists would predict that those forces should have continued to fuel mutual insecurity . After all, both sides still had massive conventional and nuclear forces built to counter one another .
 Liberalism also fails to explain the end of the Cold War, constructivists say . Liberalism failed to explain end of Cold War and end of terror, they say .
 The United States and the USSR had minimal economic relations and interdependence . Due to different economic systems and to security considerations, the U.S. and the Soviet Union did not have economic relations .
 The USSR could still not be described as a democracy at the point when the Cold War ended . The Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev did not resemble a democracy in the late 1980s . However, the Soviet Union could still be called a democracy .
 U.S. and USSR were both party to many international treaties and were members of many international organizations . None of these were new developments that could explain the change of relations beginning in the late 1980s .
 In short, none of the points of the Kantian triangle seem sufficient, individually or together, to explain the most significant geopolitical change in world politics of the second half of the 20th century .
 Constructivists do not necessarily dispute the realist description of how international relations currently are conducted . Constructivistists say that international relations are currently being conducted in the world .
 In fact, they acknowledge in many cases that power-seeking, self-help, and war are contemporary facts of international life . They acknowledge in fact that power seeking and war-seeking are a fact of life in the world .
 What they do question are realist assumptions about how and why we have arrived at the current state of affairs . They do question assumptions about why and how we've arrived at this point .
 Constructivists dispute the core realist assumption that anarchy has an unavoidable, deterministic impact on the behavior of states . Constructivism is a form of anarchy that doesn't depend on the state's behavior .
 Constructivists focus on the role of human actors and human agency in international relations . Constructivism is a form of constructivism that focuses on human actors, human agency, in international affairs . Constructivistists believe that human agency is essential to international relations in the world .
 Human beings are active agents whose understandings, conditioned by experiences and ideas, can shape and construct the kind of system in which they operate . Rather than passively responding to the impersonal logic of the international system, human beings are actively shaping and constructing their understandings . This is the case
 Wendt suggests that we consider the possible range of human responses if we were contacted by an alien civilization . Wendt says we should consider the range of possible human responses to contact .
 One response might be to assume the worst and launch an immediate attack on the first alien spacecraft to arrive .
 They peacefully landed one craft, preceded by reassurances that they had no hostile intentions . The craft landed safely in the base base of the base .
 Still, you can see how those early interactions might shape emerging relations . Still, it's not easy to predict how relations will develop in the future .
 To return to the real world, contrast the relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union during the Cold War with the relations with the United States .
 Both those relationships exist in the same system of international anarchy, but they differ considerably . The relationship between the U.S. and the world is very different .
 In the Cold War, U.S. efforts at self-help contributed to the kind of security dilemma that realists discuss, as did Soviet efforts to respond in kind . In the 1980s, the United States and the Soviet Union responded to each other's concerns .
 U.S. nuclear weapons could theoretically devastate Ottawa and Toronto as easily as they could Moscow and Leningrad . But those same United States nuclear weapons never produced the same security dilemma with Canada .
 Constructivists would argue that past patterns of interaction, expectations regarding the motives and behaviors of others that emanate from that prior experience, led the Soviet Union and Canada to interpret the “threat” posed by U.S. nuclear weapons very differently .
 Anarchy alone, they conclude, neither predetermines nor allows us to predict the nature of either relationship . Anarchy alone cannot be predetermined, they say . Anarchy is not predetermining, they write .
 Realist scholar Stephen Walt has suggested that what really drives states is the balance of threat . The balance of power drives states, rather than power, says Walt .
 Traditional balance of power theory suggests that states will fear other states based purely on their capabilities and geographical proximity . Traditional balance-of-power theory suggests states fear other countries based on capabilities and proximity .
 In other words, one will most fear militarily powerful states that are located nearby . One of the world's most powerful states is located near each other .
 Security dilemmas will ensue when states balance the power of the more powerful neighbor, writes CNN's Peter Bergen . The situation in Syria has been described as a security crisis .
 The balance of threat idea suggests that there is a third factor, aside from capabilities and geography, that must be considered . The perception of the intentions of one’s more powerful neighbor should be considered, the author says .
 Canada shares a long border with the world’s greatest military power, the United States, but neither fears nor attempts to balance U.S. power . Canada has no plans to try to balance the U.N. power, but is not afraid of it .
 Canadians generally do not believe that the United States has aggressive intentions toward them . That is because they do not think that the U.S. has any intentions toward Canada . Canadians generally believe the United. States.
 In integrating objective material conditions and considerations of intentions and identities, the balance of threat idea thereby combines realist and constructivist assumptions . The balance of the threat idea is the result of a balance of reality and constructivism .
 In the process, it provides a good illustration of how scholars working in different paradigms can influence one another . The study is a good example of how scholar working in the same way can influence others .
 Material structure alone is not destiny, constructivists explain . Ideas and norms of behavior are also powerful in shaping human action, they say .
 Depending on the answers to the questions, the response to the fire might be quite different . The fire is believed to be the largest in the country's history .
 The material structure of the situation (i.e., the fire and the one exit) provides at best only a partial source of human behavior in this case . The material . structure of . the situation provides at least a partial . source of . human behavior, the author says .
 Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev began to question traditional assumptions and ideas about how the world works . Absent any changes in the structure of the international system, Mikhail Gorbiachev began questioning traditional assumptions .
 Self-help alone is not sufficient for national survival. transnational advocacy networks . Mixes of individuals and organizations with transnational representation who interact, exchange information, and share and promote common values.
 Some of this ‘new thinking’ was a response to internal weaknesses plaguing the USSR in the mid-1980s . The USSR's worsening position compared to the U.S. in the high-tech arms race, he says .
 A regime facing challenges might have chosen to go out with a bang rather than a whimper . However, a regime facing such challenges may have gone out on a bang, not whimper.
 In the constructivist view, Gorbachev’s ‘new thinking’ provided an alternative to traditional realist ideas . In the realist view, constructivist views are constructivist . In this article, we ask the reader to share his thoughts on the future of the
 A constructivist might argue that realism is a selffulfilling prophecy . Indeed, a constructivist may argue that realism is a myth .
 If we understand the world in realist terms, we will act as realists describe. We will act like realists do. We need to be realists. We are realists, realists say. We must be realist .
 If we change our assessment of how the world works, as Gorbachev did, then we can change that world as well, as well . But if we change that assessment, we will be able to change our view of the world, it will change it too .
 Gorbachev’s ‘new thinking’ was not literally new; the ideas did not simply come to him in a flash of inspiration . The ideas were not simply new; they were not just new, they were new ideas . The Soviet Union did not want to be
 constructivist scholars have pointed to the emergence of transnational advocacy networks . They are composed of individuals and nonstate actors with shared values who exchange information and resources to promote such values globally .
 Gorbachev had a repertoire of ideas to draw on in formulating his response to Soviet decline . The Soviet Union had been in decline for decades .
 Constructivists suggest that the power of ideas and norms is missing from realist and liberal views of the world . It is precisely this power of idea and norms, they say .
 Constructivism can also explain the emergence, diffusion, and influence of less positive ideas . Gorbachev’s ideas arguably offered new, welcome ways of thinking about security .
 Al-Qaeda’s grand strategy seeks to promote an Islamic identity, define the interests of all Muslims as necessarily in confrontation with the West . Al Qaeda's grand strategy aims to shape the normative environment in which Muslim politics are contested . The West is the focus of Al Qaeda’
 Alternatives to Realism has had considerable success over the last half decade in reshaping the narratives, identities, and taken-for-granteds of Arab and Muslim political life . The Arab Spring has reshaped the narratives and identities of the Arab world .
 Lynch suggests Osama bin Laden and other alQaeda strategists are natural constructivists . The outcome of their war with the West will be determined not just by military power and other material capabilities .
 The victory will go to whoever can prevail in developing and promoting a narrative that describes and explains the nature of the relationship between Islam and the West .
 This is not, of course, to imply that constructivists support al-Qaeda . But it's not that they support the terrorist organisation .
 World politics is merely a framework within which one tries to understand the world . It is, like the other paradigms of world politics, it is merely the framework within the world, says David Cameron .
 Like all the other paradigms, sometimes it might lead us to a better understanding of things we do not like . Sometimes it might help us to understand things we don't like, sometimes .
 In their critique of realism, constructivists share with liberals a greater openness to the possibility of change in the character of world politics . With that, they share a degree of optimism that such change could be in the direction of a peaceful and cooperative world .
 Constructivists part company with liberals over the assumption that change in the actions of states can only emerge from a prior change in institutions and structures of the international system . But constructivists say that change can only come from the basic institutions of the world system .
 Liberal optimism requires the elimination of anarchy via an effectively adjudicated system of international law, an increase in the level of economic interdependence, or the spread of democratic states . Liberal optimism must also be achieved in the future, says David Cameron .
 Constructivist view: Change can come if and when a state redefines its interests and its concept of the motives and interests of other states, independently of such structural change .
 Politically, feminism in the United States and elsewhere has been largely, though not exclusively, concerned with the acquisition of equal rights for women and men . Feminism in the U.S. and elsewhere is largely concerned with acquiring equal rights .
 The status of women varies greatly around the world, and although much work remains to be done before success can be proclaimed even in the most progressive countries . Women’s access to education, jobs, and positions of power throughout society has improved markedly in many countries .
 The conduct of foreign affairs and international relations has remained a heavily male-dominated preserve . With some notable exceptions, however, the conduct of international affairs remains a largely male dominated preserve .
 As a political movement, feminism might be to increase the access of women to positions of power and authority in the realm of foreign affairs . As a goal of feminism, one goal is to increase women's access to power, authority in foreign affairs.
 Most women and men who think of themselves as feminists would likely agree . On this point, most women and male feminists would agree .
 Once in such positions of power, women may behave much as men do . Once in power, they may behave like men do, says CNN.com .
 Realists would argue that any American president, male or female, will confront the same international system, and the same balance of power considerations, so that gender differences will be inconsequential .
 Realists claim that one could simultaneously be a woman, a feminist, and a realist . In this sense, realists claim, one could be both a woman and a feminist . Realists say one can be a feminist and a woman .
 Some international relations scholars still hesitate to call it a fully developed paradigm . For example, some see it as a subcategory of constructivism .
 In recent years, feminist critiques of received wisdom in international relations have begun to multiply and develop . Many scholars (feminists and nonfeminists alike) suggest that those critiques do provide a distinct paradigmatic framework for understanding how the world works .
 The dominance of the realist paradigm throughout much of the latter half of the twentieth century may at least partially reflect that the field of international relations has been dominated by men . In this sense, the dominance of realist paradigms may reflect that men dominate international relations .
 In a 2008 survey, close to 3,000 scholars in the field of international relations were asked to name the four scholars who had had the greatest impact on the field over the past 20 years .
 The three women on the list did not appear on the initial 2004 version of this survey, nor did any other women . Moreover, the three women who appeared on the 2004 survey didn't appear on it .
 The dominance of males should not be surprising, as the field has been disproportionately male in composition, the study says .
 The pool of established scholars from which to choose and the pool of survey respondents were both disproportionately male . The pools of respondents were disproportionately male, according to the study .
 In recent years, more women have received PhDs in international relations . A similar survey done 20 years down the road might look very different .
 Of the top three vote-getters, Keohane is a liberal, Wendt is a constructivist, and Waltz is a realist . Wendt, Waltz are the realists, and Wendt's a constructivism .
 Women in this field also run the gamut of paradigmatic approaches . Likewise, women in the field also have a range of approaches .
 Feminists argue that traditional lack of gender diversity did, to some extent, shape the field of international relations in the twentieth century . Nevertheless, feminists argue that the traditional . lack of . gender diversity in international relations shaped the field in the . twentieth century.
 In particular, feminist scholars argue that male scholars are likely to place different questions on their research agendas . Women say male scholars tend to place questions on different agendas .
 Feminist theorists like Cynthia Enloe argue that world politics is not just about high-level security relations among states, but also about how interstate relations affect the lives of individuals . Enloe argues that international relations affect individuals' everyday lives .
 Uehaviory mat realists attribute to the stracrarte of me international system . Alternatives to Realism are listed in Table 1 .
 Feminists assert that women would tend to be more inclined toward nonviolent solutions to global issues than their more aggressive, war-prone male counterparts . Although they might disagree on some of the finer points, in general, they say women would prefer nonviolent solutions .
 Political scientist Francis Fukuyama has argued that the greater propensity to violence that we see manifested in many facets of male behavior—from crime to violent sports to foreign affairs— is biologically hard-wired .
 Feminists share with liberals a view of the world in which the scope for cooperation among states is much greater than realists will concede . Feminists thus share a view with liberals in which they say the scope of cooperation is greater than the realists .
 Fukuyama sees a direct connection between the liberal theory of the ‘democratic peace’ and feminist theory . In fact, he says there is a direct link between the two theories of the 'democratic peace' and feminism .
 Women tend to have a greater voice in politics in democracies than they do in authoritarian regimes . The main reason democracies tend not to fight wars with one another is because women have greater voices in politics .
 It is, in his words, the ‘feminization of politics” in democratic societies that makes those societies more peaceful, he says . The “feminization” of politics is a key to peaceful societies, he adds .
 Other feminists argue that the advancement of the liberal institutionalist approach to peace would be aided by including more women in the policymaking process and in the conduct of negotiations and diplomacy .
 Swanee Hunt and Cristina Posa have argued in support of that claim by pointing to numerous cases where involvement of women has helped resolve long-standing national and ethnic conflict . They have argued that women's involvement in conflict resolution is key to solving problems in many countries .
 In the constructivist view, you will recall, human actors shape and reshape the world in accordance with the ideas they hold and identities they assign to themselves and others .
 Having more women in power could change the way the world of international relations works, says Simon Tisdall .
 The process of reconstructing international relations along more cooperative lines will increase with more involvement of women, feminists argue . As feminists argue, because women have a less “realist” view of the world, the process will increase .
 Critics of feminism often point to examples of women in power who have seemed to be as inclined and willing to use force and violence in the pursuit of state interests .
 On her watch, India waged a successful war against Pakistan in 1971, which led to the creation of Bangladesh . In 1974, India exploded its first nuclear warhead in 1974, in which she exploded a nuclear weapon .
 Meir led the country through the 1973 Yom Kippur War that began with a surprise attack on Israel by Egyptian and Syrian forces . Meir was the prime minister of Israel during the 1970s .
 Israel, backed by U.S. assistance, won the war in Gaza . Following some initial setbacks, Israel's victory was declared .
 The Iron Lady led her nation to war in response to Argentina’s 1932 invasion of the I alklands Islands, which the Bpp^h^lja^ claimed for over 1 50 years .
 Dilma Rousseff was elected Brazil's first female president in 2010 . She was elected as president of the country in 2011 . Rousseff is a former president of Brazil .
 A former guerrilla and torture victim, she is one of a new generation of women in high office around the world . She is a former torture victim and a former guerrilla .
 Women who emerge through the feminist movement will approach foreign policy differently than those who emerge from the traditional male-dominated foreign policy apparatus . Women will be different from those who emerged through the traditional men-dominated apparatus .
 The rise of Communist regimes began in Russia in 1917 and spread in the post-World War II era to China, Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia, the Korean Peninsula, and Cuba . Neo-Marxism is the name of Neo- Marxists .
 Women with foreign policy-making authority continue to be a distinct minority around the world . But a new generation of women has risen to power in several countries .
 This trend has raised the hope of many feminists that a larger critical mass of female leaders is emerging . Many feminists hope that their approaches to world politics will distinguish them from their predecessors .
 Many of these women have come from backgrounds outside the political establishment . Many of the women are women who have come out of backgrounds outside of political establishment. Many of them have been women in the business world .
 Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf became Africa's first elected female head of state in 2005 . Ellen Johnson Sirleaf was elected in 2005 as Liberia's first female head-of-state in Africa .
 She had been prosecuted and imprisoned during the tenure of her predecessors . She was jailed during her predecessors' tenure .
 Bachelet's father had been tortured by the Chilean military regime of Augusto Pinochet . She and her mother were both detained by Pinochet's regime in Chile .
 In the 1960s Rousseff joined an armed guerrilla group to fight against Brazil's military dictatorship . Rousseff spent time in jail as a result of his involvement in the military .
 Cristina Kirchner in Argentina, Angela Merkel in Germany, Yulia Tymoshenko in Ukraine, and Julia Gillard in Australia . Other female leaders who came to power in the early twenty-first century included Cristina Fernandez in Argentina .
 Hillary Clinton was the first serious female contender for the presidency of the U.S. in 2008 . Hillary Clinton ran for the first time in 2008 as a serious contender for president .
 German philosopher provided much of the intellectual inspiration for the Communist parties and Communist regimes that have now been swept into the dustbin of history .
 Neo-Marxism is still seen as a relevant alternative view of how world politics operates . But stripped of expectations for the victory of the Communist cause and its role as the philosophical foundation of real-world Communist regimes, neo-Marxist views are still relevant .
 The neo-Marxist paradigm is marked by internal variation, but at its core, it has some fundamental assumptions to which all neo Marxist analysis would subscribe . Like the other paradigms discussed, it is marked with internal variation but at the core has some assumptions .
 In certain very important respects, the neo-Marxist perspective shares some assumptions with realism . In certain respects, it shares some of the ideas with realism, says Julian Zelizer .
 Both neo-Marxists and realists see that conflict is rooted in certain structural characteristics of the international and world system . Neo-Marxist and realist see conflict rooted in structural factors of the system .
 These characteristics largely predetermine the behavior of the human actors who make national policy . The characteristics of the nation's policy makers can influence their behavior, the author says .
 Both perspectives share the realist’s skepticism toward liberal, constructivist, and feminist optimism that cooperation can replace conflict as the central feature of world politics .
 Realists and neo-Marxists diverge on the nature of the conflict driving world politics . At the same time, realists and realists differ on how the conflict drives world politics, say realists .
 For realists, the competitive pursuit of the national interest ts at the cote ct world arfatrs. in:erhatianel r^k.dons, in their view, is about the struggle for . nmver amver ampng^overeign states .
 For neo-Marxists, the comtp'etinvb pursuit 6f class mterestsTs key to understanding the world . For neo Marxists, however, it's important to understand world .
 For them, what drives world politics are the competing interests of workers and capitalists in the global economy . For them they say the world is driven by the interests of both workers and capital .
 For realists, national interests are defined primarily in terms of military security, and the pursuit of national security drives economics . Realists say national interests drive economics, and national security interests drive economic interests .
 A neo-Marxist might see U.S. military intervention in the Persian Gulf as driven by the desire to protect the economic interests of big multinational oil companies . Realists would see that same intervention as a means to ensure that the United States as a country retains access to oil resources
 These differences can be further illustrated by returning to the case of the U.S.-Soviet Cold War .
 For realists, it was Soviet military power that doomed the U.S. to treat the USSR as a threat, realists say . For realistists, the United States should not treat the Soviet Union as threat, they say . Realists say it was the Soviet power that
 The Cold War was, in other words, a classic case of a security dilemma . "The Cold War" was a case of security dilemmas for the U.S.
 In their eyes, the clash between economic systems posed the main threat, as the Soviet regime took a big chunk of the world’s people and territory out of economic play . The Soviet regime was seen as a threat to the world's people and territories .
 American capitalists could no longer freely invest in, trade with, or exploit, the Soviet Union . Because of the differences in economic systems, American capitalists were unable to freely invest with, trade or exploit the Soviets .
 The Cold War was determined at its root by the threat to the interests of American business, neo-Marxists argue . Neo- Marxists argue that the fact that the USSR had significant military capability may have added to American hostility and suspicion .
 Neo-Marxists apply the same type of class-based economic analysis to a wide range of global events . Neo- Marxists apply this type of analysis to global events, such as the rise of ISIS in Syria .
 Realists might see a geopolitical struggle over the military/political balance of power in Europe . neo-Marxists might describe it as an intracapitalist struggle over who would economically dominate the less developed world .
 Realists might see U.S. intervention in the Third World during the Cold War as efforts to maintain the global balance of power in favor of the United States by keeping friendly, anti-Soviet regimes in power . Realists may see intervention in Third World as an effort to keep friendly
 neo-Marxists would view that intervention as the U.S. government acting to support the interests of United States business concerned about losing markets, investment opportunities, and access to resources .
 The scholarly study of international relations and world politics aims to develop generalized understandings of how the world works .
 The goal is not just to understand the cause of a particular war, but of wars in general . It is not merely an attempt to understand how an organization like the UN successfully . successfully .resolve a particular conflict, but also what circumstances and strategies are most likely to promote peace in
 Scholars of world politics approach their understanding of how the world works through different paradigmatic lenses . As also stressed in this chapter, this chapter also stressed the importance of the paradigmatic lens of understanding .
 For structural realists, understanding how the world works must begin with the fact of international anarchy . 35 Conclusion: The world's problems must be solved by anarchy .
 Everything else we see in world politics, including the war and violence that characterize the world, flows from that fundamental assumption . Everything else, such as war, violence, is based on that assumption, he says .
 "In different ways, all the other paradigms take issue with this realist view," he says . "It's a realist approach," he adds .
 Liberals suggest international institutions, economic interdependence, and the spread of democratic government can mitigate the negative effects of anarchy . Liberals suggest that international institutions and economic inter-dependence can mitigate anarchy .
 Constructivists argue that the emergence and diffusion of new norms and understandings of how the world works can themselves change the behavior of states and other actors . Constructivism is a form of social change that can be seen as a result of the emergence of norms .
 Feminists argue that more women in power will change how the world works . Feminists say more women will change the world's future .
 Neo-Marxists see conflict as driven more by considerations of economic wealth than geopolitical power . Neo- Marxists share pessimism about the inherently conflictual nature of world politics . They see conflict driven by economic wealth as more important issue than power .
 Despite the proliferation of alternative paradigms, the realist paradigm still has its supporters . The realist paradigrams still have its supporters, says Julian Zelizer .
 realism’s near monopoly on thinking about world politics has been challenged in recent years . In many respects, realism retains its status as the dominant paradigm . In fact, although realism has been increasingly challenged, it retains its dominant paradigm.
 It is the perspective against which alternative paradigms-in-the-making are compared, and providing further testimony to its top-dog status, it is the paradigm that most often serves as the primary foil .
 "The staying power of realism is in large part rooted in its elegance and efficiency," says John Sutter . "Realistic realism is an art form of elegance," he says .
 Realistic realism purports to tell us much about how the world works . The assumptions about the structure of the international system, most notably, are based on the assumption of anarchy .
 Critics suggest that this very elegance and simplicity lead to an oversimplification of the modern world .
 Critics charge that realism is not particularly realistic . Each of the alternative paradigms suggests different shortcomings of the realist view of the world .
 You are not yet in a position to determine whether you think realists or critics are right . Having read this chapter, you may not yet decide whether you agree with realists and critics .
 What you now have at your disposal are several frameworks for beginning to understand how the world works . You can use these frameworks to help you understand the world .
 In the chapters that follow, you will examine the place of war and violence in world politics, the role of nonstate actors, the patterns of international economic relations, and much else . You will examine in more depth the place and violence of world politics .
 In examining those issues, we will not in every case explicitly apply all five paradigms discussed in Chapter 1 . We will not apply all of the paradigrams discussed in chapter 1 .
 The approach will be to look at the issue through the lens of realism and whatever competing paradigms have the most to say about the limits of the realist approach with respect to the topic of that chapter .
 The epigraphs at the beginning of each chapter will highlight the essential difference between realists and their critics on the subject at hand . They will also highlight the difference in realists vs. critics .
 The introduction will elaborate on the essential difference between realists and critics . The body of the chapter will examine the substance of the issue in a manner that will allow you to consider whether realists or critics provide the better guide to understanding the world .
 Assessment Review this chapter using learning objectives, chapter summaries, practice tests, and more . Review this book using learning objective and practice tests . Use this chapter to help students understand the content of this chapter .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the week's featured news stories to CNN iReport.com .
 Simulations Play the role of an IR decision-maker and experience how IR concepts work in practice . Simulations simulate the IR process and experience the effects of IR concepts on the field .
 TRIP Survey of International Relations Faculty in Ten Coupes, February 2009 .
 Tearing down the wall that had divided Communist East Berlin from democratic West Berlin . East Berlin was divided from communist East Berlin to democratic West .
 Realistic portrays international relations as isolated in a timeless vacuum, immune from the evolutionary process taking place around it . Realistic realism is a view of the evolution of international relations, rather than an evolutionary process .
 It is sufficient to state that the struggle for power is universal in time and space and is an undeniable fact of experience . It is enough to say that it is a universal fact of the struggle to power .
 The aphorism that “nothing endures but change” certainly seems applicable to international relations . It cannot be denied that throughout historic time, regardless of social, economic, and political conditions, states have met each other in contests for power .
 Weak countries rise to become great powers, while empires that once seemed invulnerable fall . Empire empires once seemed invincible fall, but empires once seem invulnerable .
 Friendly nations develop differences and become rivals . Historic adversaries mend fences and become allies . Friendly nations become rivals, but friendly nations become allies in the world .
 While the specific players and issues may change, the nature of the game remains the same . The game will continue to be played in the future .
 For critics of realism, this emphasis on continuity fails to appreciate that how the world of international relations works has evolved over time . Critics of realism fail to appreciate how international relations has evolved .
 Some critics argue that in their failure to appreciate the changing character of world politics, realists are blinded to the significant progress made in creating a better world .
 This chapter provides a brief survey of world politics from the 1648 Peace of Westphalia to the present . This chapter will provide a brief look at world politics since 1648 .
 Space precludes in-depth examination of all the twists that world history has provided over the past four centuries . Space can't be covered in space or space travel .
 With one exception, each mark the end of a major international conflict and the beginning of a new effort to reconstruct a more stable international order . The U.S. has been involved in several of the world's most violent conflicts .
 There is a recurrent pattern of conflict, followed by an attempt to redesign the international order, and, eventually, the emergence of another conflict . Thus, as we will see, there is a pattern of war followed by attempts to redesign an international order .
 In part, this survey is intended to familiarize you with key events in world history . The survey was intended to provide an overview of events in the world .
 Historians use historical events to compare and contrast the approach to international order represented by each era . See how approaches to international relations theory emerged from and were influenced by specific historical events .
 A student of world politics in the early twenty-first century might find it hard to imagine a 'v^RcLorgMiifflE^ iti^tOtE^bni S . S .(©dSdSeign nation-states)
 The Birth of the State System: The birth of the state and the nation are relatively recent concepts . The state and nation are a relatively recent concept of statehood .
 Although those terms are sometimes casually used as synonyms, they mean different things . They are not synonyms .
 A state is a political unit able to exercise effective governance and control over a well-defined piece of territory and its population . A state can exercise effective control and control of a large chunk of territory or population .
 A nation refers to a group of people who see themselves, due to shared historical experiences and cultural characteristics, as members of a common group . A nation, in contrast, is a group that see themselves as a nation, a nation .
 The nation-state is defined as a state that exists to provide territory and governance for a group of people who see themselves as a single nation . By combining the two, one ends up with the idea of the nation state, a state .
 A world that perfectly matches the nation-state ideal of one state to represent every individual nation has never been fully realized . The ideal of a single nation to represent all nations is never fully realized, says CNN.com .
 Some nations (the Palestinians and the Kurds) lack a state of their own . The Palestinians and Kurds are the best-known contemporary examples of this .
 Some states contain within their borders members of many nations . Some states, such as the former USSR, contain members of other nations . The former Soviet Union contains members of several nations .
 The modern ideology of nationalism is based on the belief that people care about their national identity and that they are motivated to seek national self-determination by acquiring a state of their own .
 This ideology of nationalism did not exist before the seventeenth century, since neither the idea of the nation nor the concept of the state was very well developed . Neither the idea or concept of state was well developed in the early 16th century .
 The political map of the pre-seventeenth-century world looked very different than it does today . As a result, the political maps of the 16th century look very different .
 In Europe, one would have found a map with multiple overlapping political units invoking competing claims to power and authority over the same territory . But in Europe, such a map would have been more complex .
 Some of the small, localized political units dotted the political landscape of medieval Europe . Some of these would have been the small political units .
 City-states such as Florence and Venice were tiny, by modern standards, territories over which princes, bishops, barons, and trade guilds claimed authority .
 Overlaying those small political units was the Holy Roman Empire, which claimed authority over all of Christian Europe . The Holy Roman empire ruled over the whole of Europe until the end of World War II .
 The Holy Roman Empire was a much less powerful and less centralized political unit . While its name conjured the memory of the Roman Empire that dominated Europe through the fifth century CE, it was a less powerful political unit.
 Its geographic reach through much of its history was confined to the territory of contemporary Central Europe, including what is today modern Germany, Austria, parts of northern Italy, and some neighboring territories .
 Not only the size and composition of the main political units differ from the ones in which we now live, but so did the notion of sovereignty . So did the idea of sovereignty, as did the concept of sovereignty in Europe .
 Modern system in which states acquire international recognition as the sole governing authority over a chunk of territory had not yet emerged . The modern system of states acquiring international recognition was not yet emerging .
 The authority of the empire competed with that of the various local political units . A clear map with sharply defined boundaries separating one duly recognized sovereign political unit from another would not have reflected the realities of the era .
 Over time, the combination of local and imperial claims to authority came under increasing challenge from two sources . Over the late sixteenth century, the imperial claim to authority was challenged by local forces .
 First, advances in industry and technology were rendering the tiny political units of medieval Europe obsolete . Second, they were the result of advances in technology and industry .
 In particular, innovations in military technology were a key source of change . The U.S. military has been in touch with the world's most powerful military technology .
 The importation of gunpowder from China and its use in new weapons like the cannon made it possible for ambitious monarchs to challenge and maintain them . It was used in weapons such as the cannon and cannon .
 The tiny principalities and city-states of medieval Europe were fast becoming obsolete . Thus, they were becoming obsolete, says the historian .
 Second, religious changes affecting the continent were making the Holy Roman Empire seem anachronistic . Third, religious change was making the Roman Empire appear anachronic .
 The legitimacy of the empire was based largely on the authority the Roman Catholic pope granted to the monarch . The legitimacy was based on authority from the pope .
 Protestant Reformation led to a series of schisms between Catholicism and a host of new Protestant sects . The pope’s blessing of imperial rule carried little political or moral weight .
 The combination of technological and religious trends affecting Europe at the time pointed toward political units that were both larger and smaller than those that had characterized the continent for several hundred years .
 Thirty Years War provided a definitive reworking of the map of Europe and the emergence of the medium-sized political units that were the early manifestation of modern sovereign states .
 One estimate is that the population of Germany fell 69 percent, from 13 million to 4 million . Of 35,000 villages in Bohemia, only 6,000 remained after the war .
 Three things about the post-1648 world that distinguished it from the preceding centuries of European history . Three things that characterized the post, 1648 world were three things that distinguished them from the previous centuries .
 First, reforms negotiated at Westphalia led to the effective dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire . First, the reforms led to an effective dissolution .
 First, the dissolution of the empire cleared the way for the emergence of sovereign political units within the old empire . Second, the creation of sovereign states within the empire, was the birth of new political units .
 Peace of Westphalia marked the end of the period of religious wars in Europe and the beginning of an era in which the great conflicts of the continent were primarily over secular concerns such as territory . Third, the Peace of Warthenalia .
 Post-1648 map of Europe would still look very foreign to a twenty-first-century European .
 The emerging idea of sovereign states and nations was largely limited to Europe itself . Moreover, keep in mind that this emerging idea is largely limited .
 Many of the rest of the world’s peoples were becoming subjects of European states and thus denied the rights of sovereignty that Europeans were developing for themselves . Europeans were being denied the right of sovereignty .
 Post-1648 recognition of the right of each of the newly emerging European states to govern their territory laid the foundation of the anarchic system of sovereign states that structural realists still emphasize today .
 Historians are divided as to the extent that the new Westphalian order dealt with those dangerous consequences . Historians have been divided on the extent of the consequences of the order .
 Some suggest that out of the ideas of sovereignty and nonintervention in the internal affairs of states emerged a primitive apprciaHb to sAiLt6)ArQ&lch ftlRQiMi hfl Rlrumitted to punishing any s^^t
 The Birth of the State System is 43 . The birth of the state system was 43 years ago .
 Political Map of Europe in 1648. was characterized by a self-regulating balance of power system . States would automatically check the rising power of other states by forging temporary alliances .
 State of mind would maintain peace in the international system as a whole, writes David Frum . States acted individually in pursuit of their self-interest, he says .
 Other historians argue that these ideas fall far short of an organized system for ensuring order . While recognizing these tendencies, some historians say they are not realistic .
 What it did not do is create a formal system to constrain the newly acquired sovereignty of states, it didn't do that . It did not create a legal system that constrain sovereignty, it says .
 As one historian put it, such ideas were discussed but were largely “publicists’ talk, the discourse of philosophers and theorists’s theorists.” Such ideas were not widely discussed, as one historian said, in the early 1900s .
 The monarchs of Europe viewed the French Revolution as a direct threat to their power and legitimacy . The French Revolution was seen as a threat to the monarchs' authority .
 As a model for an alternative form of government, the new French Republic posed an ideological challenge to the European monarchies . The French Republic was a model of an alternative government, as well as the French Republic .
 The French buildup of military power in the ensuing years added a threat to the established European order . And the French build-up of its own military power added to the threat to Europe's established order .
 The French monarchs fear that the post-Westphalian principle of state sovereignty would not be extended to their revolutionary regime . Some feared that the monarchs were plotting to overthrow the new French order .
 Napoleon’s subsequent conquest of much of the European continent ended any illusion of a continentwide commitment to state sovereignty, collective security, and balance of power . Napoleon was able to seize control of the continent and secure the continent .
 Napoleon’s march across Europe was noteworthy precisely for its rejection of those values and for its attempt at total subjugation of defeated states . Napoleon tried to subjugate defeated states, but Napoleon's march was noteworthy for rejecting those values . Napoleon's March across Europe marked a rejection of that
 Napoleon's aim seemed to be the creation of a new European empire with France at its core . Napoleon’s aim was to create an empire with French at its heart . Napoleon wanted to create a new French empire, but France was not at the core .
 Napoleon's reign was essentially ended by his failed campaign in Russia in 1812 . Napoleon’s reign was effectively ended by the failure of his failed mission in Russia .
 Though he hung onto power until 1814, he was eventually exiled to the island of Elba . He was eventually sent to Elba, where he was exiled .
 After escaping from exile in 1815, he returned to France and attempted to reestablish the empire . After escaping, he attempted to establish the French empire .
 After the Hundred Days of renewed Napoleonic warfare, he was defeated at Waterloo . He was sent into a final exile until his death in 1821 .
 European powers took another stab at crafting a postwar settlement that would bring order and stability to Europe . Meanwhile, prompted once again by the experience of warfare, the European powers tried again to craft a settlement .
 The Congress of Vienna (September 1814June 1815) brought together the great powers of Europe to settle a series of specific territorial issues . The Congress was held in Vienna to establish a more general system for order in Europe that would avoid another major war .
 In many ways, the system they established for nineteenth-century Europe resembled that of the previous century . The system was set up for the first time in Europe .
 European peace was to remain based on a system of sovereign states without a higher power to limit state sovereignty . European peace would be based on sovereign states with no higher powers to limit sovereignty .
 Key to order was still presumed to be found in maintaining a balance of power among the most important states in the system . Likewise, the key to order in the U.S. was believed to be in maintaining the balance .
 France was eventually readmitted into the system and considered to be an important player in maintaining that balance . France was readmitted to the system in 2010 and is now considered an important part of the balance .
 The lesson of the Napoleonic era was that order, security, and balarOQf povte^Qi^lElifcEb^THiaiM dn 1 8 ki&MaQtF&Qically. However, the lesson of
 The Concert of Europe 45 established a more managed system of balancing . Concerts were held in the 1970s and 1980s in a bid to keep balance .
 It rejected the classical balance of power system of the eighteenth century that the balance would be preserved by self-interested states acting independently and instead relied on collective oversight and maintenance of the balance .
 The rules were part of the series of meetings and conferences held among the great powers throughout the nineteenth century . Collectively, these rules came to be known as the Concert of Europe .
 This concert did not presume to end, once and for all, the problem of war in Europe in Europe . This concert was held in memory of the Battle of the Rhine War .
 Preserving the balance of power was assumed to require occasional wars against those whose actions posed a threat to that balance . The U.S. has been in the midst of a series of wars in the Middle East .
 By midcentury, wars between great powers central to the concert were also taking place . The Crimean War between Russia and Britain took place .
 The nineteenth century was relatively peaceful in Europe . However, there were no continentwide world wars, and there were continentwide World Wars . The 18th century was a relatively peaceful period for Europe .
 Two key factors contributed to the success of the nineteenth-century concert system . The concert system was founded in the 1880s .
 First and foremost was the consensus among the great powers, especially in the first few decades after Vienna, that the status quo in Europe was worth preserving . The status quo was not worth preserving, but it was a common consensus .
 Britain, Austria, Russia, Russia and Prussia agreed to territorial settlements in 1815 . The agreement was reached in the wake of the Crimean War .
 At various points a key state played the role of a balancer state with the power and interest in tending to the balance even when other key states wavered . Second, at various points, the key state had the power to tend to balance the balance .
 Historically, Britain was the key balancer in Europe, as an imbalance of power in continental Europe caused by one country or alliance would, in turn, threaten Britain . Britain has been a key player in Europe for decades .
 It also had the means to maintain the balance of the balance, especially in light of the dominance of the seas by the British Royal Navy .
 The concert system remained more or less in place throughout the nineteenth century . Political and economic changes reshaping the continent by midcentury undermined its effectiveness .
 The ideology of nationalism is becoming more powerful, challenging the notion of a shared common interest in stability among the great powers . For one thing, the ideology of nationalist ideology was becoming stronger .
 Series of meetings and conferences, and the rules they generated, that took place among the great powers of Europe from 1815 to 1848, were intended to produce stability and order .
 Pax Britannica: Era of peace produced by British power and hegemony in the nineteenth century . Pax Britannia: Peace was produced in the wake of the Second World War . It was a period of peace and prosperity in British power .
 The expanding class of urban workers created by the Industrial Revolution challenged the ruling monarchies of Europe . Both the American and French revolutions, and it was later manifested in the revolutions of 1848, during which .
 The result was that diplomacy became less about the interests of monarchs and more about nations . The result of diplomacy was that it became more important to nations than monarchs .
 Domestic pressures made concerts and power balances all the more difficult to maintain . Thus, domestic pressures were made to maintain the balance .
 International relations is becoming what political scientist Robert Putnam has labeled a two-level game . Putnam: Leaders are simultaneously negotiating with other states and with key domestic societal actors .
 Such games are inherently more difficult to play than the old single-level games played by monarchs unconcerned with domestic constituencies . Such games would be more difficult than those of the old monarchs .
 By the end of the nineteenth century, the balance of power in Europe was taking on a new form . The balance of the power in the world was changing in Europe .
 Gone was the commitment of the great powers to work in concert to preserve order and the status quo . Gone is the commitment to work with the world's great powers, says David Cameron .
 Gone also was the balance of power system with its flexible, shifting alliances in support of the balance . Gone also is the system of shifting alliances between the two countries .
 Britain's role as the balancer state untied to any particular alliance is gone . And gone was the role of Britain as the . balancer .
 Austria-Hungary and the newly unified German and Italian nation-states formed the Triple Alliance in 1882 . The Triple Alliance was formed of Austria, Hungary, and Germany .
 The Triple Entente of Britain, France, and Russia emerged in opposition . Subsequently, Britain, Russia, France and Britain formed an alliance .
 "This rigid system ran contrary to the key assumptions of the balance of power system," says the author of the book . This rigid system of power systems is contrary to key assumptions, he says .
 Consensus and consultation among the great powers replaced by dissension and confrontation . Consensus replaced with dissension, confrontation and confrontation. Consensus was replaced by confrontation and confrontation .
 Archduke Ferdinand, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, was assassinated in Sarajevo by a Serbian nationalist . Archduk Ferdinand was the son of a Serbian national .
 Serbia rejected key elements of the ultimatum issued by Austria-Hungary in response to the assassination . With backing from its ally Russia, Serbia rejected some of the key elements . Serbia's government rejected the decision, which was backed by Russia .
 Such a war would not have been unlike the series of conflicts that characterized Europe during the nineteenth century . The war would have been contained, such a war was similar to that of the wars in Europe .
 The hope and expectation in some quarters was that if war did occur, it would be localized in the Balkans . Indeed, some quarters were hoping that the conflict would be centered in the region .
 The Sarajevo incident was the most destructive war in human history . However, the rigid alliance commitments that had evolved extended it into the worst ever war in history .
 Austria’s declaration of war led to Russian military mobilization in support of Serbia . That led Germany to mobilize and declare war on Russia . Germany also declared war against Russia .
 France declared war against Germany, Austria-Hungary against Russia, Russia against Russia . France and Britain declared war in a matter of days in August 1914 .
 By late August the war extended to the Far East, as Japan declared war against Germany, and Austria-Hungary declared war . Austria and Germany declared war in August .
 The breakdown of the concert system and the emergence of competing alliances help one understand the breakout and rapid spread of the conflict . The breakdown and emergence of rival alliances help to understand the conflict, says the author .
 Other forces were at work as well, and the causes of the war were varied . But other forces were also at work .
 The rise of nationalism sharpened the sense of conflicting interests among the European states, as previously noted .
 47 colonies among the European powers as an important and perhaps primary cause of the war . The Experiment in Collective Security 47 colonies were important in Europe's war effort .
 Historians are divided as to which factors best explain World War I . All agree that the result was a war unlike even the worst of the nineteenth-century conflicts . The war was unlike any other conflict in history .
 World War I was clearly the worst war in human history to that point . When measured by the number of casualties produced in a compressed period, it was the worst ever war in history . It was also the worst year of war in the history of human history .
 By the time the war ended in 1918, approximately 9 million soldiers were dead, with total military and civilian deaths somewhere in the 15 to 20 million range . By the end of the war, the death toll had reached 9 million .
 The economic and psychological costs of the war are virtually incalculable . The economic, psychological and military costs of this war are incalculated .
 With the war concluded, attention once again turned to the shape of the postwar international system . With the end of the war, attention was turned to how the world's post-war system was shaped .
 That included questions related to territorial settlements and how to deal with vanquished countries . That included how to handle territorial settlements .
 Leaders wondered how they might reconstruct an international system that could avoid another world war . At the more general level, however, leaders wondered how to rebuild the world .
 The Thirty Years War prompted the creation of the Westphalian system . The Napoleonic Wars led to the establishment of the Concert of Europe . World War I led to an effort to create a new system for establishing order .
 Woodrow Wilson's vision for creating a new approach to international relations following World War I came from United States President Wilson . The vision was to create a new way of dealing with international relations after the war . President Wilson was assassinated in 1918 in France .
 Wilson’s vision was notable both for what it rejected and what it saw as the better alternative . Wilson's vision is notable for what he saw as a better alternative to what he thought was the best alternative .
 As Wilson put it, “The balance of power is the great game now forever discredited.” The balance is now “now forever discredited”
 In point 14, he called for the formation of “a general association of nations” that would provide the basis for order in the international system . In point 13, he calls for the creation of a general association .
 It was application to the society of nations of the principle in force in every state . It was the application to society of the . society of . nations . of nations . The . principle was the . principle in . force in . every state in force .
 What Wilson was proposing was a system of collective security . The law breaker who violates the rights of another finds the combined force of society arrayed against him . lj
 As an approach to international order, collective security differs from the idea of balance of power in three important ways . Collective security differs in the idea that balance power is balanced in the world, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Balance of power assumes that stability results from disequilibrium of power in favor of peace-loving nations . Security assumes peace is most likely to be maintained when equilibrium of power exists . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in Syria since 2003 .
 Also used to apply to regional alliances that adopt collective security approach among their own membership .
 League of Nations was established in 1919 to create a global system of collective security . An attack on one member would be viewed as an attack on all . State sovereignty Retained Transferred to a higher authority .
 U.N. security creates collective organization of states with the right, obligation, and power to monitor and regulate the behavior of individual states in matters of war and peace . Replaced after World War II by the United Nations .
 For Wilson, this collective security approach was related to his expectation that democratic governments based on the principle of popular sovereignty were the wave of the future . Wilson: Democracy based on popular sovereignty was the future of the world .
 Wilsonian scholars were eventually labeled “idealists” by their more skeptical realist critics as a way to discredit their Wilsonian views as naive and utopian . Critics were skeptical realists, who labeled them ‘idealist’
 A test of Wilson's idealism was the newly established League of Nations . It was a test of this Wilsonian idealism . The League was the first of its kind .
 The League of Nations was established in 1919 by the Treaty of Versailles . It was very much the product of Wilson’s vision and efforts .
 Wilson's League idea was not a complete break from the Westphalian system of sovereign states established in 1648 . Even in Wilson’s purest conception, the League idea wasn't complete .
 It was instead a means for sovereign states to work collectively to preserve both the general peace and the sovereign authority of all states when threatened by others .
 In matters affecting world peace, primary responsibility would reside in the League Council, a smalMDbo.dy 'fcftfii4,thBDgErltii2l ^£Jhe “principal allied and ap'ociat<e oi^
 The League echoed the Concert of Europe’s reliance on the great powers to oversee peace and order . In this regard, the League echoed that of the Concert . The Experiment in Collective Security .
 The League repudiated the Concert’s balance of power approach in favor of the preponderant power of the League itself . At the same time, the League clearly repudiated its balance-power approach .
 The concert system resulted from a series of meetings and understandings among the great powers . The parties did not create a formal, global organization separate from sovereign states to oversee order .
 With the League, a permanent organization was established for maintaining peace . Member states could not withdraw from their formal commitment to preserve the peace without withdrawing from the organization itself .
 League helped defuse some disputes among minor powers, but fared less well when great powers were parties to a conflict . League helped to defuse disputes between minor powers and great powers .
 When Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931, League action was stymied by Japan, which was a member of the League Council . Japan was a major League Council member .
 When Italy invaded Ethiopia in 1934, the League responded with economic sanctions but failed to respond militarily when the sanctions did not have the desired impact on Italian behavior . The League responded to the Italian invasion of Ethiopia but did not respond when it failed to act militarily .
 As Germany threatened its neighbors, the League stood by powerless . The League was powerless to stop the invasion of Poland in 1939 . Poland was invaded by the League in the wake of the invasion .
 Only two decades after the end of World War I, the second great power war of the twentieth century began . The Second Great War of the 20th century began in France and Germany .
 In failing to prevent the outbreak of World War II, the League failed in its most important purpose, the preservation of peace . World War I began on the heels of the end of the war in 1918 . The League failed to stop the outbreak, but did not prevent the start of World
 The League Council, the organ of the League responsible for maintaining world peace, never met . The organization shriveled to a bare-bones staff .
 The failures of the League were due to numerous factors, not least of which was the absence of key international players from its membership . The League was due to a lack of international players in the league .
 As the loser of World War I and the country blamed by the victors for that war, Germany was excluded until 1926 . As the country was excluded from the Great Depression, Germany had to wait until 1926 to join the war .
 Russia did not become a member until the 1930s, by which time other countries were withdrawing . Russia was embroiled in revolution and civil war and now led by the radical Bolshevik regime .
 In 1939, following its invasion of Finland, the Soviet Union was expelled from the League . It was followed by Finland's invasion of the USSR, which was expelled in 1939 .
 The United States refused to join, despite the fact that it was President Woodrow Wilson who advocated its creation . The U.S. President Wilson advocated for the creation of the U.N.
 The United States Senate voted down United States membership in 1919, the same year Wilson was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his contribution to the founding of the League . Ironically, the U.S. Senate was dominated by isolationist sentiments .
 More fundamental than the question of membership were inherent limitations of the League structures and processes . League membership is limited to the members of the club, says former member of the U.S. League .
 Decisions in the League Council and in the larger Assembly where all League members were represented were based on the principle of unanimity . Decisions were made by unanimous consent in League Council .
 Implementation of sanctions against those that threatened peace or engaged in other illegal behaviors was left largely to the discretion of sovereign states .
 A still larger and even more fundamental criticism goes to the concept of collective security itself . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of security in recent years .
 For a test of how the structural realist paradigm holds up against the history of international relations, see Paul Schroeder, "Historical Reality vs. History" for a test .
 League League is unnecessary, as the great powers could address such issues on an ad hoc basis . Great powers could solve such issues with ad hoc arrangements, says David Cameron . League League will be unnecessary, says Cameron .
 The nineteenth-century Concert of Europe was, at least in part, intended to do . Indeed, that is exactly what it was intended to be .
 When one or more great powers are engaged in conflict, the collective security system faces a very different challenge . On the other hand, when one or two great powers engage in conflict it faces a different challenge, the security system .
 "The costs of collective action are very high and hard to embrace and implement," he says . Against a great power determined to act aggressively, collective action is very high .
 Hitler demanded at the Munich Conference in 1938 that the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia inhabited by many ethnic Germans, be incorporated into Germany . British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain gave in when Hitler demanded the annexation in 1938 .
 In what came to be viewed as a classic and failed case of appeasement—making a concession in order to avoid war—the League of Nations was largely irrelevant . In the 1950s and '60s, it was viewed as an attempt to appease the West .
 Critics say collective security works best when it is least needed, but fails when it's most needed . In effect, the complaint of the critics is that collective security is best served when needed .
 World War II wound down in 1944 and 1945, world leaders faced the question of the shape of the postwar world . World leaders once again faced the questions of the future of the post-war world .
 In 1648, 1815, and 1919, the issue was construction of a system of world order that would help avoid another great power war . As usual, this involved specific territorial issues, but the larger underlying issue was the larger issue .
 One option was to rejuvenate the League of Nations and the idea of collective security . One option would be rejuvenating the League, which is based on collective security, he said .
 Supporters of this idea argue that the problems of the League had less to do with the general concept of collective security than with the manner of its implementation in the 1920s and 1930s . Supporters of the idea argued that the . problems of this . idea had more to do . with the
 They suggested that the absence of key countries from membership and the requirement of unanimity in decision-making had doomed the institution . In particular, they suggested that key countries were excluded from membership .
 Leaders of Allied countries after the war were not among those collective security optimists . However, the leaders of the Allied countries were not .
 Franklin D Roosevelt and Winston Churchill had no serious thoughts of replacing power as the prime currency of international relations or of curtailing state sovereignty . Neither U.S. President Roosevelt nor British Prime Minister Winston Churchill nor Soviet leader Josef Stalin harbored serious thoughts .
 The idealist approach to international relations that was popular in the interwar period was now giving way to resurgent “realist” thinking . In general, because collective security had failed in the 1930s, the idealist .
 Signifying this shift was the 1948 publication of Hans Morgenthau’s classic realist text, Politics Among Nations . The realist realist movement began in the 1930s and '60s .
 The book heralded a paradigm shift in the direction of realism that remained in place until the end of the Cold War . In systematically articulating and defending the realist view, the book influenced scholars .
 The Postwar Bipolar System 51 is a look at the power politics that characterized eighteenth-century Europe's power politics . The post-war system was dominated by European power politics.
 Second, they could recreate the concert system of the nineteenth century . They could recreate a concert system that was formed in the 19th century .
 Third, they could adopt a revised approach to balance of power based on the idea of spheres of influence . Third, the Chinese government could adopt an approach based on spheres of power . Fourth, the government could also adopt a new approach to power .
 In this scheme, key parts of the world would be placed under the influence of one of the great powers . The scheme would see the power of the U.S. placed under influence of a great power .
 The system would differ from the eighteenth-century model, as it rejected the notion of flexible, shifting alliances to preserve the balance . The system rejected the idea of flexible alliances, instead of shifting alliances .
 It rejected the concert model, in which the great powers cooperatively dealt with challenges to peace and stability whenever and where they emerged . It also rejected the idea of cooperation in dealing with challenges such as terrorism and terrorism .
 Each of the great powers, by mutual agreement among themselves, would be given sole responsibility and free reign to handle its sphere of influence as it saw fit .
 Roosevelt was skeptical that the spheres of influence approach would permanently stifle each great power’s urge to expand outside its sphere . The idea was attractive to Churchill and Stalin, but FDR was skeptical of it .
 Even if it did work, it would deny the sovereignty and right of self-determination of smaller, weaker nations within each sphere .
 As he saw it, the new concert would be based on a consortium of the four Allied powers . The United States, Great Britain, Soviet Union, and China would maintain order and stability, he says .
 In practice, the postwar order that emerged combined elements of several of these approaches . The post-war order was a model for the U.S. Postwar era .
 At the February 1945 Yalta Conference, the U.S. and Britain reluctantly accepted the reality of Soviet dominance of the eastern half of the world's spheres of influence . The United States and Britain were reluctant to accept the Soviet dominance .
 Winston Churchill, U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt, and Soviet Communist party leader Josef Stalin meet to discuss the shape of postwar Europe at Yalta in February 1945 . Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, Churchill, FDR, Stalin and Stalin meet in 1945 .
 Yalta has, in the view of its critics, become a symbol of the spheres of influence idea that Roosevelt in principle had opposed . Roosevelt opposed the idea in principle, Roosevelt in fact had opposed it .
 The United States, Britain, the USSR, and China discussed a framework for a new collective security organization . Meanwhile, at a series of 1944 meetings held at an estate called Dumbarton Oaks in Washington, D.C., the U.S., Britain, and the USSR discussed a new
 In April 1945, at a follow-up conference in San Francisco, the United Nations was born . The United Nations is now the world's most powerful organization .
 The purpose and structure of the UN reflected a marriage of idealism (or what we called liberal institutionalism in Chapter 1) and realism . The UN's purpose was to reflect idealism and realism, the authors say .
 The UN resurrected the lofty goal of the League to create a global organization with the authority to monitor war and peace among states . On the one hard, the UN resurrected its lofty goal to create the League .
 The new UN Security Council would be the successor to the defunct League Council . In this regard, the new UN council would be successor to defunct League council .
 The Security Council was empowered to use force to deter and respond to countries that violated international peace and security . As we will see in more detail in Chapter 5, the Security Council will use force against countries that violate international peace or security .
 On the other hand, the United Nations embraced realist notions of state sovereignty and power politics . The United Nations has embraced the idea of power politics, but not sovereignty .
 The Security Council would include as permanent members all the great powers that were victorious in the war . Those permanent members would have to agree unanimously before the UN could act .
 Idealists who were looking to create a successor to the League were disappointed with what emerged . Idealists were disappointed by what emerged.
 It assumed that great powers could act ‘in concert’ based on a shared commitment to order and stability . It looked to the great powers as the key to peace, and assumed that those great powers would act in concert . The U.S. has been in the Middle East
 Instead of doing this through ad hoc meetings and congresses as in . nineteenth-century Europe, it was to be done via a permanent international organization . However, instead of . using ad hoc . meetings and . congresses, it would have been done via an international organization.
 UN supporters expected that it could provide the basis for a new system of international order . If the common commitment to peace and security among the victorious Allied powers held up, UN supporters hoped it could be the basis of a new order . UN Secretary General David Cameron was assassinated by the Nazis in
 The hope was soon undermined by the emerging tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . But that hope was later undermined by emerging tensions with the Soviets .
 The end of the hot war in which the U.S. and the USSR fought as allies against Hitler soon gave way to the Cold War . The Cold War was a period of crisis and tension that lasted from the mid-1940s through the 1980s .
 It was called a “cold war” because direct conflict between U.S. and Soviet military forces was avoided . The Cold War was avoided by avoiding direct conflict with Soviet forces .
 The era was marked by numerous crises, some of which brought the two rivals to the brink of a shooting war . However, the era was also marked by many crises, including the rise of the Second World War .
 Post-World War II decolonization extended the geographic scope of the U.S.-Soviet rivalry . Many of the early Cold War crises centered on tensions in Europe . The Cold War was dominated by the Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 As former European colonies acquired independence, the U.S. and USSR engaged in a global competition for influence . The United States and the Soviet Union were both involved in the conflict .
 In some cases, they sought to buy influence via trans©CbVWihtar\l/4cf3i^£inlt dt ihfou^h -eoii'Lidiic assistance and investment .
 The Postwar Bipolar System 53 between the U.S. and USSR was too dangerous, the two superpowers instead confronted one another indirectly via proxy wars . The US and USSR confronted each other indirectly via proxies wars .
 A proxy war is a conflict in which one state confronts a main rival via third parties rather than confronting the main adversary directly . It is a war in which the main rival confronts the main enemy via proxy war .
 The U.S. fought Communist forces presumed to be advancing the spread of Soviet influence in East Asia . In both the Korean War and the Vietnam War, the United States fought communist forces .
 After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, the U.S. provided material support to Islamic fighters known as the mujahedeen . Future al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was among them .
 What made Cold War tensions especially dangerous was the existence of nuclear weapons . Cold War tension was especially dangerous in the 1950s and '60s .
 The USSR’s acquisition of nuclear weapons in 1949 and the rapid expansion of the nuclear arsenals by both countries kept the superpower relationship on the brink of nuclear disaster .
 Khrushchev later noted that he had placed missiles in Cuba to deter a U.S. attack on the Communist Cuban regime headed by Soviet ally Lidel Castro . The missiles were placed by the Soviet leader to deter an attack on Cuba .
 The U.S. held a strategic nuclear advantage at the time of the Cold War . Perhaps an even stronger motive was to offset the strategic advantage that the United States held .
 The United States had missiles capable of striking the Soviet Union from bases in Turkey . The U.S. also had weapons based in Turkey, including missiles that could be fired at Soviet Union targets .
 The USSR, in comparison, had a much more limited intercontinental capability and lacked any bases in the Western Hemisphere . The USSR had no intercontinental capabilities .
 Air strikes on Cuban missile bases and a full-scale invasion of the island were considered among the options for President Kennedy's response to the threat .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from delivering additional missiles . Kennedy ordered the blockade to prevent additional missiles from being delivered by Soviet ships .
 The U.S. waited to see how the Soviets would react to the blockade, the USSR backed down . After hours of high tension, the United States waited for hours .
 Khrushchev ordered the nuclear weapons in Cuba to be dismantled and removed . In exchange for U.S. promises not to invade Cuba and other concessions, the weapons were dismantled .
 The early 1970s witnessed a thaw in the iciness of Cold War relations as U.S. President Richard M Nixon tried a new policy of detente . President Richard Nixon tried to relax tensions with the West .
 Increased U.S.-Soviet trade and educational and cultural exchanges were important elements of the detente policy . Increased trade and cultural exchange between the two countries was also important .
 The centerpieces of detente were nuclear arms control talks and high-visibility summit meetings between U.S. and Soviet leaders that came to symbolize the era .
 In 1972 Nixon and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev signed the first SALT agreement . The agreement limited the number of offensive nuclear arms each side could possess . It sharply restricted the deployment of nuclear missile defense systems .
 SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks) Talks were held between the U.S. and Soviet Union in the 1970s . They were intended to reduce the expansion of offensive nuclear weapons .
 The rift between former Communist allies, the Soviet Union and China, became increasingly evident over time and that led to border clashes in the late 1960s . An international system in which only two major powers are capable of seriously threatening the security and sovereignty of one another .
 Historical Perspectives needed to do something to deescalate Cold War tensions . Historians needed to find a way to end the Cold War era .
 By the 1970s, both sides faced weaknesses that increased their interest in reducing tensions . Both sides were interested in reducing their tensions .
 The U.S. was bogged down in an unpopular war in Vietnam and was looking for a way out . Nixon put it "peace with honor" as a way to get rid of the war .
 Nixon came to see improved relations with the Soviets as helpful . The Soviet Union might be able to pressure its North Vietnamese ally to help achieve that goal .
 The war also gave rise to the Vietnam syndrome, meaning that the United States Congress and public had become averse to any U.S. intervention abroad . The Vietnam syndrome also led to the U.N. Congress and the public becoming wary of foreign intervention .
 The U.S. sought to relax tensions with the USSR, hoping to restrain it from mischiefmaking, particularly in developing countries where the Americans and Soviets had been competing for influence . Thus, the United States sought to restrain the USSR .
 The USSR was facing economic challenges that made the prospect of increased trade with the U.S. highly desirable . As for the USSR, it faced economic challenges, it was facing .
 Henry Kissinger sought to pursue a policy of linkage in which Soviet access to U.S. trade would be linked to good behavior around the world . Kissinger was Nixon’s national security advisor and then secretary of state .
 When the Chinese Communists came to power under Mao Zedong in 1949, the assumption was that China and the Soviet Union formed a monolithic Communist bloc united by their common ideology and antagonism toward the United States .
 Moscow and Beijing were allies in the early years after the Chinese Revolution . Signs of a Sino-Soviet split eventually became evident after the Soviet-Chinese split .
 By the late 1960s Soviet and Chinese troops were engaging in border skirmishes . By the mid-'70s, Chinese and Soviet troops were engaged in border clashes .
 Nixon and Kissinger sought, in improving relations with both those Communist regimes, to play them off against one another and extract concessions . Kissinger and Nixon sought to play the two Communist regimes off against each other in an effort to gain concessions .
 The election of Ronald Reagan as U.S. president in 1980 symbolized the end of detente . Reagan's victory in the 1980 election symbolized an end to detente in the world .
 Reagan famously referred to the Soviet Union as an “evil empire” in a 1983 speech . Reagan's first term marked a shift in emphasis from bilateral arms control to unilateral arms buildup .
 Critics were pointing to the failures of detente as early as 1976 . Gerald Ford went so far as to ban the use of the word in his reelection campaign .
 Critics say detente placed too much trust in Soviet leaders to live up to arms control agreements . Critics say it led to abandonment of allies like Taiwan in order to appease the Communist regime in Beijing .
 Critics argued that the realism of Nixon and Kissinger led to a neglect of core American values such as the promotion of human rights . Critics on the left argued that Kissinger's realism led to the neglect of U.S. values .
 The 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the Carter administration’s decision to boycott the 1980 Olympics in Moscow, to end grain sales to the USSR, and to increase U.S. defense spending effectively ended the detente era . Reagan's election in 1980 effectively ended detente a year
 The Foreign Policy of Henry Kissinger is often considered a textbook example of the realist paradigm embraced and applied in practice . Richard M Nixon's foreign policy is considered an example of a realist approach to foreign policy . Henry Kissinger's policy is often described as a 'realist'
 Henry Kissinger was Nixon's national security advisor and secretary of state . Kissinger's influence is a reflection of the influence he had on Kissinger . Kissinger was a key figure in Nixon's decision to keep the U.S. from Vietnam .
 His PhD dissertation, published in 1957 under the title A World Restored, was a study of the nineteenth-century Concert of Europe and of the key personalities who shaped that world .
 Political realism finds echoes in the Nixon/ Kissinger foreign policy of the 1970s . It is also an excellent introduction to political realism .
 Nixon pursued the China opening as a means to balance the power of the Soviet Union . Despite Nixon's longestablished anti-Communist credentials, he pursued the opening of China as a result .
 Nixon and Kissinger believed they needed to do to forge a relationship with the Soviet Union that would serve American interests . Ideological distaste for a Communist regime was trumped by what they believed to be a relationship .
 Nixon and Kissinger were criticized for allowing realpolitik (literally ""realist politics,"" or policy based on national interests rather than ideological or moral considerations) to dominate human rights considerations . Kissinger was criticized in many quarters for allowing national interests to dominate the human rights consideration .
 Nixon administration's primary concern was that this not undercut the U.S.-Soviet detente . For example, when the acclaimed Russian novelist and anti-Communist dissident Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1974, the Nixon administration was concerned that this
 On Solzhenitsyn's arrival in the United States, there was no ceremony organized by the U.S. government . The Nixon administration avoided harsh criticism of the USSR .
 Kissinger case illustrates the interaction of theory and practice . Kissinger case is the result of the two paradigrams in the Kissinger case . The Kissinger case shows the interaction between theory and theory .
 realism is first and foremost an attempt to describe and explain how the world of international relations works . Like the other paradigms, realism is a first attempt at describing and explaining how the real world works .
 President Barack Obama has described the foreign policy of foreign policy as a matter of principle . But implicit in that description are prescriptions for how foreign policy should be conducted, he says .
 Kissinger provided one of the best examples of the conscious application of theory to policy of any recent world leader . Kissinger was a former academic turned policy-maker . Kissinger is an example of a successful world leader using theory to make policy decisions .
 Many presidents since Nixon, including George W Bush, have continued to seek Kissinger's counsel . Many presidents have sought Kissinger's advice since Nixon .
 It allowed for relaxation of state censorship of the media and increased access to information . It was allowed to relax state censorship and increase access of information .
 Historical Perspectives provided an opportunity to create a more positive peace among nations . Peace and stability can result from cooperation and common interests, the UN says .
 On December 25, 1991, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev resigned and accepted the dissolution of the Soviet Union . The end of the Communist regime that had ruled the country since the revolution of 1917 is seen as the post-war era .
 Gorbachev’s Christmas announcement hammered the final nail into the coffin of Soviet Communism . The symbolic end of the Cold War era was the 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall .
 The prewar German capital of Berlin was located inside East Germany, but the city itself was divided into democratic West Berlin and Communist East Berlin .
 The wall was constructed by the Soviets in 1961 to keep East Germans from escaping to West Berlin . It was built to keep people from escaping from the East to escape to the West .
 The breaching of the wall on November 9, 1989, by hundreds of thousands of East German protesters was the culmination of a process of political change that Soviet President Gorbachev had unleashed with the reforms of the late 1980s . The breach of the Berlin wall was a culmination of the reforms
 Gorbachev sought to revive the Soviet system through a comprehensive program of political and economic reforms . Faced with a stagnant economy at home and an increasingly assertive political and military challenge from the U.S. Gorbache sought to revamp Soviet system .
 His policy of perestroika introduced elements of free market economics into the Communist system . The policy of glasnost (openness) allowed for the relaxing of state censorship of the media and increased access to information .
 The Gorbachev reforms unleashed forces that led to the collapse of Communist rule in the USSR and Eastern Europe . Although they were intended to save the Soviet system, the reforms were unleashed by the reforms . The reforms led to a collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and Russia .
 Under Boris Yeltsin, the new president of post-Communist Russia, relations with the U.S. warmed . Relations with the United States warmed, and the Cold War was declared over . Under Yeltsins, the Russians were able to find a way to avoid the Cold
 1989—like 1648, 1815, 1919, and 1945, was a watershed year in world history . 1989 was the year of the year when the U.S. entered the first World War II . The U.N. has never been seen since then .
 1989 differs in two significant ways from the other key dates in this chapter . At the same time, 1989 differs from 1989 to 1989 .
 First, 1648, 1815, 1919, and 1945 each marked the end of a major world war . First and Second World Wars ended in 1945 . First World War was the first major war to end .
 In 1989 what ended was not a traditional war but a period of tension known as the Cold War . The Cold War ended in 1989 after a decade of tension .
 While one might reasonably suggest that the Soviet Union lost the Cold War, it did not lose in the traditional military fashion, and unlike in the other cases, it didn't lose at the hands of a foreign army fighting on its territory or occupying it .
 The Post-Cold War era 57 I I NATO states I I I Warsaw Pact states . I I Other communist states O Non-aligned states I FIGURE 2. I I
 Cold War Eurasia. produced a Peace of Westphalia, a Congress of Vienna, a Treaty of Versailles, or a Yalta to provide the framework of a new system.
 Many observers say changes were providing the basis for a new era of peace and stability . Yet, changes were proceeding nonetheless, and many observers say they're proceeding nonetheless .
 The end of the Cold War was about more than ending a rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It was also about ending the rivalry with the United States .
 It also brought a change in the structure and distribution of power within the international system . The UN system is now being used to power the world's most powerful nations .
 An international system in which three or more great powers have the capability to threaten the security and sovereignty of one another . Post-Cold War Eurasia Eurasia multipolarity is multipolar .
 The combination of U.S. military, economic, political, political and cultural influence after the Cold War could not be matched by any other state . The United States is one of the world's most powerful states .
 Over time, challenges to dominant power can occur, and for realists they are predictable since other states will engage in balancing behavior . The challenges to that dominant power are predictable, realists say .
 Unipolar moments eventually end and are replaced by either a new bipolarity or an emergent multipolarity with three or more dominant powers . The unipolar moments end and become replaced by emergent multipolar moments with three dominant powers.
 The expansion of global trade and investment, and the incorporation of more and more countries into this interconnected global economic system, produced an era of unprecedented global prosperity in the 1990s .
 Global commerce and the technologies that facilitate it bring different cultures into closer contact . That interaction carries political and cultural spillover as global commerce and technologies such as the Internet .
 Some see the intersection of cultural preservation and globalization as prime areas for conflict in the twenty-first century . Others see the emergence of an increasingly homogenous and interconnected world in which war and violence in world politics will decline .
 liberal institutionalists argue that the end of the U.S.-Soviet bipolar rivalry allowed the United Nations to become a guarantor of order and security for the first time . For example, liberal institutionalist argues that end of rivalry allowed U.N. to become guarantor .
 A promising harbinger of this “new” United Nations was seen during the 1991 Persian Gulf War against Iraq . The United Nations is seen as a model for a new organization .
 UN Security Council authorized military action to remove Iraqi troops from Kuwait in 1990 . Great powers responded with one voice in authorizing military action . Saddam Hussein sent Iraqi forces to invade Kuwait in summer of 1990 .
 Liberal commercialists and liberal internationalists point to the pacifying impact of the globalization and democratization sweeping the post-Cold War world . At the same time, liberal commercialists say the impact of globalization and democracy is pacifying .
 Free market nations with growing economies and strong trade ties are more likely to feel secure and to work toward freedom . Free markets are key to growing economies with strong and open trade ties, experts say .
 democratic states are less likely to threaten our interests and more likely to cooperate with the U.S. democratic states will cooperate with us to meet security threats and promote free trade and sustainable development, the authors say .
 The U.S. needs to be engaged in the world and expand the community of secure, free market and democratic nations . These goals are supported by ensuring America remains engaged, says President Obama .
 In short, liberals argued that all three points of the Kantian triangle were converging in the direction of peace and creating a world that realists could no longer fully explain . Realists could not fully explain the world, they argued .
 The end of the Cold War emboldened liberals, it also encouraged the emergence of constructivism as a credible challenger to realist orthodoxy and to liberalism’s status as the primary alternative .
 Constructivists argued that the end of the Cold War rivalry between the United States and the USSR preceded Soviet democratization and integration into the global economy . The book ends in Chapter 1 .
 The changes occurred without any significant prior reform of the UN or other international institutions, they argued .
 The improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations in the late 1980s and 1990s did not depend on structural change in the international system or the Soviet regime, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the improvement in relations with the Soviet Union was not structural change .
 Constructivists would say the diffusion of new ways of thinking about international relations depended on diffusion of ideas that influenced the policies of key actors .
 For them, the ‘changes’ characterizing the post-Cold War world are not so significant, they say . For them they say, the "changes" are not significant .
 The post-Cold War era ended abruptly on the morning of September 11, 2001 . 9/11 marked the end of the Cold War era and the beginning of a new era .
 19 suicide terrorists hijacked airplanes in the United States and flew two of them into the twin towers of the World Trade Center complex in lower Manhattan . 19 suicide bombers hijacked planes in the U.S. on September 11, 2001 .
 A fourth plane crashed into a field in rural Pennsylvania following a struggle between the hijackers and passengers . The plane was apparently headed for the U.S. Capitol or the White House .
 Terrorist attacks brought to a sudden halt the post-Cold War optimism about a peaceful world bound together by democracy and markets . Terrorists attacked the U.S. during the 9/11 terrorist attacks .
 The post-9/11 foreign policy of President George W Bush’s administration clearly reflected this change in attitude . The post 9/11 policy of the Bush administration reflected that change .
 U.S. neoconservatives argued that democracy had to be exported by military means . Instead of assuming that democratization was automatically leading to global peace, they argued that it was necessary to export democracy .
 Without waiting for approval from the UN Security Council, the U.S. initiated a war against Iraq in 2003 . The United States initiated the war without waiting for UN approval . The U.N. Security Council approved the war in 2003, but the United States did not have to wait
 Under international law, initiating a war does not necessarily constitute illegal aggression . Initiating a war is not necessarily illegal aggression, under international law .
 A preventive war is one in which a nation strikes first, not in response to an imminent military threat to vital interests . It is a concern about a longterm shift in the balance of power that might prove detrimental to its interests down the road . In contrast to a preventive war, a
 A hypothetical example would be a U.S. strike against Chinese military bases intended not to prevent an imminent Chinese attack, but to stop China from closing the military gap with the United States . A strike would be aimed at stopping China closing the gap between the two countries .
 Under international law such a preventive war would normally be considered illegal . The temptation to deal with a potential problem sooner rather than later might be understandable, but under international law it would be illegal .
 In discussing the Iraq war, the Bush administration was always careful to describe it as preemptive . The Bush administration described it as "preventive" and "preparatory"
 The 2002 U.S. National Security Strategy was notable for its emphasis on the right to act unilaterally and preemptively if necessary to forestall another 9/11 type of attack on United States soil .
 The document suggested that the distinction between preemptive and preventive war was becoming increasingly fuzzy . The combination of weapons of mass destruction and international terrorism made the threat to U.S. vital interests permanently imminent, it said .
 Critics argued that this new formulation made it too easy for the U.S. to justify making a first strike .
 9/11 symbolized more deeprooted changes in the international system, says CNN's John Sutter . The attacks symbolized deep changes in international system .
 U.S. forces pull down a statute of Saddam Hussein from Baghdad's Firdos Square as Iraqis cheered them on . The image was one of the most famously symbolic images from the Iraq war .
 Some have suggested that this was less a spontaneous outburst by Iraqis than an event staged by the U.S. military . The episode has been the source of controversy as some have suggested it was less spontaneous .
 For realists, the ‘unipolar moment’ that characterized the 1990s was assumed to be temporary . Realists say it was always assumed that the 'unipolar' moment was temporary .
 Concentration of power, most realists would predict, leads to balancing efforts by others . Concentration in power leads to balance efforts by other people, realists say . Concentrations of power will lead to more cooperation, more cooperation .
 In the late 1990s, some observers argued that such balancing efforts against the United States were not yet in evidence . A decade later, evidence of some balancing is apparent, less via a formal alliance than through largely uncoordinated efforts .
 Increases in Chinese military spending, a more assertive Russian foreign policy, Iranian efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and to arm anti-U.S. forces in Iraq, and even Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez’s anti-American policies in Latin America can all be viewed as a challenge to
 The strains of America’s continuing involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan, its dependence on foreign oil, its 2008 financial crisis, its massive budget and trade deficits, and its continued vulnerability to terrorist attacks have led many observers to suggest that United States global dominance is in decline .
 American hard power is on the wane, but soft power is also on decline, observers say . U.S. is also facing a decline in soft power, they say .
 Soft power is the ability to influence others via attraction rather than coercion . Soft power can be used to influence people via attraction, not coercion, in order to influence them .
 The United States remains the only multidimensional power with a combination of economic, military, and technological prowess that no other country can match . The U.S. is the only multi-dimensional power no other nation can match, says President Obama .
 In 2006 the United States accounted for two-thirds of great power defense expenditures, while China accounted for only 6 percent . China, America’s presumed twenty-first-century rival, accounted for 6 percent of defense expenditures .
 The U.S. economy remains the world’s largest by far, accounting for over one-quarter of global production . Likewise, the United States economy is the largest in the world by far . The United States is also the largest producer of the world's largest products .
 As for soft power, America’s potential rivals all face limits of their own . The U.S. faces limits of its own soft power .
 Europe remains politically un-unified and faces its own economic problems . Russia’s economy continues to be burdened by corruption and inefficiency . China, despite decades of spectacular growth, faces an uncertain future based on authoritarian political model .
 The history of modern international relations is often written as if Europe is the center of the universe . Europe is often seen as an important part of the history of international relations .
 There is some justification, as Europe’s leadership in the Industrial Revolution allowed it to dominate world politics in the post-1648 era . There is also some justification for Europe's leadership in Industrial Revolution allowing it to lead the world .
 Recent centuries have seen once proud civilizations colonized and dominated, sometimes very directly, by Europeans . While other civilizations have long and proud histories, including periods when such civilizations were the most advanced, Europeans have taken over .
 Before 2001, and even before 1989, change in this regard was already in evidence . Before 2001 it was not before 1989 that change was in evidence.
 Decolonization and independence followed World War II, and by shear numbers alone, the voices of those newly independent states became heard .
 This challenge to Western dominance was evidenced in the radical extreme by the events of 9/11 . This challenge was shown in the extreme extreme by 9-11, says author .
 China and India have emerged as key players in the world's economic and political power shifts . The shift in power and influence from the West to the East has been significant in recent decades .
 As the center of gravity in world politics has shifted eastward from Europe, a new cultural dimension has arisen in international relations . The center of the world politics is shifting eastward .
 If one thinks of the major conflicts, disputes, and wars that have occurred since 1648, one sees that they have centered on disputes among Western states . The major conflicts have centered around disputes between Western states, such as Spain and Italy .
 U.S.-Soviet rivalry was often characterized as an East-West conflict . The Communist doctrine of the Soviet regime was rooted in Karl Marx, a nineteenth-century German political philosopher .
 Russia, Western Europe, and the U.S. all have Christianity as their dominant religion . Russia, the nations of Western Europe and the United States all have Christian beliefs .
 Nye first coined the phrase ""soft power"" in 1990 . Nye further developed the concept in his 2004 book "soft power" in his book .
 Less than a year after the election, there was already evidence that the Obama effect was real . The Obama effect is real, and there is already evidence of it .
 The question is whether that improvement in the United States image really translates into a soft power boost for the U.S. The United States is improving its image in the world .
 Realists argue that Obama's personal popularity cannot trump the structural characteristics and conflicts of interest among states that shape international politics . Realists would be skeptical of Obama's popularity, arguing that his personal popularity can't trump those of states .
 Realists tend to view soft power less as an independent phenomenon than as a by-product of hard power . The attraction that defines soft power is rooted in hard power assets such as economic and military strength . Soft power is not independent, but it is a result of economic, military strength
 For liberals like Nye, soft power is important in its own right . Nye: "Soft power is not just about soft power, but it's important to have soft power."
 The image and reputation of a country and its leaders could either augment or diminish its ability to use hard power, experts say .
 Others will have less reason to fear the accumulation and even the use of hard power if a country and its leaders are viewed positively . Others will be less concerned about the accumulation of power if the country is viewed positively, say experts .
 Constructivists might argue that soft power is rooted in its relationship to global norms . Likewise, constructivists may argue that a country's soft power can be traced back to its relationship with the world .
 To the extent that a country adheres to soft power norms, soft power can increase, author says . "Soft power is a matter matter matter, and its legitimacy and freedom of action accumulate"
 Political democracy and free market economics have been associated with the rise and dominance of the West over the past two centuries . The relative decline of the United States and the West, in general, reopens the debate over the future of democracy .
 In one important respect, the challenge on both counts may be greater than it has been in the past . The challenge may be more difficult than it's ever been before .
 For first time since 1648, the current and emerging great powers extend beyond the European world . For the first time in history, the world's great powers now extend beyond Europe .
 The consensus for a concert in any form might be quite difficult to achieve . Thus, the consensus for such a concert may be quite impossible to achieve.
 Many dramatic events have occurred and much has changed in four centuries since the Peace of Westphalia . Much has changed world politics since the peace of Westphalalia .
 Economic development, world wars, revolutions, the collapse of empires, and the emergence of new nations, new states, new ideologies, and new forms of governance would make the world of the early twenty-first century seem a largely foreign place to a resident of 1648 Europe .
 The central question is whether those multiple efforts have changed the way the world works . "The world works. The world works," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In particular, the question is whether efforts have led to progress in creating a more peaceful and orderly world . The question is if those efforts led to the creation of a peaceful world?
 For realists, the twenty-first-century world is not essentially different from the world of 1648 . The world of the 1648 is essentially similar to that of the year 1648, according to the British historian .
 The system of sovereign states that emerged from Westphalia has remained largely intact, military power is still the main currency of international influence . Balance of power has remained the only practical approach to balance of power in the world .
 Chart indicates the war that brought one era to an end, the settlement that ended the war, and the new era in international relations history that ensued before being upset by the next war . Chart shows the wars that ended one era, the peace settlement, the end of one era and the
 The contours of the ""post-post-Goid War eia"" remain unclear . Note that the 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States and the subsequent 'J.S. war on terror have not wet produces definitive settlement .
 Idealist rhetoric after major wars promised a redesign of the international system in ways that would transcend power politics, but the performance seldom met the promise . The performance of power politics in the U.S. has never been met with real results .
 1648, 1815, 1919, and 1945 all shared an understanding that those states with the greatest power would be most essential to the postwar order, and they were accorded privileged status in the approaches to order established . Realists would note that such idealist rhetoric notwithstanding, realists
 While realists emphasize continuity, many critics of realism emphasize change . Many critics of realism emphasize continuity . Realism is a form of realism .
 In particular, they call attention to the noticeable, if gradual and still incomplete, progress in moving from a completely unmanaged and unregulated system of selfhelp to more managed approaches to international order .
 In moving from the classical balance of power system to the concert model, we have moved perceptibly, if not completely, away from Hobbesian war of all against all . The League of Nations and the UN are examples of collective security as manifested in collective security . We have moved away
 The end of the Cold War provided, in the view of many critics of realism, a historic opportunity to further a four-centuries-long process of changing how the world of international relations works .
 Whether that process of change is real and whether it is challenging realist understandings of how the world works is a story that will be examined across a range of issues in the remaining chapters of this book .
 Learn the key U terms in this chapter . You can test yourself by term or definition . Use these images to help students understand each other's words .
 Woodrow Wilson, The State, from The State , from from an excerpt in Evan Luard, Basic Texts in International Relations , 270. Woodrow . Wilson's State of the State was published in The State in 1918 .
 John Mearsheimer, “Why We Will Soon Miss the Cold War,” Atlantic Monthly, 20th edition . John Mearheimer: ‘Why We will soon miss the cold war.’
 See, for example, Jack Snyder, “One World, Rival Theories,” Foreign Policy, November/December 2004, 56, for more .
 Many believed that United States foi George W Bush as United States pre with individuals than with 1 has ,„ss do tdb r l e . e ^t^ s ^s ^ s ^ s tt 1 f^ t ^ii :si1straints P o
 Language such as “the United States did this ” or “China did that” is commonplace . Language like ‘the U.S. did this or ” ‘China did this’ is commonplace. Language such a commonplace is commonplace in the U.
 For many scholars, such language is convenient shorthand for the more complex and often invisible process of formulating a state’s foreign policy . For many, it is a convenient shorthand to describe the complex process .
 Valerie Hudson suggests a gross oversimplification that disguises the way the world works . But it can be, as Hudson suggests, that disguising the way it works, falsely conferring a coherence in policy and interest onto a state's behavior .
 For realists such as Stephen Krasner, however, such language is neither misleading nor mere shorthand . The realists are not satisfied with the use of such language, they say .
 This chapter will look more closely at the sources of state behavior in international relations and world politics . This chapter looks at the causes of international relations .
 Three most commonly considered are international system level, state level, and individual level . The three most commonly used to be international system levels are international, state and individual levels .
 Although one might not accept all these answers as equally useful in understanding and explaining U.S. policy, they are not necessarily mutually exclusive .
 Several of these answers might even be combined to get a full picture of the sources of U.S. policy .
 A useful way to think about the multitude of factors that shape a foreign policy decision such as the Iraq invasion is to categorize them at different levels of analysis . The Iraq invasion was a major decision to invade Iraq in 2003 .
 The concept of levels of analysis owes much to Kenneth Waltz’s classic 1959 book Man, the State, and 'Ward' Waltz asks the bigger question of why war, in general, is such a frequent event in international relations .
 The first image attempts to explain war as a result of characteristics that are inherent in human nature . The second image, the individual level of analysis, attempts to . explain war .
 The second image, the state or domestic level, focuses on characteristics of states . The first image focuses on the state and domestic level .
 The international system level of analysis incorporates all those explanations of war that lie in characteristics of the international system as a whole . The third image, the International system level analysis, is an analysis of the world's international system .
 Scholars have spent much time debating whether the big events that make up the daily international relations headlines are best understood as a reflection of the beliefs and personalities of individual decision-makers or the characteristics of the international system as a whole .
 Waltz’s third image of international relations places the roots of state behavior in the overall structure and characteristics of the international system . The Sources of State Behavior can be traced to the structure of the world's international system, Waltz says .
 Structural realists emphasize the international system as the most important source of state behavior . Waltz himself is generally regarded as the father of contemporary structural realism .
 They assume that a state’s foreign policy can’t be understood and even predicted without reference to the internal characteristics of that state, they say . This is the case of Russia, Ukraine, Russia and Syria .
 All one needs to know to understand state behavior is the nature of the larger international system within which individual states operate, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 For a structural realist, there are two primary characteristics of the international system that shape state behavior . The international system is one of the world's most powerful institutions .
 anarchy mandates the acquisition of military power and other forms of self-help . As discussed in Chapter 1, anarchy mandates a number of state behaviors, including acquiring military power .
 The distribution of power in the international system is constantly in flux, says Julian Zelizer . Realists say anarchy, for realists, is a constant constant, but power distribution is in flux .
 Depending on how power is distributed in the system as a whole, individual state behavior will vary accordingly . Individual state behavior varies depending on how it is distributed .
 For example, in a bipolar system like that of the Cold War era, the two major poles will be wary of one another and have an adversarial relationship regardless of internal regime type or leadership . The two poles are unavoidably wary of each other .
 If your state is one of the three main powers in a tripolar system, your key objective is to make sure you are not the ‘odd man out’ in an alliance of the other two major poles .
 The internal character of the three main states is less important than the overriding systemic logic, says the author of the book . The author says that the internal character is not important, but the systemic logic is .
 A good illustration of the changing impact of the international system on the behavior of states is the lessening of tensions that characterized U.S.-Soviet relations in the early 1970s . A good example of the change is that of U.K. relations with China in the 1970s,
 Richard Nixon established normal diplomatic relations with Communist China for the first time since the 1949 Communist seizure of power on the Chinese mainland . While negotiating arms control agreements and expanding trade with Moscow, Nixon negotiated arms control .
 Richard Nixon cut his political teeth preaching an uncompromising form of anti-Communism back in the 1950s . That Nixon would be responsible for the openings to both Beijing and Moscow might be surprising unless one takes account of the evolving international system .
 By the 1970s China was a nuclear power and though still much weaker than either the U.S. or USSR, some sensed an emerging tripolar system .
 Nixon was engaged in a predictable strategy designed to play off the other two poles against one another . In that changing international system context, Nixon's strategy was predictable . Nixon was engaging in a different strategy to deal with the other poles against each other .
 This attempt to understand individual state behavior as a function of characteristics of the international system as a whole is sometimes referred to as the billiard ball model of international relations .
 Think of the table on which a game of billiards is played as providing the basic structure for the game . Think of it as providing a basic structure to the game, the table provides the structure for it .
 The size of the table, the number of pockets, and the quality of the felt on the tabletop provide a common setting within which all the individual Balls move . The size, number and quality of felt are key to success .
 How those balls move has little to do with nre'imier qualities of the balls ytrrcy arc ail the same . Please donate to the site .
 Once someone takes a shot, what matters is the table and the interactions of the balls as they collide with one another . What matters is to determine whether the balls hit each other .
 In international relations, the billiard ball model assumes that the structure of the international system (the common table) and the external interactions of states tell the whole story .
 The billiard ball model assumes that states have interests that transcend the special interests of individuals and groups that exist within the state borders . The model is based on international system level analysis and the model of international systems .
 A state’s leaders might disagree over the extent to which any one of these elements of the national interest might be in jeopardy or how best to respond .
 International system level analysis sees international relations and foreign policy as a continuing effort on the part of state leaders to protect and promote the national interest in light of challenges posed by events and trends beyond state borders .
 The international system level of analysis tends to be most closely associated with the structural realist paradigm . Scholars working within competing paradigms also sometimes stress systemic sources of state behavior .
 Realists emphasize systemic characteristics that they emphasize will differ from those stressed by realists . However, the specific systemic characteristics of the realists will differ, they say .
 For liberals, the key systemic variables will be less international anarchy or the distribution of power among sovereign states . The existence of international institutions or the degree of economic interdependence that binds states to one another will be key .
 For liberals, the thicker the web of ties that bind people in states together, the greater the disincentive to war and conflict among the actors in the international system . The thicker the ties, the more disincentives to conflict, liberals say .
 Constructivist scholars also weigh in at the international system level . Constructivist scholar: Constructivism is a model for the future of the world .
 The difference between realists and constructivists employing systemic level analysis is, once again, related to the nature of the systemic variables that get stressed . The difference is, again, is related to how the system is stressed .
 For realists the key attribute of the international system shaping state behavior is the distribution of power, for constructivists it is the prevailing global norms . For constructivistists, this is the normality of the world's international system .
 The strong commitment to the norm of state sovereignty, for example, has for much of the history of international relations, has shaped and constrained state behavior . State sovereignty is a key part of the world's history .
 The challenge to absolute notions of sovereignty since World War II created a new global norm that affects state behavior . The rise of the idea that sovereignty can be overridden in the quest to protect human rights has created a global norm .
 The attractions of systemic level analysis are its elegance and efficiency . It is an elegant and efficient way to understand the complexity of the analysis .
 The Sources of State Behavior is a look at the history of each state, its domestic politics, or its leaders . Needed to know very much about each state's history, or politics, to understand its leaders and history .
 To understand Russian behavior in the Cold War, for example, does not require one to be a Russian expert, or have spent time in the country, or to know the language . To understand Russia's behavior in Cold War does not need to be an expert .
 Many international relations scholars say systemic level analysis is not enough to solve problems . However, in the view of many scholars, it is necessary to identify problems in international relations .
 The authors argue that there is great variation in how states respond to and operate within those systemic constraints . While it might be useful in identifying the larger systemic constraints within which individual states operate, they argue there is a great variation of how states operate .
 To understand that variation requires looking more closely at the unique characteristics of the individual states that make up the larger international system, the author says .
 The international system level tells only part of the story, many scholars say . The State Level of Analysis is a state level of analysis, not the international level .
 For a more complete view, it must be combined with factors at the domestic or state level of analysis . For a complete view of the situation, the analysis must also be considered .
 Few analysts of the 2003 U.S. decision to go to war in Iraq would fail to at least consider such issues as domestic electoral politics, public opinion, relations between Congress and the president .
 Some might argue that the idea of “democracy promotion” has a long tradition in U.S. foreign policy . That is a unique attribute of the American approach to international relations that cannot be removed from the Iraq equation .
 Some suggest that the Bush administration's tendency to see the world in terms of good versus evil is also deeply rooted in the American foreign policy tradition . Similarly, some suggest that this is also an approach that is deeply embedded in the U.S. foreign policy .
 What separates all “second image” analysis from “third image’s analysis is the insistence of the former that characteristics of individual states and their societies do shape how states will behave in the international arena .
 "One cannot, from this perspective, predict how a state will act simply from a description of the international setting within which it is operating," he says . "It is not possible to predict how much of the world will be affected by this," he adds .
 The game is now being played with different-sized balls made of a variety of materials . To return to the billiard ball metaphor, it is as if the game is playing with different sizes of balls .
 How a ball moves when struck will depend on the characteristics of the table and position of the other balls, but also on the unique attributes of the ball itself . The ball will move when struck when struck, depending on the position and characteristics of that table .
 A complete inventory of state level variables that might impact the foreign behavior of a state would be very long . State level variables would be a long list of factors that might affect foreign behavior .
 The state level variable that has received the most attention from scholars is type of government . Type of government is the most important variable in the study of state government .
 Democratic peace theory is a perfect example of state level analysis . It suggests that democracies are less war-prone (at least when it comes to fighting other democracies) than authoritarian regimes . The theory is based on state-level analysis .
 From this perspective, the Cold War has to be undersCoBWthjlibQADiEEBSoln GiEeflJoGtfitGt fitGtflection of the fact that of d|ig two noly,s wa|^ u democracy . From this
 Type of government can affect not only how a state will behave but also how effectively it conducts its foreign policy . Type of state can affect how effective it conducts foreign policy. Levels of Analysis: Government can affect type of government .
 Alexis de Tocqueville was pessimistic about the ability of a democracy to conduct an efficient foreign policy . For example, he wrote Democracy in America .
 In staking out a public position in an international crisis, leaders of democratic states cannot easily back down . They face potential backlash from their citizens at home, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "Democrat leaders are not making hollow threats and will be forced to take the public position of democratic states more seriously," says Putin . Putin: "Democracy is not hollow threats. It is a matter of national sovereignty"
 For some scholars of international relations, a state’s economic system can have an even more significant impact on its behavior than type of political system . For example, the economic system of a state can influence its behavior, experts say .
 Marxist analyses of world affairs have traditionally argued that capitalist economies must seek markets abroad in order to deal with domestic crises of overproduction . For example, Marxist analyses have argued that . capitalist economies need to seek markets overseas to cope with domestic overproduction crises .
 That economic imperative requires imperialist foreign policies in which states assert their power to ensure continued access to the markets, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 In turn, those policies can lead to conflict with other imperialist states and, ultimately, are a major source of war . Those policies can also lead to conflicts with other countries, such as Russia .
 Gorbachev’s efforts to improve relations with the U.S. in the 1980s were driven in large part by the weakness of the Soviet economy . The Cold War was driven in part by a weakened economy in the Soviet Union, according to most accounts .
 By the 1980s the Soviet economy could barely provide the necessities of life for its citizens, let alone continue to keep pace in the arms race with a technologically superior U.S. The Soviet economy was barely able to provide basic food and shelter .
 Some observers argue that national styles in international affairs stem from differences in geography and historical experience . Others argue that differences in national styles stem from geography and history .
 Russia and the U.S. have very different approaches to international affairs . For example, the geography and history of Russia differ from those of the United States .
 Russia is located in the Eurasian heartland, borders on multiple real and potential adversaries, and has a history of conflict across those borders . Russia has history of warring neighbors, including Russia and Ukraine .
 The United States is protected by two oceans with relatively weak neighbors to its north and south . It has not fought interstate war on its soil since 1812 . The U.S. is protected from interstate war .
 Russian policy reflects a more insecure, pessimistic, and “realist” view of the world compared with the more secure, optimistic, and "idealist” worldview reflected in much of U.S. policy . As a result, some suggest, some say, Russian policy
 Samuel Huntington argues that states in the twenty-first century will be increasingly guided by considerations of cultural difference and affinity . The clash of civilizations thesis is the result of a clash of civilization thesis .
 The Sources of State Behavior 75 through one’s domestic cultural filter . The sources of state behavior are based on one of the country's domestic cultural filters . The Source of State Behaviour 75 is based on the sources of State behavior .
 Arms accumulated by another state might appear more or less threatening, depending on whether that state shares membership with you in a common civilization . The arms accumulated by a state might look more or more threatening depending on the state's membership .
 Huntington: Long-term economic cooperation and integration among states will depend on cultural affinity . He says cultural affinity is key to economic cooperation . Huntington: Economic cooperation will be predicated on cultural ties .
 The four state level variables noted above largely describe long-term attributes of individual states . Short-term domestic factors also help determine how a state will respond to a foreign policy challenge .
 The relative power of domestic interest groups with a stake in a foreign policy decision is a factor in foreign policy decisions .
 The U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam in the 1970s would be complete without taking into account the shift in public opinion against the war . For example, no analysis of the withdrawal from the Vietnam withdrawal would be incomplete without taking account of the shift .
 The initial decision to invade Iraq in 2003 and the later pressure to find an exit strategy both have to be analyzed against the backdrop of changes in the public mood . Similarly, the decision to find a way out of the Iraq war has also been analyzed in Iraq .
 The state level of analysis is compatible with most of the international relations paradigms . As we saw to be the case with the international system, so too is the state level analysis of analysis . The analysis of international relations in the U.S. has been compatible with international system level
 The purple ink-stained finger on this Iraqi citizen signifies that she has cast her ballot . Iraqi citizens can now cast their ballots in Iraq's capital, Baghdad .
 Democratic peace theory predictsthat a more democratic Iraq wLILhe,a-raqre peaceful Iraq, less-inclined to act aggressively toward its rielghbdrsJ— dspecally iRueCcssful Iraqi democratization leads to the spiead
 The liberal Kantian triangle is a way of thinking about world politics that explicitly incorporates both state and systemic factors . The triangle is based on the Kantian theory of the state, systemic factors, rather than the state .
 Constructivists can interpret state behavior as reflective of global, systemwide norms or as shaped by the socially constructed norms and identities at the individual state level .
 The one paradigm that is intrinsically most resistant to state level analysis is structural realism, which at its core is an international system level perspective on how the world works . Structural realism is a system-level view of the world, rather than a state level perspective .
 Structural realists have emphasized how international system constrains and determines what individual states do . Unlike classical realists, structural realists focused a lot of their attention on the individual state and its attributes .
 In general, state level analysis is more complex than system level analysis . State level analysis can be complex, and system analysis is complex .
 Each state’s actions must be examined in the context of the attributes unique to that state . Instead of looking to explain state behavior by virtue of the . attributes of the international system as a whole, each state's actions should be examined for its own reasons .
 The impact of individual decision-makers is still left out of the equation . But even that added level of detail and complexity still leaves another source of state behavior outside of that equation .
 Neither the international system nor the state levels of analysis assign much significance to the role of individuals in world politics . The individual level of analysis is less important than the international level .
 Voters take the time and expend the effort to cast ballots for individual leaders . They assume that the outcome of the election will have an impact on the country’s foreign policy .
 In casting their ballots, those voters are implicitly accepting the great man theory of history, which suggests that the course of human history is determined by the beliefs and character of individuals who rise to positions of influence .
 From this perspective, the history of the twentieth century would have unfolded very differently had such individuals as Lenin, Stalin, Roosevelt, Hitler, Churchill, Mao, Gorbachev, and Reagan not been born . The world's history has been very different since the birth of the first World War
 Many might argue that the early history of the twenty-first century would not have been the same had Osama bin Laden been killed in the 1980s by the Russian forces he was fighting in Afghanistan or if a few hundred votes shifted from Bush to Gore in the 2000 presidential election .
 For better or worse, the U.S. might not have invaded Iraq in 2003 had Gore been certified as the winner in 2000 . Gore was certified as a winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998 .
 John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt published their controversial article ""The Israel Lobby" which they expanded into a book published the following year . Realism and the Levels of Analysis are the levels of analysis .
 American foreign policy in the Middle East has been at odds with vital U.S. strategic interests in the region, authors say . Their thesis is that American foreign policies in the Mideast have been in conflict with vital American strategic interests there .
 They blame the disconnect between U.S. policy and the national interest on the influence of a diffuse but powerful Israel lobby . Israel lobby is more concerned with protecting Israel than in asserting what is best for the United States, they say .
 Two prominent realist scholars wrote the article and book . From the point of view of international relations theory, the most interesting thing about the article is that they were written by prominent scholars .
 Mearsheimer's 2001 book The Tragedy of Creat Power Politics is a classic of recent neorealist thinking . States consistently and predictably act to promote their national interests in response to the larger international context .
 The book focuses on the international system level and treats states as unitary actors that apply rational decision-making strategies . Thus, the book focuses .
 Israel lobby thesis is focused on the impact of domestic politics . However, the Israel lobby has focused on domestic politics. Israel lobby says the Israeli government is not interested in foreign policy .
 Most realist scholars, though emphasizing the international system level, would acknowledge some role for domestic factors . Of course, most realist . scholars would say some role . for domestic . factors .
 Mearsheimer and Walt say domestic factors are virtually the entire story of U.S. Middle East policy . However, for Mearsheim and Walt, domestic factors have to be considered a factor .
 If one thinks of realism as a prescription for how states should behave, Mearsheimer and Walt's criticism of U.S. policy is realist in character, Walt says .
 Most realists argue that the power and appeal of the realist paradigm is that it describes and predicts how states actually do behave . However, most realist argue that this is not the case, but it is the case that states actually behave differently .
 The focus on the Israel lobby as the key driving force in U.S. policy seems a decidedly nonrealist analysis . If one thinks of realism this way, then the focus on Israel lobby seems nonrealistic .
 Waltz was most interested in examining the common qualities that human beings possess as a species . He asked whether humans have an innate instinct for violence and warfare . Waltz: "Humanity has a common sense of empathy"
 CNN.com: Variations can be related to substantive beliefs and to aspects of individual personality and character . CNN iReport: Are you a good person? Share your own story with us at iReport .
 A belief system refers to the set of substantive values and understandings of the world that an individual holds . Belief systems are based on the beliefs and values of an individual's beliefs .
 We often think first of the qualities of leaders that have an impact on foreign policy, we often think of their substantive beliefs and ideas about the world . When we consider a leader that has impact on a country’s foreign policy we should think of his substantive beliefs .
 Differences in belief systems may manifest themselves in positions on foreign policy challenges . At the narrowest level, differences may manifest as to positions on specific foreign policy .
 At a higher level of generalization and sophistication, other sets of questions might be relevant . At higher levels of sophistication, questions might also be relevant.
 Knowing where a potential leader stands on these kinds of questions can help us anticipate how a leader will act in future situations . Knowing a leader's stance on these types of questions helps us anticipate future leaders' actions .
 At the most sophisticated and highly integrated level of belief systems is ideology, ideology is ideology . Ideology is a form of belief system that is highly integrated into belief systems, says the author .
 An ideology is an integrated set of assumptions and understandings about how the social, political, and economic world both is and should be structured and organized . An ideology can be defined as how the world is organized and how it should be organized .
 A leader who subscribes to Marxist ideology will have a very different understanding of the world than will a fundamentalist Muslim theocrat . A Marxist theocrat will have an entirely different view of world than a fundamentalist theocrat, he says .
 One atheist sees world politics driven by conflict among economic interests . The other is guided by the Qur’an and sees political leadership as an opportunity to act on religious values .
 The ideological differences would presumably affect a state’s view of whom its friends and foes are in the world, and the nature of the challenges and threats it faces . Those ideological differences might affect the instruments it might use in response to those threats .
 State behavior in the world can also be affected by the operational codes of those in power . State behavior is also affected by operational codes, according to the world's most powerful .
 It has more to do with the person’s general philosophical predispositions to politics than politics . Instead, it has more than do with their philosophical predisposition to politics, he says .
 Leaders differ as to whether they believe human beings are inherently good or evil . Leaders might differ on whether politics is more conflictual or cooperative, or whether the behavior of others is predictable .
 Many scholars argue that personality attributes can also shape policy decisions . Personality attributes can shape policymaking decisions, they say .
 temperament, by temperament, pragmatic or dogmatic, authoritarian or democratic, impulsive or deliberative, cautious or risk-taking can have as great an impact on that individual’s policy as his or her substantive beliefs . temperament can have a great impact on policy as well as substantive
 One scholar who has devoted much of her career to examining the impact of leadefjiQWMt}Qt6tjB&Eion po k/ isBihr^ater Qermannn. One scholar has devoted a life-long career to studying the
 Responsiveness to constraints has to do with the extent to which a leader perceives external circumstances to limit his or her freedom of action . Responsiveness is a leader's ability to respond to external circumstances, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Openness to information has to do with the extent of which a leader seeks and is receptive to information contrary to his or her preconceived policy views . Leaders should be more open to information that contradicts their preconceived policies, experts say .
 Crusaders are the least sensitive to the context in which they operate . Crusaders should be more sensitive to context of their operations, says Terence Moore .
 They have a clear goal or purpose and do not let external constraints or contrary information deter them from meeting their objective . They have to meet their objective and not be deterred from meeting it .
 Depending on one’s perspective, it can appear to be admirably bold or dangerously impetuous . Depending on the perspective, they can appear either the bold or impulsive .
 At the other extreme, opportunists are the most sensitive to constraints and contrary information . At the end of the spectrum, opportunisticists are sensitive to the constraints of the government .
 Strategists and pragmatists are also constrained by their environment more than crusaders, but in different ways . Strategists are constrained more by environment more by pragmatism, but not crusaders . They are constrained by environment, but different ways, say experts .
 Levels of Analysis Strategists have clear goals that they consistently seek to promote, but seek information about how best to attain them . Strategists often seek to find the best way to achieve their goals . Levels of analysis Strategists seek to achieve the goals of analysis .
 To outsiders, they can seem unpredictable as they adjust their tactics in response to new information . The U.S. military is known to be unpredictable and unpredictable .
 Pragmatists see themselves as highly limited in what they can achieve by external constraints . They say they are limited to what can be achieved by outside constraints . Pragmaticists say they can only achieve what they want .
 They have goals, but are willing to compromise if the context is not right . They have been in the process of trying to get the best out of a tough situation .
 Hermann herself suggested that President Clinton showed respect for constraints and openness to information, placing him also in the opportunist camp . Hermann: President Clinton also showed respect and openness .
 Obama’s emphasis during his campaign on making his cabinet a ‘team of rivals’ suggested openness to information of diverse types . Depending on his relative level of respect for external constraints, Obama could be seen as a strategist or opportunist .
 Hermann’s typology is only one of many attempts by scholars to link the personality attributes of leaders with their public policy performance . Hermann's typology was one of several attempts to link personality attributes with public policy outcomes .
 The application of any of these typologies to specific leaders is bound to be controversial and spark debate . It is bound for debate, but it's bound to spark debate over whether it should be applied .
 The larger question is whether the beliefs and personality attributes of individuals make a difference in world politics, given the international system and state level factors also driving and constraining foreign policy .
 Structural realists, along with many liberals, are dubious, as they emphasize the constraints imposed on leaders by the international system . Many liberals are dubious about the constraints on leaders .
 Hermann and others operating at the individual level of analysis suggest that individuals do make a difference . Hermann: "Individuals make the difference"
 How much of difference they make depends on the specific conditions present in a given situation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Journalist and author Thomas Friedman argues that globalization has created the phenomenon of the super-empowered individual . Friedman: Someone who can arm himor herself with the most advanced digital communications technologies of the twenty-first century .
 Some of these “super-empowered angry men” are “angry men’s” who also have the ability to do great harm to states and people around the world . Friedman suggests that some of these individuals are super-empowered angry men .
 In response to the 1998 terrorist bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa, the Clinton administration ordered cruise missile attacks in Afghanistan aimed at taking out a super-empowered man by the name Osama bin Laden .
 The “levels of analysis’s analysis” question is concerned with where the key inputs or variables shaping foreign policy are located . Foreign Policy Decision-Making is the ultimate analysis of foreign policy decisions .
 What remains to be examined is how decision-makers take those inputs and transform them into the actions and behaviors that constitute foreign policy .
 The U.S. response to Iraq’s 1990 invasion of Kuwait was similar to that of the 1990s . Iraq has been criticized for its response to the invasion of Iraq .
 No one, not even a scholar, would be so naive as to suggest that the Iraqi action automatically triggered the U.S. response .
 The U.S. government is not a giant computer preprogrammed to respond automatically to certain inputs from the international system . The United States government will not be able to respond to the input of the U.N. system, a spokesman says .
 The United States government is a collection of individuals and organizations that have to take those inputs, discuss them, and process them into foreign policies . The U.S. government, like states and their governments generally, is not a government .
 Following Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, individuals in the United States government engaged in countless meetings, discussions, and debates over the proper response to the invasion .
 In the course of those meetings and discussions, a variety of international and domestic factors were to one degree or another entered into the analysis . The analysis was filtered through the ideological and personality attributes of each person involved in those discussions .
 U.S.-led and UN-sanctioned military intervention, known in the United States as Operation Desert Storm, forced Iraq out of Kuwait . Somehow, from this process came a foreign policy output .
 Scholars differ on how this decision-making process works . Scholars differ, however, in their view of exactly how it works .
 The key divide is between those who see foreign policy outcomes resulting from a rational actor model of decision-making . Those who think foreign policy emanating from a more complex and pluralistic bureaucratic politics model see it differently .
 Iraqi military forces invaded Kuwait in 1990 . Iraqi forces invaded the neighboring kingdom of Kuwait . The Rational Actor Model is based on the model of a rational actor .
 Within a matter of days, what little resistance the Kuwaiti military could manage was effectively crushed, and Iraq was in unchallenged control . Iraq's invasion of Kuwaiti territory was effectively wiped out of Kuwait .
 Key U.S. foreign policy-makers held meetings, reviewed the intelligence, consulted with one another and with United States allies around the world . The president, the secretaries of state and defense, the national security advisor, and a host of additional civilian, military, and intelligence officials held
 Operation Desert Storm, January 1991, is the name of the operation involved in Iraq's invasion of Kuwait . The operation was part of the 'Operation Desert Storm' in which Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1991 .
 View of foreign policy decision-making assumes policymakers have a shared sense of the national interest, which they seek to attain via a rational process of finding the most efficient means to achieve those ends . View of Operation Desert Storm rational actor model: Policymakers considered what the range of possible policy responses
 After a brief attempt to force Iraq out of Kuwait through diplomatic pressure combined with economic sanctions, U.S. officials concluded that military force was required . The United States decided to use military force against Iraq .
 Operation Desert Storm was launched on January 17, 1991, with UN Security Council approval . The U.S. led a coalition of countries led by the United States initiated the operation . Desert Storm is the first Gulf War of the Cold War .
 Through a combination of air strikes followed by a ground invasion, Iraq was forced out of Kuwait . The Iraqi government was forced to withdraw from Kuwait .
 Bush ordered a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf War and declared that Kuwait had been successfully liberated . Bush declared the war had been over successfully .
 The U.S. response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait is based on a rational actor model of foreign policy decision-making . This very brief description of the United States response is based, at least implicitly, on an irrational actor model .
 After weighing the costs and benefits of each of those options, one chooses and implements the option that allows one to achieve one’s goals or meet the challenge at the lowest cost . After carefully weighing each of the options, each of them is the best .
 This rational actor model can be applied to understanding of decisionmaking in any realm, from foreign policy to personal matters like the college that you attend .
 At least at a general level, decision-makers share a common understanding of the national interest . Decision-makers are motivated and united primarily by the effort to protect and promote those national interests .
 A powerful national leader will often serve as the custodian of that national interest, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "A powerful leader is often seen as a custodian" of that interest .
 Key foreign policy decisionmakers will collectively and systematically canvass the range of alternative policy choices from which they might choose . They will ultimately settle on the choice that will most effectively and efficiently promote national interests .
 Once a policy choice is made, it will be implemented more or less as decision-makers had intended . Decision-makers will have to make a decision to implement the policy, say experts .
 This point assumes a unity of purpose between those who define policy and the individuals and agencies that must carry it out .
 Note that the model does not assume total agreement among the participants in this process every step of the way . The model is based on the fact that the participants are not always in agreement .
 The rational actor model has room for disagreeing over how much of a threat was posed by the Kuwait invasion . The model is open to debate over whether or not the invasion posed a threat to Kuwait .
 In the days following the Kuwait invasion, some U.S. officials argued that the United States could live with the loss of Kuwaiti sovereignty . The United States bought Kuwaiti oil from Saddam Hussein or from the Kuwaiti monarchy .
 The model can accommodate honest disagreements over the costs and benefits of the various policy responses considered . It can also accommodate discussions over the benefits and costs of each policy response .
 In the Kuwait case, the chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Colin Powell, advocated the use of economic sanctions as the best response . Others, including President Bush, had already concluded that sanctions would not work and that a military response was necessary .
 The model also does not assume that the policy ultimately chosen will prove to be the wisest and best of the available choices . The model is based on the fact that the policies ultimately chosen are the best of all available options .
 After the 1991 Persian Gulf War, some critics of the Bush administration argued that the cease-fire was declared too soon . toppling Saddam Hussein should have been the ultimate goal .
 Some within the administration had debated and disagreed over exactly this question .
 The rational actor model assumes that participants share and are motivated in their deliberations by an overriding commitment to promoting the national interest . However, while allowing for disagreements among policy-makers in all these areas, the model assumes there are disagreements .
 The model sees states as unitary actors that speak with one voice in defense of the national interest . At bottom, the model sees state's sovereignty as a unitary actor .
 Levels of analysis of foreign policy behaviors to the underlying and less transparent motives behind them . Levels of Analysis of Foreign Policy behaviors to reveal the underlying motives behind some of the nation's foreign policy actions .
 Efforts to explain why Iran is pursuing nuclear weapons or why China conducted a test of an antisatellite weapon often implicitly assume a national interest goal and strategy .
 Most lay observers intuitively interpret foreign policy in rational actor terms . If this entire description of the rational actor model seems little more than common sense, that reflects the fact that most lay observers understand foreign policy .
 Initial Iraqi invasion of Kuwait must have been driven by some overriding Iraqi national interest . So the initial Iraqi invasion was driven by an overriding national interest. So the invasion must have had to be driven by the Iraqi national interests .
 Saddam Hussein and his top advisors first discussed the costs and benefits of an invasion before deciding on a course of action . Saddam Hussein's top advisors are believed to have discussed a number of other options .
 To suggest that Saddam Hussein was a rational actor does not mean that one shares or endorses his goals or methods . It simply suggests that Iraqi foreign policy resulted from a “rational” process .
 Critics of the rational actor model argue that it presents an oversimplified and idealized image of how decision-makers act and that it is rarely achieved in practice .
 The human beings involved in making foreign policy decisions cannot and do not achieve the level of comprehensive rationality implied in the model . The model is based on the fact that the world's foreign policy is irrational .
 Goals and interests are often vague and poorly defined, and, many cases, people hold contradictory objectives . People often hold contradictory goals and interests, and often have conflicting objectives . Goals are vague, poorly defined .
 The ability of human beings to canvass, evaluate, and predict the consequences of all the policy alternatives available will be limited . Similarly, the ability of humans to assess, evaluate and predict, and to predict, is limited, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Information is usually endless, time is frequently short, and time is often short . The intellectual capability of human beings to process all the available information is finite . Information is often endless .
 Foreign policy-makers often opt for satisficing—or settling for a more limited set of national objectives . Thus, rather than pushing to maximize their national interest goals, foreign policy makers often opt to satisfice .
 Decision-makers often take intellectual shortcuts to simplify their job, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "In the process, decision makers often take shortcuts to simplify their job"
 Critics of U.S. intervention abroad have, since the 1970s, referred with similar frequency to the lessons of Vietnam . Likewise, critics of United States intervention abroad often refer to Vietnam .
 The context and details in two seemingly similar events will often vary widely . While the “lessons of history” can often be useful, they can also be misleading as the context of these events will vary widely.
 Poliheuristic theory suggests that decision-making is a two-stage process . Another short cut is described by poliheurgeur theory, which suggests that decisions are two stages .
 Decision-makers take a quick, first cut at eliminating any option that seems to impose unacceptable . A detailed, rational remaining, more limited set of options is a detailed and rational remaining set of .
 Political scientist Bruce Bueno de Mesquita reached a conclusion about how best to get North Korean dictator Kim Jong II to stop developing nuclear weapons in 2004 .
 The theory of rational choice assumes that human beings are rational, and that they are rational . Like the rational actor model discussed in this chapter, the model assumes that rational choice is rational .
 It assumes that people have interests and that they act in accordance with those interests in choosing the course of action that they take . That is, according to the law .
 For rational choice theorists the interests sought are not ""national interests" but individual interests of the key actors involved in making foreign policy decisions . The interest sought is not national interests, but individuals' individual interests .
 Kim Jong II was the key actor with preponderant (though not exclusive) influence over North Korean policy . His interests and preferences were key in the North Korean case .
 Kim's main concern (like that of most political leaders) was remaining in power . Kim's most important concern was to remain in power, he says .
 There was a possibility of stopping the North Korean nuclear program if it was linked to guarantees of Kim's political survival . So there was possible of stopping North Korea's nukes if it were linked to guarantee of his political survival, he says .
 Whether Western countries would want to accept any deal that kept the ruthless Kim in power raises moral questions as well . Of course, whether Western countries . would want any deal to keep the ruthless dictator in power?
 The larger point underlying the rational choice approach is that we can better understand the actions of states if we think of them in relation to the interests of the key players responsible for formulating policy . But the larger point is that the larger issue is that states must be careful to consider the interests
 The rational actor model assumes that decision-makers have a clear understanding of their own interests as well as the interests and motives of their adversaries . Decision-makers should be able to understand their interests and those of their enemies .
 It assumes that they accurately perceive and understand the objective facts and information shaping the situation they are facing . It also assumes .
 Political scientist Robert Jervis listed more than a dozen common misperceptions that tend to color the decision-making process . Levels of Analysis political scientist lists 12 common misconceptions .
 Such misperceptions reflect the limits of human rationality in the face of complex situations, says the author of the book . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a London-based author of a book about the world's most recent history .
 Misperceptions often result from the need to take cognitive shortcuts necessary to make decisionmaking more efficient . Like the satisficing behavior noted previously, these misperceptions result from taking cognitive shortcuts .
 Fitting new information into preexisting theories and images of the world avoids the need to start analysis from square one every time a decision has to be made . Thus, fitting new ideas into pree-existing theories avoids a need to re-examine existing theories .
 The tendency to engage in worst-case analysis and exaggerate the hostile intentions of one’s adversary in the face of complex, incomplete, or contradictory information is often seen as both an easier and safer way to proceed .
 One special problem that has been shown to limit the ability of decision-makers to maximize the national interest is the phenomenon of groupthink . Groupthink is a problem that limits decision-making ability to maximize national interest .
 Groupthink refers to the tendency most often found in small, cohesive groups operating under conditions of stress . Groupthink is common in foreign policy decision-making .
 Scholars have argued that groupthink often leads to faulty decisions that harm those outside the group as well as the larger interests of the group itself . Scholars say groupthink is often harmful to those outside of a group .
 Criticism of the policy challenges the wisdom and solidarity of the group . It can also lead to the perpetuation of a misguided policy, it can also be perpetuated, it says .
 Even if one could achieve perfect rationality on the individual level, states will still be composed of a myriad of people and organizations, and they will not all see things the same way . Thus, even if one can achieve perfect rational thinking, states still will not be rational .
 The differences reflect the fact that many players in the foreign policy process bring a diverse set of individual and organizational interests to the table, the author says .
 It is on the assumption that the bureaucratic politics model of foreign policy decision-making rests . It is based on this assumption .
 Foreign Policy Decision-Making surprise and concern bordering panic bordering on panic . Foreign Policy decision-making surprise and panic bordering upon panic .
 Sputnik suggested a capacity to deliver atomic warheads from space . The USSR already had the atomic bomb, and Sputik now suggested a space delivery capability .
 Many believed that the United States was losing the space race . President Dwight Eisenhower did not share this sense of panic . The United States still far ahead in most significant civilian and military technologies .
 The United States sped up the schedule to test its own satellite via a Vanguard rocket . In response to Sputnik, the U.S. sped up its own test program .
 On December 6, 1957, as many Americans watched on live TV, the Vanguard rocket exploded in a cloud of smoke and fire . The Vanguard rocket rose a few feet into the air before collapsing back down onto the launch pad and exploding .
 It was both a technological and a political defeat . It added to the growing sense in the United States that the country was losing the space race . The loss of the U.S. space race adds to a growing sense of a sense of loss .
 Soviet officials offered to provide the United States with aid typically reserved for developing nations . Soviet officials at the U.N. offered to give the United Kingdom aid .
 Even the most sanguine observers recognized that the Vanguard failure was, at the very least, a public relations disaster for the U.S. The failure of the Vanguard failed to be a major embarrassment for the country .
 Test of the United States Navy's Vanguard rocket fails in a fiery explosion on December 6, 1957 . It would be the first test of the Vanguard rocket .
 The U.S. Army and Navy have a rivalry over which branch of the service would take the lead in developing space for military purposes . The answer may be found in the interservice rivalry between the two sides .
 The Vanguard, as one might guess, happened to be a Navy rocket . The failed test seemed to provide an opening for the Army . The test was the first of its kind .
 This story of the Vanguard rocket and the interservice rivalry that surrounded its development is one illustration of the bureaucratic politics model of foreign policy decision-making .
 The bureaucratic politics model rests on four key assumptions regarding the policy-making process . The model is based on four assumptions about the policy making process .
 It involves a tug of war or a “pulling and hauling” among a multiplicity of individual and institutional actors who play a role in formulating foreign policy . The U.S. has been in the throes of a "pulling, hauling" of
 Although certain leaders (e.g., presidents, prime ministers) might have ultimate responsibility for policy, they do not and cannot completely shape and control the decision-making process . President, prime minister and other leaders do not have ultimate control of policy decisions .
 Each participant brings to the table a set of interests and perspectives shaped by the role he or she fills . While at a general level, all players might have a sense of shared national interest .
 If policy-making is a social process involving competing interests and perspectives, it follows that the policies adopted and foreign policy behaviors that result are often compromises among those competing interests .
 One cannot always work back from policies adopted to a clear sense of unitary state motives and intentions . Thus, it is not necessarily the case that ‘important events have important causes,” says the author .
 Some players involved in formulating policy do not get all they want . They still may have opportunities to influence policy at the implementation stage .
 The losers in the policy debate might, in part, still get their way . By dragging their feet, following the letter but not the spirit of the policy, or simply failing to follow through with policy implementation, the losers may still be winning their way.
 The bureaucratic politics model sees foreign policy as a two-dimensional game of politics, influence, and negotiation in which the course of world politics is shaped by the interactions occurring at two levels . The bureaucracy politics model is based on the two levels of interaction .
 Rational Actor Versus Bureaucratic Politics Models . Key Actors Unitary states Multiple foreign policy bureaucracies . Policy Objectives Promote national interests and promote national and bureaucratic interests .
 Internal struggle for influence and power is driven by differences of interest, role and mission, and organizational process . That internal struggle for power can be driven by different interests, roles, and process .
 Differences in perspective apparent among the actors who formulate foreign policy derive from differences in interests . At the crudest level, the differences in perspective are due to differences in interest .
 Those interests are related to questions of institutional prestige, budgets, and power . Those interests include questions of power, prestige and prestige .
 The U.S. Army general wanted to grab control of the satellite program from the United States Navy . The general was motivated by a combination of all those selfish institutional considerations .
 A successful Vanguard rocket test would have meant more money to the Navy and less for the Army . A successful launch would have seen more money for the Navy .
 The race to space in the 1950s was a high-visibility endeavor . Perhaps even more important, the space race was a highly-visited endeavor .
 Whichever branch of the military service came out on top in this race would bask in considerable attention .
 Reduction of foreign policy disputes merely to clashes over money and power can be overly simplistic and cynical . It misses much of what motivates some of the actors involved in the process, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In many cases, the actors bring genuine differences in judgment about how best to define and promote the national interest . Each perceives it through the lens of his or her particular bureaucratic role and mission .
 The concept of a bureaucratic role refers to the responsibilities associated with a particular job or position . Bureaucratic Roles and Missions are defined by the responsibilities of a job or job .
 While each individual brings different qualities and approaches to any given job, the job itself can shape and constrain the perspective and behavior of the individual who holds it .
 i ctofi MvOkfeUan formulating policy. Likewise, the larger mission of the particular bureaucratic agency within which one works can be found out .
 In the early 1980s, during the Reagan administration, the Soviet Union was constructing a 3,000-mile pipeline through which natural gas would be exported to Western Europe .
 At the time, United States Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger and U.S. Secretary of State A1 Haig advocated different approaches toward their European allies .
 Each held a deeply ingrained suspicion of the Soviet Union and its motives . Although both worried about Western Europe becoming dependent on the USSR for energy, they disagreed on how to handle this issue .
 Weinberger advocated economic sanctions against Western Europe if it went ahead with the pipeline deal . Haig advocated more subtle diplomacy, fearing the consequences of economic sanctions on NATO .
 This difference in approach can be at least partly explained through differences in bureaucratic roles . This is partly explained by differences in the roles of bureaucratic roles, such as the role of government officials .
 Haig, not Weinberger, had primary responsibility for maintaining good diplomatic relations with U.S. allies . As secretary of state, Haig had responsibility for keeping diplomatic relations in good relations with allies .
 Haig’s perspective was bound to differ from that of his counterpart at Defense . Since economic sanctions would surely complicate those relations, Haig's view was bound for that of the Defense Secretary .
 Differences in bureaucratic perspectives are also a function of differences in organizational process . Organizational Processes are important in the world of bureaucracy .
 Over time, bureaucracies, like individuals, develop differences in their routines or procedures . Over time bureaucracies develop different routines or standard operating procedures, like those of individuals .
 Those standard operating procedures emerge in response to prior experiences in dealing with like situations, such as dealing with such situations, are common in the U.S. State Department of Justice .
 They can be a source of comfort in responding to complex situations, and they can be efficient insofar as they avoid the need to reinvent the wheel every time a new situation develops . They can also be an efficient way of dealing with complex situations .
 They can be a source of rigidity in dealing with unique circumstances . However, they can also be source of . rigidity, they say .
 John F Kennedy’s response to the discovery of Soviet offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba was to order a naval blockade of the island .
 Kennedy and McNamara were concerned with how the U.S. Navy would respond if Soviet ships tested the blockade . The blockade was designed to avoid a potential third world war with the USSR .
 The tension between McNamara and Anderson was over the implementation of this policy . McNamara: "The tension between the two was over this policy"
 How this blockade was implemented was noi merely a technical, administrative matter; it was potentially a) f or ge^e begveen the two great powers of the day . Yet how this blockade implemented was not merely a . technical, but potentially a . potentially a.) f or
 In the view of many scholars of international relations and world politics, choosing between the rational actor and bureaucratic politics model is not an either/or proposition . The rational actor is not the only rational actor, but the bureaucratic actor is a key figure in world politics .
 The consensus in the literature is that both models provide insights, and that the relative utility of the two decision-making models varies with the circumstances of the circumstances . Instead, the consensus is that the two models provide insight, rather than provide insights .
 In a crisis situation where an immediate and severe threat to widely shared vital interests exists, the rational actor model is likely to prevail . In the crisis situation, the irrational actor model will prevail, says David Cameron .
 Decision-making in more routine, noncrisis situations provides greater scope for the parochial interests and organizational perspectives of subnational actors . In contrast, decision-making is more difficult for subnational groups to make decisions .
 In any regime, high-level leaders (presidents, prime ministers, etc. etc. have broad responsibility for promoting the national interest . In any . regime, leaders have broad responsibilities for promoting national interest, he says .
 When leaders have a high level of interest in foreign affairs, when they are politically adept, and when they have broad popular support, the rational actor model will have maximum utility . When those leaders have high levels of interest and expertise related to foreign affairs they can have broad support .
 The leader will be in a better position to harness the centrifugal forces pulling policy in the direction of subnational bureaucratic interests . That is because he will be better able to harness those forces, he says .
 When top leaders are ineffective, ineffective, inexperienced, and politically weak, the pull of bureaucratic interests will be maximized . In contrast, when leaders are unengengaged, ineffective and ineffective, they will be ineffective, say experts .
 In open, democratic regimes, subnational interests and perspectives tend to have greater scope for influencing policy . Subnational interests tend to be greater scope to influence policy in open democratic regimes .
 In democratic regimes, bureaucratic actors are able to forge alliances with societal groups that share their interests . In democratic countries, they can form alliances with society groups, says David Frum . Frum says .
 In authoritarian regimes, power is by definition more centralized, and the ability of bureaucratic actors to mobilize constituencies will be limited . In closed, authoritarian regimes power is more centralized and bureaucratic actors will have limited ability to mobilize .
 Democracy has more room for bureaucratic politics than does authoritarian regime . Democracy has room for bureaucracy, not authoritarian regime, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy is a democracy, says Zelizer.
 While these rules of thumb do provide some insights and a starting point for analysis, they are not hard and fast laws . They are not a hard or fast law .
 Consider the decision of the Soviet Union to invade Czechoslovakia in 1968 . The Soviet Union invaded the country in 1968 and invaded it in 1972 .
 Czechoslovakia was a Communist country and a member of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact military alliance . It was a Soviet-backed Warsaw Pact member of NATO .
 In the spring of 1968, Prague began to relax government censorship, experiment with economic liberalization, and tolerate increased political pluralism . The Czech Republic became a model of democracy in the 1960s .
 From the perspective of Soviet leaders in Moscow, the Czech reforms constituted a crisis that threatened many shared interests . The Czech reforms were meant to threaten shared interests, according to the Soviet leaders .
 Given this perception of crisis, the attention given to the situation by top leaders, and the authoritarian nature of the Soviet regime, one might expect the three rules of thumb noted above to be applied to a textbook application of the rational actor model .
 A close study of the Soviet decision to invade reveals considerable evidence of bureaucratic politics . In fact, the decision was made by a close study .
 One can see elements of both the rational actor and bureaucratic model at work in a single case . The case is an example of the rational and bureaucratic approach .
 Each provides a different way of looking at the issue, and each, by itself, would arguably provide an incomplete picture of foreign policy decisions .
 The clearest and most unambiguous relationship between paradigms and decision-making models is that between structural realism and the rational actor model . The relationship is that structural realism is that of rational actor models .
 The rational actor model appears to be a logical elaboration of the realist paradigm . It is based on the assumption that a state’s foreign behavior is shaped primarily by the interaction of those interests with structures and forces located at the international system level .
 Some versions of liberalism and neo-Marxism are also compatible with the rational actor model . The model is compatible with some versions of liberal and Marxist theories .
 Liberal institutionalism (with its emphasis on the role of law and international organization in reducing anarchy) and liberal commercialism can readily incorporate the rational actor model into their views of the world .
 The system also tend to embrace the rational actor model, but stress the rational pursuit of class interests . Instead of focusing on the national interest, the system stresses the pursuit of the class interests of the nation .
 In some instances, the connection between paradigms and decisionmaking models becomes a bit more ambiguous . In some cases, this is not the case for the first time .
 Robert Jervis is a self-described realist . He raised questions about the limits of the rational actor model . He is the author of the book, "Rational Actor"
 While certain subtypes of liberalism and neo-Marxism embrace aspects of rational decision-making, neither of these paradigms is bound exclusively to the rational actor model .
 Realists assume rational decision-making but with mitigating factors like misperception, groupthink, and bureaucratic politics creating deviation from the rational ideal type . The emphasis and starting point in foreign policy analysis is the assumption of rational decision making .
 The deviations from the rational actor model are qualitatively great enough to undermine the model and many of the realist assumptions about the world that are closely associated with it . For critics of realism, they include liberals, constructivists, feminists, and neo-Marxists .
 constructivism is the logical theoretical home for critics of the rational actor model . Constructivism is a theory of constructivism, argues some scholars . Constructivist is the theory of a constructivist state of mind .
 The rational actor model does not account for differences in the ways individuals and organizations involved in foreign policy-making perceive the situations they are facing, authors say . The model is flawed, they say .
 President Obama has defined the national interest, defining the threats faced, and defining the motives of one’s adversaries . That includes defining national interest and defining enemies' motives .
 Critics of the rational actor model assume that one’s “definition” of each is shaped by the images, interests, roles, and preconceptions one brings to the table . The rational actor, along with realism, assumes that all these things are objective facts waiting to be
 This sounds a lot like what constructivists argue when they suggest that ideas and norms shape our reality as much as they are shaped by it . This is a lot of what constructivistists argue . Constructivists say that our reality is shaped by ideas, norms and norms .
 It is consistent with feminist views that suggest women tend to define a situation differently than men . It is also consistent with women's views that they define the situation differently .
 Most sophisticated analysts accept that no single level of analysis or decision-making model is capable of fully explaining how the world works .
 Even the most hard-core structural realists sometimes concede that international relations is about more than the structure of the international system . As the controversy over the role of the “Israel lobby’s” suggests, it suggests that even the hard-liners sometimes concede .
 Certain differences of emphasis are inherent in the competing paradigms . However, certain differences of focus are inherent .
 Realists insist that states are rational and unitary actors with preestablished preferences or interests . States act to defend those interests and assert those preferences in response to the larger international context, they say .
 Domestic and individual levels and bureaucratic politics enter the picture only as a secondary consideration . Domestic, individual levels are the most important consideration, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For a liberal internationalist, democracy is not a secondary factor explaining state behavior . Democracy is at the core of understanding a state’s foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy not secondary factor in understanding state's foreign policy .
 For a Marxist, the interests of domestic capital explain not merely residual variance but, rather, the essence of a capitalist state’s foreign policy . A Marxist, for example, argues that domestic capital is the key to a state's foreign policy, not just its interests .
 For a constructivist, evolving conceptions of friends and enemies trump realist assumptions about the determining influence of international anarchy or balance of power .
 For many students of bureaucratic politics, bureaucratic interests and roles compete with the dominant pursuit of the national interest . They are crucial in deciding what that national interest might be in the first place .
 The realist view has the virtues of elegance and analytical efficiency, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "We begin with the international system level and the assumption of states as rational actors"
 It presumes that without peering inside the messy world of domestic and bureaucratic politics, we can understand and predict a great deal about state behavior . Without peering into the messy, messy world, politics can be understood and predicted, it presumes, it can be predicted .
 The question, however, is whether this analytical simplicity does more to illuminate or distort our understanding of how the world of international relations works . The question is whether it does more than illuminate the complexity of international diplomacy .
 Analyze recent world affairs by watching streaming video from major news providers . CNN.com will feature iReporters' top 10 most recent stories .
 Think of a recent foreign policy decision taken by a state, and list the factors that might have influenced that decision at all three levels of analysis . Think of the factors involved in a decision to take such a foreign policy move .
 70 ideology 70 ideology 78 worst-case analysis 86 billiard ball model 86 . 88 audience costs 74 individual 80 bureaucratic politics clash of civilizations 74 rational actor model model 82 model 88 great man theory of unitary actors . 84 organizational process belief system belief system 78 poliheuristic theory 78
 Valerie M Hudson, with Christopher S Vore, “Foreign Policy Analysis Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow,” Mersbon International Studies Review 39:2 , 210.2 .
 Samuel P Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order , 125. Huntington: "Clash of Civilisations" is the result of the war of world domination . Huntington: The future of the world is in the hands of the U.S.
 International Studies Quarterly 13: 2 : 197. A Neglected Approach to the Study of Political Leaders and Decision-Making .
 Thomas L Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree, was published by Friedman in 1999 . Friedman: "Lexus and Olive Tree" was published in 1999 by Friedman .
 The points made below are noted and developed in Houghton, “Reinvigorating the Study of Foreign Policy Decision-Making,” 24^15 .
 A Liberal Theory of International Politics . International Organization 51 : 542. A liberal theory of international politics. International Organization .
 Conflicts of interest are inevitable and continue to exist within the developed world . Conflicts are inevitable, but they are still exist in developed world, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 The structural realist view that war is rooted in international anarchy provides least cause to expect that war can ever be substantially eliminated . War may be rooted in anarchy, but it's not possible to eliminate it, says the author .
 Realists insist that states will from time to time need to protect their vital interests through the use of force and violence . In a world with no effective and reliable higher authority to impose order, realists insist . Realists say that states must protect vital interests by using violence .
 This view of war has come under increasing challenge . However, as suggested in the quotations above, this view of the war is still under challenge .
 This chapter will examine the evolving record of war in world politics . This chapter is the first to examine the evolution of the war in the world .
 First, we will examine the role of war in world politics, including both an examination of the frequency of war and a discussion of how observers from the various international relations paradigms have come to terms with the moral questions posed by an activity that involves the taking of human life .
 The destruction rendered by twentieth-century technologies of warfare raises questions, both moral and empirical, as to whether the Clausewitzian view of war as the “continuation of policy” can remain relevant .
 Third, we examine evidence of a decline of the frequency of war in recent decades and competing explanations of that decline offered by various international relations paradigms . We examine the evidence of the decline of war .
 The chapter concludes with a discussion of trends in twenty-first-century violence . Finally, the chapter discusses trends in violence .
 As you read, keep in mind Mearsheimer’s assertion in the quotation above that “the real world remains a realist world,” and ask yourself whether trends in the use of force and violence do, in fact, portend a fundamental change in how the
 Many lay observers of world politics say war is an interruption of the normal state of peace among countries . War in world politics is an unfortunate interruption of normal state-of-peace among nations .
 When wars do occur, they are often blamed on individual leaders with militaristic ambitions and inclinations . This is not the case for the U.S. military, but it is often blamed for the rise in arms control .
 Go onto the street and ask passersby about the primary cause of World War II . Their answers will likely begin with the name Adolf Hitler . Hitler was the only person to blame for the war .
 The 2003 invasion of Iraq by the U.S. by the United States is likely to be blamed on either Saddam Hussein or George W Bush . Saddam Hussein is the most likely to blame for the Iraq invasion .
 Scholars suggest that Americans in particular tend not to be natural-born realists . Americans tend to think about war differently when it comes to thinking about war .
 The American view of war as an exceptional state of affairs is not hard to understand given U.S. history and geography . The American views of war are not easy to understand .
 No war has been fought on American soil since the Civil War . The last time foreign troops fought on U.S. soil was the War of 1812 .
 Americans have experienced terrorist attacks on the homeland, but no American alive today has ever had foreign soldiers march across his or her property . Americans have also experienced the death of a child on U.S. soil at the hands of an enemy army .
 Nevertheless, the record of human history is still to be seen . Nevertheless, human history will be remembered for its humanity .
 The U.S. has fought in a dozen major interstate wars and has been involved in countless smaller-scale military conflicts . The United States, in its relatively brief history as a nation, has fought .
 The average number of years between American involvements in major wars has been less than two decades . Every American generation since the American Revolution has lived through years of America at war .
 Political scientist J David Singer and his associates in the Correlates of War Project have been collecting and analyzing data on modern war for more than four decades .
 Political scientists define war as sustained military combat with a minimum of 1,000 battle deaths . Despite defining war very conservatively, the record of the past two centuries is sobering . The record of war in Europe has been sobering, says political scientists .
 The table includes major wars but not smaller-scale conflicts, interventions, or peacekeeping operations . It includes major-scale conflict but not small-scale operations .
 The figures are for deaths of military personnel in battle and (except for the American Revolution and War of 1812) from other causes such as war-related accident, disease, and suicide .
 Anne Leland and Mari-Jana Oboroceanu, "American War and Military Operation Casualties: Lists and Statistics,"" Congressional Research Service, February 26, 2010 .
 World Wars I and II and the 1991 Persian Gulf War are obvious examples . World Wars II and II were obvious examples of conflicts .
 In many cases, these have been wars of independence waged by colonies against imperial powers . In many of these wars, they have been fought against the British Empire .
 Examples include the Franco-Algerian War of 1954 and the Portuguese-Angolan War of 1975 . Examples of the conflict include the Angolan War in 1975 .
 Examples include the 1992 fighting among Serbs, Croats, and Muslims in Bosnia as well as the conflict in Chechnya .
 The average number of wars in progress around the world at any time is even higher . When one considers that most wars last more than one year, the average number is higher . Most wars last over one year .
 It would be hard to find a day in the past two centuries when at least one war was not taking place somewhere . Indeed, it would be a day not a day when there was not one war taking place .
 Coercive diplomacy is a frequent backdrop to international politics . Threats and small-scale demonstrations of military power short of war are often used in diplomacy .
 MIDs are defined as “conflicts in which one or more states threaten, display, or use force against other states” and thus include wars plus a much larger number of cases of coercive diplomacy . MIDs include wars, coercive diplomacy and coercive diplomacy, such as coercive diplomacy
 Most of the 4,000-plus militarized disputes never escalated to war as we have defined it . The sum total of death and destruction wrought by them pales in comparison to full-scale warfare . Most of those 4,00-plus disputes never escalate to war .
 The prevalence of coercive diplomacy contributes to the realist characterization of world politics as a Hobbesian war of all against all . But each clearly involves the use of military power and self-help, and in combination with the actual wars that break out .
 Even that horrifying total grossly underestimates the human carnage produced by war, as it does not account for civilian casualties . Yet, even that horrifying figure does not include the civilian casualties of war .
 In World War II alone, estimates of total deaths, civilian and military, range anywhere from 35 to 60 million . Most estimates in the 50 million range range .
 Taiwan announces referendum on acquisition of antimissile weapons unless China removes missiles it has targeted at Taiwan . China warns it will use force if Taiwan pursues independence from Taiwan .
 China warns of confrontation should the missile referendum take place, and begins new military exercises over coastal areas opposite Taiwan . China warns that confrontation will take place if the referendum takes place .
 Vice minister of China's Taiwan Affairs Office says that armed conflict with Taiwan may be unavoidable . Vice minister says armed conflict may be inevitable with Taiwan .
 China's People's Congress passes a law authorizing the use of force if necessary to prevent Taiwan from acquiring formal independence . The law was passed by China's parliament in Beijing .
 China had warned of the high risk of a military incident if the referendum passes or pro-independence party win . China had also warned of a high risk if the vote passes or a pro-independent party wins .
 United States deploys three aircraft carrier strike groups to waters near Taiwan in response to Chinese election period warning . U.S. deploys 3 aircraft carrier strikes groups to respond to China's request for help near Taiwan .
 Failure of referendum and defeat of pro-independence party leads to reduction of tensions . China continued to increase the number of missiles deployed across the strait from Taiwan .
 Since the Chinese Revolution of 1949, tension has prevailed in the Taiwan Strait . China insists that Taiwan must be reunited with the Communist mainland, Taiwan insists on retaining its autonomy . The United States is caught between its commitment to protect Taiwan and the economic and military challenges of its relationship with Beijing .
 China, Taiwan, and the United States have used coercive diplomacy as a way of signaling intentions and drawing lines in the sand . Through it all, the U.S. and China have been using coercive diplomacy to signal intentions .
 April 1, 2001: United States spy plane operating off the coast of China collides with a Chinese fighter jet . April 1: U.S. spy plane and a Chinese jet collided in a collision off China's coast .
 China detains the U.S. crew for 11 days and the plane for 3 months . The United States crew was held in China for three months . China detained the crew for an 11 days .
 For realists, the absence of a higher authority makes it difficult to establish and enforce standards of morality in the conduct of interstate relations . Realists say it is hard to establish morality in interstate relations with other nations .
 In the realist view, the frequency to which states resort to war to settle disputes is predictable, if not always desirable . The frequency of states resorting to war is predictable and not desirable, he says .
 This view doesn't imply that war for states is always the preferred option for protecting national interests . This view does not, however, imply that . war for state is always a preferred option, however .
 War, for realists, is a matter of the rational calculation of costs and benefits . War is a rational calculation, says realists . War, realists say, is about the rational cost and benefits of the war .
 Those costs might include money expended, economic assets destroyed, political goodwill lost, and the number of soldiers likely to be killed .
 In some cases, the calculation might lead one to choose war as a necessary and prudent act . War might be a necessary act, says President Obama .
 John Mearsheimer, one of the most outspoken contemporary realists, opposed the U.S. decision to go to war in Iraq precisely because he did not believe the cost-benefit calculation added up in favor of war . Mearsheim: "I don't think the cost of
 In his view, continued UN sanctions, coupled with the threat of massive U.S. military retaliation, were sufficient to contain Iraq at a much lower cost than going to war, he says .
 His opposition to the war was not simply that people would be killed but that U.S. interests would not be served . His opposition was that the war would not serve American interests, he said .
 Others disagreed with Mearsheimer’s analysis of the Iraq case . Others, including other realists, disagreed with him .
 Realist view of war as inevitable and useful does not apply to every particular war . The point, however, is that the realist view doesn't apply to all particular wars. The point is that war is inevitable but useful, not inevitable .
 For many, this cold, calculating cost-benefit approach to war can be morally troubling, especially when discussing an activity in which millions of lives are at stake . For many it's morally troubling to discuss such an activity, especially in the war zone .
 But one might counter that this approach to warfare is really not so exceptional . It is not the first time the U.S. military has taken a similar approach .
 The number of U.S. military personnel killed in all of the major United States wars of the twentieth century was approximately 617,000 . In contrast, the number of automobile-related deaths was about one-fifth the number killed in the wars of that century .
 People oppose war in general and individual wars on moral grounds, but few picket General Motors or call for governments to ban cars on such a basis . Yet people commonly oppose war on the moral grounds .
 We need automobiles; they are essential to our modern economy and way of life . They may even save some lives by allowing quick transport to hospitals and easy access to foods or medicines .
 War is sometimes needed to defend one's territory, to ensure access to vital resources, or to defeat aggressors who would harm one’s people . But one can make a similar case for war as an activity needed to protect the nation from harm .
 In fact, one might reasonably argue that the loss of a life on a field in France fighting Nazi aggression is more noble than a death in a car crash while picking up a pizza .
 Critics of realism do not accept, without discussion, this view of war as a cost-benefit calculation based purely on national interests . Critics say this is not the case of realism .
 pacifism is the position that any use of violence employed with the intent to kill or do physical harm to other human beings is morally unacceptable . Located at the extreme opposite end of the spectrum from realism, pacifism stands at the opposite end to realism .
 "No good cause or vital interest can, from this perspective, ever justify the purposeful killing of another human being," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Unlike realists, pacifists see no distinction between personal morality and that of leader of a sovereign state . A pacifist sees no such distinction, unlike realist realists .
 Pacifists operating within the Judeo-Christian tradition might argue that the commandment ‘thou shalt not kill’ contains no footnote . Political leaders are free to kill, or to order others to kill if democracy, oil supplies, or security from terrorist attacks are on the
 Leo Tolstoy once served in the Russian army and wrote about war in his novel War and Peace . He later became an ardent pacifist later in his life . The great Russian novelist became a pacifist in later life .
 With regard to those who voluntarily choose a military career, I would propose to state clearly and definitely that not withstanding all the pomp, glitter, and general approval with which it is surrounded, it is a criminal and shameful activity . The higher the position a man holds in the military profession
 Tolstoy: Everyone involved in the U.S. military establishment, from the secretary of defense down to the army reservist who finds himor herself unwillingly fighting in Baghdad, must be considered a criminal and murderer . Applied to our own times, everyone involved in U.
 Critics of pacifism argue that it is an unacceptable position for two reasons . Critics argue that pacifism is unacceptable for the future .
 Realists would suggest that any state that adopted a pacifist position in a world where anarchy prevails would find its interests trampled . Realists say any pacifist state would find it trampled by anarchy .
 pacifism denies the right to use violence when needed to defend other innocent lives . Second, and even more important, pacifism is not pacifism, it says . It denies the rights of pacifism to be pacifism .
 The unyielding morality of pacifism seems unacceptable to many because it does not accept the need to confront aggressors and evil-doers with force or even the threat of force . pacifism is not accepted by many because of the need for confrontation .
 Just War doctrine is a perspective on war and morality that accepts that war can sometimes be both necessary and just . It allows, in contrast to amoral realism, that ethical and moral considerations must be part of determining when and how to fight .
 For a war to be considered “just,” the human costs must be considered "just" 4. Theory in Theory in Practice: Human costs must include the cost of a war .
 Hard cases, like saving innocent victims of genocide in Darfur, sometimes make it difficult and put one's pacifism to the test . But hard cases like Darfur make it hard and put pacifism on the test, says author .
 If you answered NO to all these questions, you might quality as a pacifist . If you answer NO to these questions you might have been a peacemaker .
 If you answered YES to even one, you cannot call yourself a pacifist . But if you answered yes to even a single question, you can't call yourself "a pacifist"
 In the just war perspective, human life is valuable in itself and must be factored into the equation . Human life is valued in itself, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Versions of the just war doctrine exist in most societies, cultures, and religious traditions . Versions exist in many cultures and cultures, including the U.S.
 Jus ad bellum is concerned with the circumstances in which it is morally acceptable to enter into a war . Jusad bellum concerns about the circumstances it is moral acceptable to engage in war .
 Going to war for reasons of legitimate self-defense or to repel and punish aggression is considered just reasons for war . The U.S. has been involved in more than 100 percent of the world's wars since 2001 .
 The protection and promotion of human rights might also be a just cause . Human rights is also a cause for promoting human rights in the world .
 War should be fought solely to attain that just cause and not for additional, unspoken purposes of promoting self-interest . War should only be fought to attain a just cause, not to promote self-interested interests, he says .
 Before going to war, less violent means of resolving the problem must be exhausted, or a reasonable conclusion must be reached that those other means will be futile . The U.S. should not go to war in order to solve the problem, the author says .
 Even when fought for a just cause, war is a waste of human life if the objectives of the fighting cannot be met . War is waste of life if objectives are not met, even if it is fought for the right cause, writes Simon Tisdall .
 There must be some reasonable expectation that the goals of the war can be successfully obtained, he says . Thus, there must be a reasonable expectation of success .
 Further fighting to take advantage of the weakness of one’s opponent or to exact retribution for the misdeeds of one's adversary would unnecessarily threaten further human life . Further fighting would unnecessarily kill more human life, the author says .
 Nonstate actors are not authorized to wage war on the grounds that chaos would result if any actor with a good cause had a green light to use violence . The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that nonstate actors should not be allowed to engage in war .
 Jus in bello is concerned with the way one conducts and fights a war once it is under way . The war is conducted and fought once it's under way, says the author of Jus In bello .
 Those conducting and fighting a war must take all reasonable efforts to discriminate between soldiers and civilians, and to attempt to limit harm to the latter, the author says . Those conducting a war should take reasonable efforts, he says .
 The degree of violence used must be proportionate to the just cause pursued, says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.S.
 For example, dropping atomic bombs on Baghdad in 1991 would have been a disproportionate response . Dropping atomic bombs in Kuwait would have led to disproportionate response to Iraq's invasion .
 In order for a war to be considered just, all the criteria of the just war doctrine must be met . In order to be called a just war, a war must be just, according to the U.S. Supreme Court .
 "A doubt about any one of them puts the justice of that war in jeopardy," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Just war doctrine might seem like an acceptable compromise between amoral realism and unequivocal pacifism . But the doctrine has its critics, including some who say it's not acceptable .
 A major problem is tiQ Ql ei/l'dtLdlMkId r'eadiiB^ Jt tdtBdSfefhldQft@)lying the criteria. The criteria is a lie .
 The just war doctrine legitimizes and gives moral cover to the decision to fight . The doctrine is loose enough to justify almost any military engagement . It legitimizes war by legitimizing and giving moral cover for the military .
 War theorists maintain the value of entering moral considerations into the calculation . Still, just war theorists maintain that moral considerations should be considered .
 War by its very nature is an uncertain enterprise, and virtually every calculation of war’s results and impact is subject to falsification as events unfold . War is an unpredictable enterprise, with the result and impact of war being falsified .
 "Good faith calculation" does not relieve us of attempting a good faith calculation in each area, it says . But that doesn't relieve us from attempting to do so, he says .
 Constructivist and liberal critics of realism might well argue that just war doctrine has had an impact on the actual behavior of states as they contemplate fighting wars .
 Just war doctrine is a good example of how powerful norms, developed and diffused over the centuries, can shape and constrain state behavior . For constructivists, it's important to think about norms and norms that shape state behavior, and how they shape it up .
 For liberals, it is the institutionalization of those just war norms as formal laws, monitored and enforced by international institutions, that is key . For liberals it is to be institutionalized by international organizations like the UN .
 Geneva Conventions of 1949 seek to formalize the jus in bello principle of ‘discrimination’ by specifying in great detail the measures that states must take to protect civilians in times of war . For example, among other things, they sought to specify measures that would protect civilians
 States often violate that principle in practice, it is not irrelevant to their war planning . Though states often violate it, it's not irrelevant .
 Some critics argued that the U.S. “rules of engagement” in Afghanistan were too restrictive, giving insurgents an advantage . The rules governing when and how soldiers can use force in conducting operations in Afghanistan .
 But the concern of military planners was to avoid unnecessary civilian casualties, military planners say . The concern was that they would not be risking unnecessary casualties .
 Afghan casualties could turn Afghan public opinion against the U.S. Those casualties could also delegitimize the United States war effort on a global level, CNN says .
 The U.S. military felt the need to pay homage to that discrimination norm in its war planning . It is a good illustration of the power of such norms, such as discrimination .
 Even when constrained by just war considerations, war has always been a brutal enterprise . War has been the most brutal enterprise in the world since World War II .
 The brutality of warfare increased as the Industrial Revolution spread into the military realm . But the brutality of war increased in the late 1800s and early 1900s . The Industrial Revolution led to the rise of the industrial revolution in Europe .
 Not only has war been a frequent element of world politics; it has also become more lethal overtime overtime . To be sure, StfVl' k4>fi'i©GNlJ©:RCt'ith enormous loss of humap 1 rred, yGP
 The war that took the most American lives was not one of the world wars of the twentieth century but the U.S. Civil War . The Civil War was the most deadly war in the United States .
 The pace and efficiency of killing raised the destructive potential of warfare to an entirely different level . However, in the twentieth century, killing has become more lethal than ever before .
 Most battle deaths resulted from close contact between soldiers . Prior to the twentieth century, most battle deaths were due to close contact with soldiers .
 The efficiency of killing with a sword, a bayonet, or a single-shot rifle cannot be compared to the efficiency of the machine gun, which was introduced in battle on a mass scale in World War I . Likewise, the emergence of the airplane as a tool of war that could
 Thinking about warfare also evolved and, specifically, thinking about the relationship of the government and the military to the civilian population . The government and military have been involved in the U.S. military for more than a century .
 In much of premodern Europe, wars were essentially battles among monarchs, with little emotional attachment between rulers and ruled . War was essentially battles between monarchs and ruled by monarchs in much of the world .
 Insofar as they were in the path of battle, civilians often suffered greatly, but they had little of the modern notion of patriotism that would lead them to care much about which monarch ultimately won . Civilians suffered greatly in battle but had little sense of patriotism .
 Soldiers were often mercenaries who worked for pay rather than love of the queen or country . And the soldiers were often mercenary soldiers rather than lovers of the country .
 By the twentieth century, the relationship among civilians, the military, and the government had all changed . By the end of the century the relationship between civilians and the military had changed .
 Hans Morgenthau, the most influential modern realist thinker, suggested that the twentieth century was the century of total war . He described war of, by, and against total populations as war of war .
 War “of the total population” implies that the people have an emotional attachment to the war, the cause for which it is fought, and who wins and loses . War ‘of the whole population’ implies that people are attached to the people involved in the war .
 This attachment stems first from the growth of the modern nation-state in post-Westphalian Europe and the sense of nationalism that accompanied it, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The attachment to the nation state stems from its growth in post Westphalian culture .
 The attachment would be strengthened even further in those states that adopted forms of democratic governance . Citizens of those states would see an even tighter connection to their government and its wars, the author says .
 War “by the total population” reflects the fact that twentieth-century wars were no longer fought by mercenaries, but by large, often conscripted, armies drawn from the nation’s population . War ‘by population’ reflects fact that wars were fought by
 More than 15 million men and women served in the U.S. armed forces during World War II . More than 150,000 Americans served in WWII .
 Domestic economies were heavily militarized, with significant portions of the population, including an increasing number of women, working in factories that provided the means of fighting a war . Furthermore, in the twentieth century, domestic economy was heavily militarized .
 The Nazi bombing of civilian targets in London in World War II was less the result of a barbaric madman than a predictable extension of the logic of modern war .
 If the bombing of London led British citizens to question whether the fight against Hitler was worth the cost, then Hitler’s task would be made that much easier .
 American and British bombing raids on German factories might be considered necessary, despite the fact that many such factories were located in highly populated areas . German factories were churning out guns and tanks and fighter planes .
 The U.S. factories were immune to attacks by the German air force . The Allied forces were able to use the geography of the United States to protect them .
 A new age in international relations began on August 6, 1945, when a United States bomber nicknamed "Enola Gay" dropped an atomic bomb nicknamed “Little Boy” on the city of Hiroshima, Japan . The United States dropped the bomb nicknamed "Little Boy" on Hiroshima,
 In one respect, nuclear weapons represented a departure from the logic of total war . In another respect, the nuclear weapons were a departure .
 One no longer needed a mass army, or war “by” total population, to cause massive harm to one’s adversary . War ‘by’ total population’ no longer required mass army or total population to cause mass harm .
 A few planes carrying nuclear bombs and some missiles in silos tipped with nuclear warheads could do the job using only a fraction of the workforce represented by a conventional military campaign . A small fleet of nuclear missiles could be used to carry nuclear warheads .
 Nuclear weapons represented the culmination of the logic of total war, says author . Nuclear weapons were the culmination in the logic and logic of war, he says .
 U.S. estimate: 70,000 to 80,000 died because of the bombing in Hiroshima . Hiroshima, a city of 350,000 people, was estimated to have been at the center of the bombings .
 By the end of 1945, 140,000 had died as a result of the atomic bomb . More recent data collected by the Hiroshima city government indicate that by the . end of . 1945, by the end . of the . war .
 From 1946 to 1951, an additional 60,000 deaths from injuries and radiation produced by the bomb are estimated, leaving a grand total of 200,000 . The deaths were directly related to the dropping of a single, and by today’s standards, relatively small atomic bomb .
 Despite these numbers, opinions vary as to how much of a revolution in our thinking about international relations and the role of warfare the atomic age mandated . The atomic age was a major factor in the development of international relations .
 Atomic bombs were the latest step in a continuing process of innovation in military technology . For some, not much had changed, and atomic bombs were just the latest in a long line of innovation .
 There is not much that nuclear weapons can do against defenseless people, says CNN.com .
 Less sophisticated weapons, including knives, machetes, clubs with protruding nails, screwdrivers, hammers, and bicycle handlebars, all eventually became a part of the technology of killing .
 Some sensed early on that nuclear weapons were more than just another step in the technology of warfare . On the other hand, some sensed early in the 20th century that they were more important than just technology .
 It was the speed and efficiency of the destruction that made nuclear weapons unique . The speed and the efficiency of nuclear weapons were unique, experts say .
 More people may have died from knives and machetes in Rwanda than from the bombing of Hiroshima . Rwanda slaughter resulted from thousands of individuals engaging in sustained killings over several months .
 In Hiroshima, the deaths were all produced by one bomb dropped in an instant from one airplane . Hiroshima, Japan, was the only city to be hit by a single bomb .
 It can have almost no offl©iWMlf6 ]$oEfcl ""©F& fsQii’i, InlfifiStl A'bkjQfc had Please donate to the site. It can be almost impossible to read the site's
 No policy benefits could outweigh the massive cost of nuclear war, especially one fought between two or more similarly equipped nuclear powers, might now entail . Because no policy benefits would outweigh the huge cost of a nuclear war .
 MAD was based on the assumption that as long as each side retained a second strike capability, each side would have an incentive to strike first . MAD was designed to ensure that each side had enough retaliatory capability to do unacceptable damage to one’s opponent .
 It assumed that the threat of retaliation would deter each side from launching a first strike, but it provided for no defense from the other side’s nuclear attack should deterrence fail . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 MAD proponents argued against even trying to defend from a nuclear attack . In fact, MAD proponents argue against even defending against a nuclear strike .
 In part, this was due to doubts about the feasibility of defensive systems . In part this was because of doubts over the possibility of using them .
 The illusion of defense from a nuclear attack might make each side feel less vulnerable and thus more likely to use nuclear weapons . Even more important, defenders of MAD were concerned that the illusion of a defense from an attack might be less vulnerable to each side . The illusion was thought to make each
 Many came to view nuclear weapons as the basis for a somewhat perverse but stable global peace . Thus, many came to think nuclear weapons were a source of perverse peace . The U.S. has never had nuclear weapons .
 The cost of nuclear war, the theory went, was so high that it became unthinkable . The theory went that the cost of a nuclear war became unthinkable, and that it was unthinkable .
 A conventional war between the two superpowers had to be averted for fear that once war started, it could escalate to the nuclear level . Even a conventional war would have been avoided for fear of a nuclear war .
 The Cold War was filled with superpower crisis and tension . It was also the longest period of peace among the great powers in modern history .
 During the Cold War, smaller conventional wars remained a part of the international landscape . The Cold War was a major source of conflict in the Middle East . The U.S. has been involved in a number of smaller conflicts in the past .
 Some of these “limited wars” were actually not so limited, often involving one of the superpowers . High casualties and high casualties were often high casualties . The U.S. has been involved in some of the world's most deadly wars .
 The United States sacrificed close to 100,000 soldiers fighting limited wars against Communism in Korea and Vietnam . The total casualties on all sides in those two conflicts ran in the millions . The U.S. lost close to 10 million soldiers in those wars .
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 produced 10 years of fighting in which at least 15,000 Soviet soldiers were killed along with a million Afghans . At least 15 million Afghans were killed in the fighting .
 Some scholars have noted the stability/instability paradox, in which states feel free to engage in conventional war precisely because they feel secure in the assumption that it can never escalate to nuclear war among superpowers .
 Wars completely below the level of the superpowers have also continued . Wars below the levels of superpowers also continue .
 India and Pakistan went to war in 1947, 1965, and 1991 . To cite a few examples, the two countries have gone to war since then .
 In 1999, two months of fighting erupted between the two countries over the disputed region of Kashmir, despite the fact that both sides now had nuclear capability .
 The Iran-Iraq War from 1980 to 1988 cost a million lives, and what has been dubbed “Africa’s First World War” has raged in Central Africa since 1998 . The war has involved at least six countries and has claimed almost 4 million lives .
 Even at the nuclear level, some have attempted to resuscitate Clausewitz and restore reie vanes ;o his view of war as tbe in nation of policy .
 Critics were uncomfortable with MAD because it assumed that each side in the superpowers’ nuclear ‘balance of terror’ was a rational actor with the same approach to ethics and the value of human life . The critics were uncomfortable because of MAD because of its assumption of each side was
 If that assumption was wrong and an irrational or ethically callous leader came to power in a nuclear state, those weapons might very well be used . "If that assumption is wrong, the weapons might be used," the author says .
 Reagan administration pursued nuclear strategy that emphasized ways to fight, survive, and even win a nuclear war . Reagan administration in the 1980s pursued a nuclear strategy emphasizing ways to survive and win a war .
 Critics labeled Reagan strategy NUTS—an acronym for nuclear utilization theories . Critics labeled the Reagan strategy 'NUTS'
 Reagan strategy aimed to limit damage of nuclear war by relocating people to more rural locations in case of a nuclear confrontation . The Reagan strategy was aimed at developing more accurate offensive missiles that could destroy Soviet missiles .
 SDI was a multibillion-dollar research program intended to find ways to defend the U.S. homeland from a nuclear attack . Dubbed “star wars” by its critics after a popular science fiction movie of the time, it was dubbed “Star wars�
 The debate is whether the NUTS approach makes the unthinkable more thinkable . It is not clear whether it will help make the unthinkable even more realistic .
 The more convinced one is that nuclear war can be survived and won, the more one might tempt fate and try it . The more . one is convinced one might try and try to try it.
 One country's preparation for limited nuclear war might frighten others to launch a preemptive strike on it . Plus, one country’s preparation for nuclear war may frighten other nations to launch preemptive strikes .
 Even a limited nuclear war will be destructive enough to deter most rational leaders . If other leaders with nuclear weapons are irrational, the need for a nuclear defense becomes even more crucial .
 The more prepared one country is to fight and win a nuclear war, the less likely another will be likely to start one . The most prepared nation is likely to win a war, it's more likely to be prepared to fight .
 With the disintegration of the USSR in 1991 and the end of the Cold War, the debate over nuclear strategies simmered down a bit . To some observers, it seemed increasingly irrelevant in a world where Russia and the West were enjoying more friendly relations .
 Concerns about the rise of China were escalating in some circles . Fears of a new round of nuclear proliferation were growing . Russia and the U.S. were turning cool again .
 Nuclear proliferation is the spread of nuclear weapons to nonnuclear countries . Nuclear weapons are spread to non-nuclear countries, not nuclear ones .
 Some anticipated the rapid spread of nuclear weapons to perhaps dozens of countries . At the beginning of the nuclear age, some anticipated the spread of such weapons to possibly dozens of nations .
 By the 1960s only five countries were members of the nuclear club . Only five countries had nuclear facilities in the world's nuclear arsenal .
 In 1968 the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was adopted and eventually signed and ratified by the vast majority of countries . The treaty was adopted by the majority of the world's nuclear powers .
 The treaty prohibited nonnuclear countries from developing nuclear weapons . It also banned existing nuclear states from transferring nuclear weapons technology to nonnuclear states . The treaty was signed by the United States and Russia in 1998 .
 The treaty provided for inspections by the UN-related International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure peaceful nuclear technologies were not diverted to weapons development . The treaty also provided for inspection by the IAEA .
 Among the handful of countries not originally party to the NPT were Israel, Pakistan, and India . Israel and Pakistan were among the handful countries not party to NPT .
 M^£Ge:.iiiiiiy3fidl devBopfc^lt . By the 199Opt was cjear j:Jra_r all |^je^|a i d^j^ ear weapons capability .
 Reagan administration initiative designed to develop and deploy a system of nuclear defense that would render harmless enemy missiles before they could hit their targets . The spread of nuclear weapons to previously nonnuclear states is the result of the Reagan administration's Strategic Defense Initiative .
 Most believe a nuclear Iran will be an emboldened and more aggressive actor in the region, setting off a chain reaction of proliferation . Others suggest that nuclear proliferation might inject a note of caution into a historically volatile region .
 In 1998 India and Pakistan each engaged in tit-for-tat nuclear tests designed to demonstrate their capabilities, raising a new round of concern about further proliferation . What to Do If More States Co Nuclear?"" Foreign Affairs, September/ October 2006,
 The challenge is not only those two countries but also the chain reaction they could produce among their neighbors . "The challenge is ... the challenge of the two countries," CNN's John Sutter says .
 In Asia, a nuclear North Korea might provoke a rethinking of Japan’s policy on nuclear weapons . It could also stimulate proliferation in South Korea and Taiwan . A nuclear N. Korea could provoke a rethink of Japan's policy on weapons .
 Recent reports note some evidence of unreported nuclear experiments in Egypt . In the Middle East, recent reports note evidence of such experiments .
 Some have suggested that this proliferation can be a stabilizing force, injecting a dose of caution into and inducing resolution of historically volatile conflicts, such as those between Israel and its Arab neighbors .
 The threat of mutual assured destruction could prevent war between the U.S. and USSR for half a century . It could have a similar impact elsewhere, says proliferation optimists .
 These pessimists are concerned that as the number of nuclear states increases, the statistical probability of nuclear deterrence breaking down will increase . They say the statistical likelihood of breaking down of nuclear diplomacy will increase.
 A breakdown can result either from a purposeful decision to use nuclear weapons or from a loss of command and command . That breakdown can be caused by purposeful use of nuclear weapons .
 Some data suggest a decline in interstate war in the post-Cold War era . Recent trends provide at least some reason for cautious optimism, says author .
 Scholars working within different paradigms provide different assessments of the cause of this trend and of its long-term significance . Scholars work in different ways to assess the impact of the trend, such as whether it will continue to grow .
 In this section, we will begin by describing the recent decline in interstate war and then compare a few alternative explanations that have been offered . We will begin with describing the decline of interstate war .
 In the years since the Cold War ended, the trajectory has been an overall decline in warfare across the globe . Declining frequency of war is one of the reasons for the decline in the frequency of warfare .
 Civil wars have since fallen back roughly to their Cold War era frequency . Putting aside the years 1990 and 1991 when the Cold War was ending and intrastate, or civil, wars surged, such wars surged .
 interstate war has declined from an average of 1. new wars per year during the Cold War to 0. new war per year in the period from 1991 to 2006 . At the same time, interstate war in the U.S. decreased from 1.2 new wars a year to 0
 After 1991, only 15 percent of states involved in any form of warfare by 2005 . The trend has been consistently downward since then .
 By 2009, the overall level of warfare across the globe was at its lowest level since the 1960s . By 2009 the overall levels of warfare in the world were at their lowest levels since 1960s.
 The trend toward avoiding wars involving direct clashes among the great powers has continued in the post-Cold War era . Second, the trend toward avoidance of the most destructive kinds of wars has continued, he says .
 Graph, ""States Experiencing Warfare, 19462006"" from Center for Systemic Peace . Graph, "States Experienced War, 1946, 1946," is based on World War II . Graph shows that the U.S. was at the center of the war .
 Historian John Lewis Gaddis might not be literally accurate, but he does capture an important and positive characteristic of the period . Some countries have essentially taken war off the table as an option in their relations with certain other countries .
 The United States, Canada, Japan, and Western Europe have created what he calls a security community . The U.S. and Canada have created a group of countries that no longer threaten or fear war with one another .
 His idea of a security community seems to trump the realist notion of the security dilemma and the feelings of mutual insecurity that it generates . The security dilemma is a security dilemma .
 No one in France, for example, fears British nuclear weapons, and no one in Canada fears the arms of the world’s greatest superpower just to their south .
 Several post-Communist states of central Europe have joined Western institutions such as the European Union and NATO, and can now be included in that group of states among whom war is virtually unthinkable . The security community, already in evidence during the Cold War, has since expanded .
 The evidence of a decline of interstate war provides cause for some to suggest both the declining utility of the realist paradigm and a cautious basis for hope that the era in which war is ‘the continuation of policy” may be coming to an end .
 Realists, however, would caution that war continues to be an instrument of policy . The recent downturn in interstate war can be explained within the parameters of the realist paradigm .
 Central to the realist explanation of both war and peace is the distribution of power . A Realist Explanation of Peace is based on a realist theory of power distribution .
 multipolar systems are more complex with more pairs of states with potential conflicts, more opportunity for the imbalances of power to develop, and more opportunities for miscalculation . Because multipolar . systems have more players, they are . more likely to be more complex .
 There is only one other state to worry about and whose power must be assessed and balanced . There are only one state to be worried about, and that's the only other .
 The reality of mutual assured destruction created extra incentive for both the U.S. and USSR to prevent Cold War era crises from evolving into hot wars . Mutual assured destruction provided extra incentive to both the United States and USSR .
 The gap in nuclear capabilities between the two superpowers was so large that the bipolarity of the international system remained unaltered . Even as other countries acquired nuclear weapons, the gap remained large .
 Bipolarity was replaced, at least temporarily, by an international system in which one superpower, the United States, seemed to be in an unchallenged position of hegemony, or dominance, in world affairs .
 Observers began to talk about a “unipolar moment,” and well-known scholars published books on the consequences of a new period of American empire . The U.S. has been in the midst of a major crisis in the Middle East .
 A French foreign minister coined a new word to capture the multifaceted nature of U.S. hegemony after the Cold War . The American dominance in military power but also in economic, political, and cultural influence seemed overwhelming in the 1990s .
 U.S. hegemony helps explain decline of interstate war during the 1990s . United States hegemony helped explain decline in interstate war .
 As many realists have long argued, hegemony begets peace, as other countries are wary of the power of the hegemon . The U.S. should be wary of its power in the Middle East, says the realist .
 At the same time, while hegemony might explain peace in the short run, it is not something that will last indefinitely . At the end of the day, hegemony might be explained as a reason for peace, but it won't last forever .
 As realists would also argue, periods of hegemony eventually end, and other states do eventually attempt to balance the power of the hegemon . As realist would argue, this is not the only case of a period of hegemony that ends .
 Such periods of challenge can be very dangerous, with great power tension and, potentially, great power war . Such a period of crisis can be dangerous and potentially dangerous, writes Andrew Hammond .
 According to the power transition theory, the international system is prone to great power war when the prevailing dominant power is challenged by a rising power that is unsatisfied with the existing distribution of influence . The theory says that great power wars are particularly prone to when the dominant power challenges it .
 Some observers have suggested that we may one day look back on the 1990s as a period of calm before the storm . Anticipating precisely such a challenge to the U.S. from the emerging power of China, some observers say .
 A resurgent Russia, an increasingly integrated European Union, a militarized Japan, and a newly emergent India might all be key players in an increasingly multipolar twenty-first century that reverses the peaceful trends of the 1990s . Depending on how things play out, a resurgent
 Realists would argue that the post-Cold War era is not quite two decades old, a mere blip on the radar screen of history . Realists, in short, say that the Cold War era has not quite been a decade old .
 The entire era of the long peace among the great powers from 1946 to the present is notable . However, it too is a relatively short period in the wider sweep of world history .
 What some see as a long-term transformation of world politics may be little more than a shortterm cyclical downturn in war and violence . Thus, what some see is little more of a short-term downturn in violence may be a short term downturn .
 In other eras, war was thought to be in decline, only to reemerge . Indeed, in other times, it has been thought to have been in decline . War has been a recurring problem since World War II began .
 The most destructive interstate war in the history of humanity soon followed . The 1920s were an era of relative global peace, but the war was a precursor to interstate war . World War II was the first interstate war of its kind .
 The Kantian triangle suggests three potential sources of peace in world politics . A Liberal Explanation of Peace offers an explanation for peace .
 The development of international institutions that reduce anarchy is one of those sources . It will be the subject of Chapter 5 of the book .
 Economic interdependence is yet another explanation of peace among nations, and it will be addressed in Chapter 7 . Economic interdependency is another explanation for peace among countries .
 Some see transitions as periods of instability that are prone to war . Some see such transitions as instability that is prone to civil war .
 The right of all adults to take part in the political process, including the process of electing public officials, is a right to participate in the process .
 Competition among political parties and individuals allows for meaningful choice in the election of public officials . Competition among parties, individuals that allow meaningful choice is needed .
 When the definition of democracy is applied most strictly, the observation that democracies do not fight wars with one another appears close to being an absolute law . At least a minimal package of freedoms (e.g., free press, free speech, free association) essential to ensure that participation is informed
 One scholar, applying a strict definition of democracy, could find only one exception to the rule . The 1999 conflict between India and Pakistan was the only exception to democracy, he says .
 India and Pakistan were, at best, flawed democracies, and the conflict itself was small-scale, barely meeting the 1,000 battle deaths minimum necessary to categorize a conflict as a war . But even that exception is debatable both because the conflict was small, and because it was
 Even if democracies tend not to fight with one another, they do frequently fight wars against nond-democratic regimes . Even though democracies don't fight with each other, they often fight wars with nond-ocratic regimes .
 As we saw in the 2003 U.S. preemptive attack on Iraq, democracies are not necessarily unwilling to fire the first shot in wars against authoritarian states . democracies aren't necessarily willing to fire first shot at authoritarian states, as they did in 2003 .
 If the democratic peace is to prevail on a global level, the expansion of the number of democratic states becomes the key . Thus, if the democratic . peace is . to prevail, if . the . democratic peace was to prevail .
 The last quarter of the twentieth century witnessed an impressive wave of democratization around much of the world . The last 25 of the 20th century witnessed a wave of democraticization around world .
 Political scientist Francis Fukuyama famously declared in 1989 that we had reached the end of history, or the point at which the grand political debate about how best to organize ourselves politically had been resolved once and for all in favor of democratic government . Another political scientist, Francis Fukuama,
 By the beginning of the twenty-first century, the number of countries democratized has risen . By the end of the 20th century, more than 100 countries have been democratic .
 When you marry the observation that democracies have tended not to fight one another with this reality of an expanding global community of democratic governments, the realist notion that interstate war is inevitable comes into question .
 Realists and other critics of democratic peace theory are not quite prepared to concede the argument . However, realists and others argue that peace theory is necessary for democratic peace .
 Even if one accepts that democracies tend not to fight one another, the world still has a significant number of nondemocratic states, authors say . They say .
 In comparison with the impressive democratic gains of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, the trend toward democracy since 2000 appears to have stalled . Indeed, in comparison to the impressive gains made in the 70s, 80s and 90s, democracy appears to be on the decline
 Among the remaining nondemocracies are some fairly important countries, including China . China with its population of over 1 billion, its dynamic economy, and its steady improvement in military capability .
 The Middle East remains a hotbed of both terrorism and interstate strife . Likewise, the Middle East has been bypassed by the third wave .
 Realists point to the prospect of backsliding among countries currently categorized as democratic . Second, realists point out that the U.S. is not the only democratic country in the world .
 Huntington notes that the first two waves of democratization were followed by reverse waves in which some newly democratic states reverted to authoritarian rule . Huntington says the first wave of democracy was followed by a reverse wave of authoritarianism .
 Some realist critics argue that the core assumption that democracies will not fight one another, though largely true, has not been sufficiently tested . Third, critics argue, that the assumption that democracy would not fight is not fully tested .
 Even the early United States and other fledgling nineteenth-century democracies would be considered largely undemocratic by current standards, given the limitation of democratic rights to white male property owners . The early U.S. and early 19th century democracies would have been considered undemocracy .
 In the view of realists, we still lack sufficient data to conclude that form of government is the key factor restraining democracies from going to war with one another . We need to find out more about the role of government in order to avoid war .
 The existence of a common enemy, the Soviet Union, kept the democracies at peace with one another during the Cold War . Perhaps it was the existence of an enemy that kept the nations at peace .
 Most democracies of the Cold War era were Western countries that shared a common European cultural identity . Moreover, most Western countries shared a shared cultural identity.
 As the world’s democracies become more culturally diverse, one cannot rule out the possibility of differences in the ways these new democracies interact with each other .
 A Constructivist Explanation of Peace would give more attention to changes in global norms . The realist explanation of peace emphasizes the distribution of power, and while the liberal democratic peace theory stresses the impact of structural changes in domestic regime type . Constructivist explanations of peace would focus on global norms
 Though the prevailing norm in world politics has long held that war is an acceptable ‘continuation of policy,” competing norms have challenged or at least sought to limit that .
 John Mueller's work on the decline of war predates the constructivist turn of the 1990s . Mueller provides an analysis of the long peace and the decline in the frequency of war that is consistent in many respects .
 Mueller rejects the realist view that the long peace of the post-World War II era was just a temporary reflection of a particular balance of power . On the one hand, Mueller rejected the view that peace of post-war era was temporary .
 Mueller sees in the long peace a more fundamental and more permanent change in how the world works . Like liberals, Mueller sees the peace as fundamental and a permanent change .
 The recent absence of great power war and decline in interstate wars have little to do with the Kantian triangle stressed by liberals, says Mueller . However, for Mueller, the recent absence and decline of interstate wars of all types are likely to blame for the decline .
 Traditional liberal view most likely misinterprets cause and effect, he says . With respect to the impact of economic interdependence and international institutions, he suggests that the traditional liberal view is most likely to be wrong, he writes .
 Peace is the cause rather than the effect of expanding trade and the proliferation of institutions, says Mueller . Peace is peace is the result of peace rather than expanding trade, he says . Mueller: "Peace is the way we get around the world"
 Mueller points out that democratic peace theory cannot explain the absence of a great power war between the authoritarian USSR and democratic America . Mueller says peace theory can't explain the central element of the peace .
 Mueller: Human beings in much of the world have concluded in ever-larger numbers that tanks and bombers are no longer acceptable means of resolving problems for civilized nations . Mueller: The growing “obsolescence of major war” is a result of the fact that human beings in
 Once viewed as an occasion for honor and glory, war is increasingly seen as an evil to avoid . War is increasingly viewed as a evil to be avoided. War is no longer seen as a cause for honor or glory .
 This change in perception was facilitated by the emergence of an active peace movement beginning in the late nineteenth century . Individual “idea entrepreneurs” in promoting and diffusing this presumption against war on a global basis .
 Constructivist scholars would further add onto Mueller’s explanation the role played by common identities in facilitating peace in the post-Cold War world . Constructivist scholar: Common identities are key to peace in modern world .
 The important thing about the spread of democracy in the 1990s was the fact that democratic states see themselves as part of a common community, constructivists say . Constructivists: For constructivistists, the important thing was less the structure of democratic institutions .
 Constructivists would no longer expect democratic institutions by themselves to be the guarantor of peace, they say . They say they would not expect them to be able to guarantee peace between democracy and religious traditions .
 Let’s assume, for the moment, that the “long peace,” and the absence of the great power war to which it refers, continue for the indefinite future . Let's assume the ‘long peace’ will continue .
 Let’s also assume the decline in interstate wars characteristic of the post-Cold War era also persists . Let's also assume that interstate wars will continue to decline .
 Van Creveld agrees that interstate war is over because in the era of nuclear weapons states cannot fight one another without risking mutual suicide . The era of interstate war was over because states are now at risk of mutual suicide, he says .
 They will be affected not just accidentally or incidentally or anonymously from afar, as in the case of strategic bombing, but as immediate participants, targets, and victims . They will not just be affected from afar from afar but as well from afar .
 Practices that for three centuries have been considered uncivilized, such as capturing civilians and even entire communities for ransom, are almost certain to make a comeback . Practices that captured civilians for ransom have been seen as barbaric for centuries .
 An asymmetric war is a war in which there is a fundamental difference (or asymmetry) in the nature of the participants, and in their goals, capabilities, and tactics .
 In a conventional war, the participants are all sovereign states and their goals are to defend their national interests . In the case of Syria, Russia and Ukraine, the conflict is likely to be more complicated than a war .
 While one side may be stronger than the other and while there is often some variation in their military tactics, they are basically playing the same game with varying amounts of weapons .
 The participants are not all sovereign states but a mix of states and nonstate actors . The participants were not all countries but some of the participants were non-sovereign .
 The goals are not simply national interests as defined by sovereign states, but also tribal interests, promotion of religious beliefs, or, perhaps, private financial gain . The goals, therefore, are not just national interests .
 The capabilities of the participants can vary widely not only in the number but in the type of weapons . Participants can also vary widely from the number of participants to the types of weapons.
 One side may use highly sophisticated technologies, while the other uses primitive weapons from centuries past . One side uses highly sophisticated technology, while another uses primitive technology .
 Differences in capabilities give rise to varying tactics guided by very different moral rules . And those differences in capabilities are given rise to different tactics .
 To return to the basketball analogy, it is as if one side, unable to match the talent level of the other, begins to play a different game with tactics that violate the traditional rules of the game in order to compensate for its weaknesses . The tactics are similar to those used in basketball
 NATO airstrikes against former Yugoslav republic of Serbia were under way in 1999 . President Bill Clinton addressed the American people on March 24, 1999, in Kosovo .
 In making the case for war, Clinton pointed to the brutal treatment of Kosovar Albanians by Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic . Clinton also cited the treatment of Serbians by the brutal Serbian leader .
 It was also a new kind of war with respect to the manner in which it was fought . It was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in a major war in the Middle East . The U.N. President Barack Obama was elected to the White House in
 Kosovo was very much a conventional conflict given that it was a war fought between sovereign states . In one respect, the Kosovo conflict was very similar to that of the Kosovo War . Kosovo was fought between Kosovo and Kosovo, but it was fought by sovereign states.
 Smart weapons or precision-guided munitions are missiles, bombs, or artillery shells equipped with sophisticated electronic guidance systems that direct the explosive toward a predetermined target . Smart weapons are also known as smart bombs, bombs and artillery shells that direct bombs toward a target .
 NATO pilots spent their time looking at video screens in cockpits well out of range of enemy fire . For NATO forces, the result was what one observer has called a “virtual war” in which pilots spent most of their lives on video screens .
 NATO air raids were relatively low civilian casualties . Civilian casualties were also low due to the accuracy of PGMs .
 Serbian forces did not escape the experience of battle . Unlike their NATO counterparts, Serbian forces have had their own experience . Serbian forces were involved in the battle against Serbia in 2011 .
 Hundreds of Serbian forces were killed and the infrastructure of the Serbian state and economy was decimated . Hundreds of Serbians were killed in the war, including hundreds of Serbian troops .
 Future of War forces and their associated paramilitary units were to seek revenge against Kosovar civilians, killing many and driving hundreds of thousands more into exile . The Future War forces were to kill many and drive thousands of people from the country .
 Gaza Strip is a small, densely populated territory between Egypt and Israel that is home to approximately 1. million Palestinians . The Gaza Strip has a population of 1.2 million .
 Control of Gaza was formally ceded to Israel after the 1967 war . After changing hands several times in the Arab-Israeli wars of 1948, 1956, and 1967, control of Gaza became Israel's main focus .
 As a result of the intifada of the late 1980s, Israel ceded control of Gaza to the Palestinian Authority in the Oslo Accords of 1993 . The Palestinian uprising against Israeli control of the West Bank and Gaza was an uprising .
 Israel retained a military presence in Gaza until 2005 when it evacuated in order to ease tensions with the Palestinian Authority . Despite Oslo, Israel retained its military presence until 2005 .
 In 2007 fighting between the two primary Palestinian factions in Gaza, Fatah and Hamas, resulted in the victory of Hamas . In 2007, Hamas and Fatah were the two main Palestinian factions .
 Hamas has called for the elimination of the state of Israel and is officially labeled by the U.S. State Department as a terrorist organization . The more radical of the two factions, Hamas calls for the state to be eliminated .
 The prelude to the winter 2008-2009 war was a series of skirmishes in which Hamas would launch missiles into Israel . Israel would respond with air attacks on Hamas forces and infrastructure . Israel responded by attacking Hamas forces, infrastructure .
 When a cease-fire brokered by Egypt in June 2008 broke down six months later, Israel commenced an air, naval, and ground assault on Gaza on December 27, 2008 . Israel launched the assault in December 2008 .
 Hamas had access to rockets and other weapons smuggled into Gaza from the outside . Hamas's military capabilities were no match for those of Israel’s high-tech military . Hamas has access to weapons smuggled in from outside .
 Approximately 1,400 Palestinians killed and only 13 Israelis (military and civilian combined) killed . The result was a wide asymmetry in casualties . Only 13 Israelis were killed in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
 Israelis and Palestinians blame each other for the wide disparity in casualties . Israel and Palestinians have been at odds for years over the years over Palestinian deaths .
 The Israeli military blames Hamas for violating the rules of war by hiding its fighters among the civilian population . The absence of uniforms would allow the distinction between civilians and fighters to be clear, the military says .
 Hamas blames Israel for indiscriminate attacks on densely populated urban locations . Hamas says Israel attacked densely populated areas of Israel's cities .
 A highly controversial UN report on Gaza assigned blame to both parties . The report was criticized by commentators on each side of this debate . The UN report was published by the UN in 2009 .
 Scholars of asymmetric war might argue that the results were predictable . Questions of moral culpability aside, scholars say that the outcome was predictable .
 In an asymmetric war the side with technological superiority will be able to shield its forces from harm . In asymmetric warfare the side will shield itself from harm from harm, says CNN.com .
 The weaker side will respond with tactics like those employed by Hamas, placing the onus of the decision to engage in attacks that will inevitably kill civilians back in the hands of the stronger party . The weaker party will respond to attacks that kill civilians .
 NATO in Kosovo and Israel in Gaza paint one image of how twenty-first-century warfare will be waged . The September 11, 2001, 9/11, attacks on the United States is the first act of war in the world .
 On the one hand, you have combatants largely protected from harm as they fight from 15,000 feet in the air . On the other, you've got suicide attackers whose death is assured and accepted in advance .
 On the one hand, you have highly accurate, if imperfect, weapons designed in large part to minimize civilian casualties . On the other, the very purpose of the mission is to maximize civilian deaths, he says .
 We need a definition of terrorism that we can apply regardless of how we assess any particular cause . For purposes of analysis, therefore, we need to be able to define terrorism as a matter of fact .
 Most observers would agree that terrorism involves premeditated violence distinguishable in its political goals from ordinary crime . Terrorist violence is distinguishable from ordinary crimes, but it's political .
 More contentious is the part of the State Department definition that associates terrorism with “subnational groups or clandestine agents” like al-Qaeda . The definition exempts such purposeful World War II attacks on civilians as the Nazi blitz of London, the Allied firebombing of Dresden,
 Among Western publics, the popular view is that terrorism is an irrational activity engaged in by mentally unbalanced zealots with a fanatical devotion to their cause . The popular view of terrorism is that it is irrational and irrational .
 It is difficult for most people to come to terms with the fact that someone would strap explosives to his or her waist and detonate them in a crowded restaurant, or crash a fully loaded plane into an office building .
 Some individual terrorists may be irrational and mentally unbalanced, says author . Terrorist terrorists are, perhaps, irrational, and mentally ill, he says .
 The overall record of terror suggests that it is, in fact, a rational, purposeful activity . However, the overall record suggests that terrorism is rational and purposeful, it is not a terrorist activity .
 To call it rational does not imply endorsement or justification of terror, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "To be rational doesn't imply endorsement of justification for terror. It's not a rational response to a terrorist attack"
 Terror is utilized as a means to a larger strategic end, not terrorism, it says . Instead, it merely suggests that terror is utilized for a larger purpose . Terrorists are not terrorists, they are terrorists. Terrorists should not be terrorists, they say .
 Asymmetric warfare is a form of asymmetric warfare employed by weaker parties in a struggle with a stronger adversary . It is often used in the struggle against a stronger enemy .
 Osama bin Laden has articulated a long list of grievances against the U.S. Over the years, he has been vocal about his grievances with the United.
 A Saudi by birth and a self-described devout Muslim, he was particularly enraged by the continued presence of American troops in the holy land of Saudi Arabia . A self-proclaimed devout Muslim .
 Suicide airplane crashes were not invented by al-Qaeda on September 11, 2001 . Suicide plane crashes are not invented in the U.S. on 9/11, 2001.
 In World War II Japanese suicide pilots purposely flew their planes into American ships . More than 30 U.S. ships were sunk or damaged by the Japanese pilots .
 Thousands of other kamikaze planes were held in reserve to respond to a U.S. naval attack on the Japanese islands . They were never used due to President Harry S Truman's decision to end the war by using the atomic bomb .
 Those Japanese kamikaze attacks would not fit the definition of terrorism because their targets were military ships, nr/.i TTns . But suppose Japan had adopted a different tactic. Those attacks would be considered terrorism .
 Japanese leaders had the will and capability to fly a thousand planes into office buildings and other civilian targets in the United States, producing 100,000 or more civilian deaths . The U.S. would have been hit by a thousand of those planes .
 Added to the list were complaints about U.S. support of Israel, neglect of Palestinian rights, and economic sanctions against Iraq in the 1990s that caused many deaths of Iraqi civilians .
 President Obama could not expel the United States Army from Saudi Arabia or change U.S. policy in the Middle East by conventional military means . He could not change United States policy by conventional means, he would pressure the government indirectly .
 By attacking the World Trade Center and other U.S. targets, he would raise the price of United States policy for Americans . He hopes Americans will pressure the United States government to change course .
 If Americans had to worry about going to work, shopping in a mall, or sending their children to school, they might decide that it was not worth the price to maintain the current policies .
 A larger study of the motivations behind suicide terrorism, political scientist Robert Pape found that the common thread was an effort by militarily weaker groups to use terror to expel foreign troops .
 Such tactics are not guaranteed to work—indeed, they can backfire and provoke even greater intervention by one’s adversary . Such tactics may backfire, but they can also provoke greater intervention .
 Pape’s study suggests that the terror strategy works more often than not and is, at the very least, a calculated risk many terrorists think worth taking .
 As suggested above, the goal of terror is to spread fear and alarm in an effort to pressure one’s adversary to change course and policy . Terrorists spread fear, alarm and alarm to pressure their adversaries to change their course .
 The spectacular nature of many terror attacks and the amount of television coverage they receive help fuel the sense of fear that terrorists seek . Terrorists seek to fuel a sense of terror that they seek .
 The number of casualties produced by terrorism remains relatively low compared to ordinary warfare . However, the number of people killed by terrorism is still relatively low .
 One study counted 3,299 deaths from international terrorism in the 39 most developed countries from 1994 to 2003 . Most of the deaths occurred on 9/11, most of which occurred on September 11 .
 In other words, we tend to exaggerate the risk entailed in dramatic events that receive a lot of television coverage . We tend to underestimate the risk of common everyday activities, he says .
 Terrorists count on exaggerated reaction to their grievances to be taken seriously and addressed . Terrorists rely on the exaggerated reaction of fear and alarm to produce that echo of fear, alarm that can be heard in the world .
 Our post 9/11 preoccupation with the threat of terrorism is not entirely unreasonable . Nonetheless, our preoccupations with terrorism may not be entirely unreasonable.
 Two aspects of twenty-first-century terrorism combine to make it especially worrisome . In particular, two aspects of Twenty-First-Centennial terrorism combine make it particularly worrisome .
 The increasingly explicit willin^ltSs tatkv©fi{hke0:R£nibrace the technique . Please donate to the site .
 War of terror in pursuit of a cause and to treat anyone as a potential target . The Future of War of Terror is to be defined as a cause .
 Political philosopher Michael Walzer notes that the ‘terrorists’ of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century were often guided by a “political code” that caused them to focus their bombing and assassinations on political leaders and government targets rather than random civilians . Walzer:
 Osama bin Laden argued that the taxes U.S. citizens pay to their government make them complicit in their government’s actions and, thus, legitimate targets, he says . Compare that with bin Laden's argument that the tax they pay to the government makes them complicit .
 The second worrisome aspect of contemporary terrorism is the potential for terrorists to access weapons of mass destruction . Terrorists are able to access WMDs, the U.S. says .
 A terrorist with a conventional bomb can bring grief to the lives of victims and their families, but for the nation as a whole, that threat is usually less significant than one posed by the conventional armies of enemy countries . A conventional bomb is usually much less significant .
 For a superpower like the United States, that kind of terrorism might be viewed as a nuisance . In fact, it might be a mere nuisance, one of the costs of a superpower doing business in the world .
 Even a tragedy as significant and dramatic as that of September 11, 2001, need not, as long as one does not overreact, threaten the sovereignty, political order, or economic prosperity of a superpower like the U.S. The tragedy does not, however, threaten America's sovereignty
 The Soviet threat during the Cold War was a threat on a completely different order of magnitude in comparison to what happened on 9/11 . The threat was a much greater threat than the threat posed by the Soviet Union, CNN says .
 An al-Qaeda cell with even a small nuclear device, a dirty bomb, or a vial of anthrax, or chemical weapons, is a threat calculation grows exponentially . Add into the mix an al Qaeda cell with an even small nuclear bomb, dirty bomb or anthrax vial
 The likelihood of the worst-case scenarios—detonation of an atomic device, willful spreading of infectious diseases such as smallpox, mass mailings of anthrax powder— is debated . The likelihood is debated as to what happens next .
 The potential for mass casualties and serious disruption of our way of life is great enough that even unlikely scenarios have to be taken seriously . But whatever the odds, the risk of mass casualties has to be considered seriously .
 Unlike the situation during the Cold War, deterrence is unlikely to prevent nuclear terrorism . Moreover, unlike the situation in the 1950s, deterrence will not prevent terrorism, experts say .
 Mutual assured destruction can only work when the first strike is launched with a return address label attached . The first strike will only work if the first strikes are launched with the return address .
 A nuclear bomb unloaded and detonated in a container in the port of Los Angeles will not be easily traced to a specific terrorist group abroad . The bomb was unloaded in a shipping container in Los Angeles and detonated .
 Even if those responsible are hiding among the population of a country whose citizens do not condone the terror and may even be friendly toward the U.S. And even if such a trace can be developed, retaliation would be problematic .
 New technologies combined with terrorism pose a very dangerous twenty-first-century thtea)t.t. Thus, new technologies .
 J^NtnGifeieJ fhe ^jSJkfst o f/the mb; of p u wers . Please donate to the site .
 The threat can come from sources wielding weapons ranging from anthrax powder to a nuclear device . Now we live in a world where that threat comes from any number of sources wielding .
 Post-9/11 fears of an escalated terror threat pose some larger theoretical questions related to the debate between realists and their critics .
 Critics of realism argue that terrorism and other forms of asymmetric war challenge the realists’ assumption that states exercise a monopoly on the use of violence in world politics . The realists are concerned about the role of state violence in the world politics.
 In fact, more and more of the violence we see in world politics seems to be taking the form of asymmetric war pitting states against various nonstate actors . The violence is taking place in countries with a variety of political, cultural, economic grievances .
 Critics of realism suggest that the very status of states as the key actors is threatened by the changing nature of warfare . Second, critics of realism say that the role of states is threatened .
 If it is the case that major states cannot fight one another because the cost of war in the nuclear age is too high, the main reason for loyalty to states is potentially undermined . The main reason to loyalty to the states is their ability to provide security for their citizens .
 First, they would argue that the presumed decline in the utility of states’ military assets is exaggerated . Second, they argue that a decline in state’s military assets in the U.S. is exaggerated.
 Some might also argue that the Israeli military was effective, notwithstanding the human cost of the war, against an asymmetric foe in the Gaza conflict . Though a more ambiguous case, some might argue that Israel was effective in the war .
 Despite post-2001 fears of follow-on terror attacks, al-Qaeda by many accounts was much weaker in 2010 than it was in 2001 . Al-Qaeda is now a much weaker force in the United States and the world at large, experts say .
 Realists respond that the key issues are the persistence of anarchy and war . Second, and perhaps even more fundamental, realists respond to that . Realists say the key issue is that anarchy, war and war persistently persist .
 The nature of the actors in the system and the kinds of wars they fight are less important than the kind of war they fight . It's important to know how the system works and how the wars are fought in the U.S.
 The realist paradigm could survive the decline of the state system, says Julian Zelizer . Thus, the realist paradigrams could survive, he says .
 Thucydides and Machiavelli wrote long before the 1648 emergence of the Westphalian state system . John Mearsheimer notes that they were key intellectual ancestors of modern realism .
 They could be states, city-states, states, cities, states . Please donate to the site .
 Few scholars are prepared to argue that war is likely to disappear completely from the landscape of world politics anytime soon . Despite the declining incidence of interstate war in recent decades, few scholars believe war will disappear forever .
 War and the threat of war as a means to defend national interests remain central to how the world works . Some groups of countries seem to have taken war off the table as a way to settle disputes .
 Scholars are divided as to what the degree and trajectory of violence in the twenty-first century will look like . However, once one gets past the general observation that the threat of war remains, scholars are divided on what the future of violence looks like .
 Some suggest that the idea of war is becoming unfashionable, and they place their hope in an evolving moral consciousness that can render war less frequent . Some hope that a moral consciousness will reduce the likelihood of war more frequent .
 Others suggest that political change, specifically, the spread of democratic government, is our best bet for the emergence of a new world order .
 International institutions and economic interdependence increasingly mitigate against violent solutions to international conflicts . Still others argue that international institutions mitigate against violence against each other . Chapters 5 and 7 will be discussed in more detail .
 At the very least, the optimists suggest, the combination of these trends might allow us to avoid great power wars . Great power wars whose impact on the world is, especially in the nuclear era, are most threatening .
 Realists argue that in many fundamental respects, not much has changed in international relations since the days of Thucydides and the Peloponnesian Wars . Realists would argue, however, that not much of the world has changed since that time .
 In a world of anarchy, war and violence remain the ultimate recourse for states and other actors to protect their interests and seek redress of their grievances . War and violence are the ultimate resort for states to protect interests of their interests .
 Short-term cyclical downturns in the number of wars should not be mistaken for a permanent change in how the world works, the authors say . The authors say short-term downturns are not permanent changes in the world .
 The longer view of history suggests that despite changes in actors, the emergence of new forms of government, and the development of new and more lethal weapons of destruction, the one constant is that those weapons eventually are used .
 This chapter examined high-stakes issues, potentially involving the lives and deaths of millions of people . This chapter examines the fate of civilization as we know it . The next chapter will focus on the future of civilization .
 In all probability, however, the twenty-first century will not likely produce either the end of war or a global apocalypse . The 20-20th century is not likely to produce either a war or an apocalypse .
 The difference between realists and critics is not so much whether war or peace will prevail, but how many wars will be fought, what kinds of war they will be . The explanations for both the amount and nature of twenty-first-century war can be found, he says .
 A Comprehensive Look £.t rhe .r Distribution over Time, 1116 1997,’ .'nte -ri.ional Studies Quarterly 4 ^fea^e 9 .
 Sarkees, Wayman, and Singer, “Inter-State, Intra-State and Extra-State Wars,” 65. Sarkees and Wayman wrote a book about the war .
 Others have previously made and developed the comparison between war and the automobile . Others have also made the comparison .
 Robert Windrem, “Is Egypt Ready to Go Nuclear,” MSNBC Online, March 15, 2005 . Windrem: Egypt ready to go nuclear .
 International Security 15:4 : 4 :4 : 5-56 .
 See, for example, Larry Diamond, Juan J Linz and Seymour Martin Lipset, Politics in Developing Countries, 2nd ed. , 6-7 .
 Colin Powell addressed the UN Security Council on February 5, 2003, regarding Iraq's alleged weapons of p. p.5\d«d«9ljiyi|:tipij.
 Constructivists and liberals argue that realists underestimate the possibility and reality of cooperation among states . In different ways, both constructivists or liberals take issue with that view .
 For constructivists, the triumph of cooperation over conflict is rooted in the diffusion of powerful global norms favoring cooperative, nonviolent resolution of disputes . Constructivists say that global norms should favor cooperative and nonviolent solutions to disputes .
 Those norms are manifested most powerfully among certain groups of states that have developed shared identities . But they are also manifest more unevenly on a global scale .
 For constructivists it is the power and legitimacy of the norms thenQ^M that shape state behavior . While those norms can be formalized as law and enforced by institutions, they can shape the state's behavior .
 Those liberal institutionalists accept the realist notion that war and violence in world politics result from the anarchy of the international system . They accept the idea that anarchy is caused by anarchy in international politics, they say .
 Realists argue that a system of international law and international organizations can promote order . But realists disagree on how they assess progress in overcoming anarchy via the creation of an international law .
 In their view, the creation of enforceable rules provides the basis for an international society of states that can peacefully work out their differences via legal and institutional framework .
 Realists discount the effectiveness of international laws and organizations . While acknowledging the obvious proliferation of international law and organizations, realists discount their effectiveness .
 Abba Eban, the first Israeli representative to the United Nations, says laws exist but don't mean they will be obeyed or enforced . Eban: Laws exist but not always will be reliably obeyed, enforced .
 The establishment of even the most nobly intended international organization does not guarantee that its mission will succeed . Neither does the establishment of such a mission guarantee that it will succeed. Neither does it guarantee that the organization will succeed, says CNN.com .
 This chapter examines the record of international law and organization in the contemporary international system . This chapter includes the history of the U.N. system and international law .
 Special attention will be given to the United Nations and its key organs, the Security Council, the General Assembly, and the World Court . The UN is both the key international organization of the post-World War II era and the institutional linchpin of international law .
 To the extent that these institutions appear to effectively constrain state sovereignty and reduce anarchy, the record will help confirm the liberal view of how the world works today, says Julian Zelizer .
 To the extent that these institutions appear to be weak and ineffective, the record will help reconfirm the traditional realist understanding of the world, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Hugo Grotius was a leading theorist and writer on the modern system of international law . He was also a leading figure in the development of the modern international law system .
 As a Dutch jurist and legal thinker, he was concerned that the maritime power of England, Spain, and Portugal might threaten Holland’s access to the open seas and its important trade routes . He was concerned about the power of Spain, Spain and Portugal .
 He argued that all countries must have the right to sail the seas . He argued powerful nations should not be allowed to deny that right to others .
 This “Grotian notion of the ocean” 3 was a step in the direction of a larger system of international law . This is a step toward a larger international system of law .
 On the Law of War and Peace, Grotius argues that states must be a part of a larger international society . He accepts the concept of state sovereignty but argues that it must be part of an international society with rules governing relations with one another .
 Most modern, democratic states, legislatures and parliaments typically establish such rules . The first question that must addressed, therefore, is where one turns to find these rules .
 At the global level, however, no such legislative body has the authority to make law . At a global level of law, no law has been made by a legislative body .
 Some observers look forward to the day when the General Assembly or some other global body might develop such law-making authority . The closest approximation might be the UN General Assembly, the closest approximation .
 The General Assembly can provide a forum for discussion on matters of international law and can authorize drafting of treaties and documents . Resolution and declarations of the General Assembly are not legally binding on states .
 International treaties are the most important source of international law . Treaties are important legal sources for international law, including international treaties . International law is based on international treaties, rather than treaties .
 Some multilateral treaties may involve the majority of the world’s countries . Some of the most significant of the treaties are multilateral agreements .
 Multilateral treaties are often intended to be norm-making . They establish global standards that the parties view as a guide to beneficial behavior . Multilateral agreements are often meant to be norms-making.
 In this respect, they are distinguishable from bilateral treaties, which apply narrowly to only two states . In this case, bilateral treaties apply narrowly only to two states, rather than two .
 Bilateral treaties are, in effect, contracts between states . They are not necessarily intended to establish norms for the international system as a whole . Bilateral treaty is not intended to set norms for international system .
 During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union signed a number of arms control treaties designed to regulate their bilateral arms race . The U.S. and Russia signed several arms control agreements during that time .
 The international legal principle of pacta sunt servanda (“treaties must be respected”) requires states to comply with the terms of treaties they have signed and ratified .
 When a broad majority of the world’s states have signed and ratified a treaty, it can even put political pressure on nonsignatories to conform to treaty rules . When a treaty has a majority of nations sign and ratify it, it puts pressure on non-signatories to
 Only countries that have signed and then ratified a treaty are legally bound to observe its terms . Under international law, only countries that sign and then ratify a treaty can observe it terms .
 The United States has not ratified the Kyoto protocol on globaL^varpiing . The U.S. faces a lot of political heat for refusing to participate in the treaty .
 International Law and Organization since India, Pakistan, and Israel did not sign and ratify the Nonproliferation Treaty, they could legally acquire nuclear weapons despite the global consensus against nuclear proliferation . Since India and Pakistan not signed and ratified the treaty, they were able to acquire nuclear arms
 Skeptical observers often note that treaties only bind states with their consent . This, they say, is a major weakness of the international legal system .
 In their view, it is the equivalent of a domestic law that prohibits murder, but only for individuals who agree in advance to the prohibition . The law would be equivalent of the domestic ban on murder, they say .
 Even when states sign and ratify treaties, they often do so only after attaching formal treaty reservations . The reservations are intended to exclude or modify the applicability of specific provisions .
 States often can formally withdraw from a treaty if they decide that compliance no longer serves their national interest . States can also decide to formally withdraw if compliance is no longer necessary .
 Many treaties specifically provide a mechanism for withdrawing from the U.S. to withdraw from the European Union . Such withdrawal is not always allowed, but treaties provide a way to do so .
 Long-established norms of behavior among states can become a part of what is called customary international law . treaties are the most important and most formalized source of law .
 Customary law established through practices that are routinely respected and that states come over time view as obligatory, even though they have not been negotiated and codified through the treaty-making process . Customary laws are established by practices that have not yet been negotiated or codified .
 The notion that unarmed fishing vessels should not be captured in warfare has long been a part of international customary law . For example, the notion that an unarmed fishing vessel shouldn't be captured is long part of the law .
 International law has long recognized the right of states to defend themselves when threatened . But customary international law may extend this right of self-defense to terrorist threats . This includes a right to engage in military response against states that harbor terrorists .
 The "cannon shot rule" once defined a state’s territorial waters . For example, it was once the custom that the “cannon . shot rule” defined state territorial waters, but it has since gone .
 The rule said that coastal states could claim as sovereign territory waters 3 nautical miles from the shore . That rule was first formulated in the seventeenth century . The rule was created in 17th century .
 The 1994 Taw of the Seas Treaty was the first formalized treaty between the U.S. and the world's largest nations . The treaty was signed in 1994 . Technology has changed and as states challenged the three-mile custom became clear .
 General principles of la.w recognized by civilized nations are a third source of international law . Other Sources of International Law are the principles of the la. w recognized by nations .
 International Law Adjudication 1: 39 “gap-fillers” provide legal basis for decisions in cases where neither treaties nor customs offer conclusive guidance . 39 ‘gap-fills’ are “gaps-filling’s” insofar as they
 These general principles often deal with legal procedures such as rules of evidence . But they can also relate to substantive matters such as human rights .
 The 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights lays out a long list of human rights . It is explicit in noting that “general principles of law recognized by the community of nations” must be respected .
 If an individual violated human rights that were not explicitly covered in the 1966 treaty, that individual might still be prosecuted under international law if it could be shown that he or she had violated a general principle covered by the law of most civilized states .
 Judicial decisions and teachings of the most highly qualified jurists are considered subsidiary sources of international law . Finally, judicial rulings and teachings from the most successful jurists should be considered as a source of law .
 Rulings of the World Court and other judicial bodies can contribute to the development of that law, says Simon Tisdall . The World Court can help develop the law, he says .
 The same applies to the learned opinions of jurists and legal thinkers, whose interpretations of treaties and customs also contribute to the development of legal norms . The same apply to jurists, legal thinkers .
 International law provides a wide range of rules and procedures, obligations, and prohibitions that guide states as to acceptable and unacceptable behavior . These various sources of international law provide a wide .
 Despite the absence of a global law-making legislature, it is hard to argue that the world has no rules that, if observed, could reduce anarchy and increase order in the international system .
 The conduct of war, weapons proliferation, human rights, trade and investment, and the environment, are regulated by treaty or custom . Virtually every aspect of interstate relations, including the conduct of weapons proliferation and human rights are regulated .
 An effective legal system not only requires a set of laws stated in advance but also a system of courts that can apply those laws . A successful legal system requires a court system to apply the laws, which can be applied by law .
 The courts must examine the circumstances of a case, determine if a law has been violated, and if so, decide who is responsible for that violation . Courts must examine circumstances of cases, decide if law was violated, then decide who's responsible .
 In the international legal system, issue-specific institutions adjudicate some cases . In the world, the cases are adjudicated by an international body .
 The only general-purpose, global court with responsibility for resolving disputes among states under international law is the International Court of Justice . The World Court, better known as the World Court , is the only general purpose global court .
 The World Court was created after World War II as the successor to the Permanent Court of International Justice that had existed from 1922 to 1946 . The ICJ was created in 1946 after the end of WWII .
 Any state'tlrat is aTuriTTber of me'TJnrted NationsTs'ailtbmatically a party to the W3 hfelcCT© r Q 3) .
 The World Court is the general-purpose, global court with responsibility for resolving disputes among states under international law . The International Court of Justice is the most important court in the world . It is the only international court with jurisdiction for resolving international disputes .
 The World Court has 15 judges, elected by the state parties, who serve nineyear renewable terms . The judges are elected by state parties and serve nine years each .
 The nationality of the judges has reflected an attempt to represent the global diversity of state parties, the judges said . The nationality has reflected a attempt to recognize the uneven distribution of power in the international system .
 No state can have more than one of its nationals sit on the court . No state has to have two nationals sit in the court. No state must have one member of its national team .
 The five permanent members of the UN Security Council (United States, Russia, France, Great Britain, and China) have generally always had a judge on the court . The one exception of China from 1967 to 1984 was the one exception .
 15 judges who sit on the court are there not to represent their home country . They are there to uphold and apply international law on an impartial basis . The 15 judges are not represented by their country but by international law .
 The UN can issue advisory opinions on matters of international law at the request of the UN Security Council, the UN General Assembly, or other specialized UN agencies granted this right by the General Assembly .
 States, individuals, NGOs, and other international organizations outside the UN system cannot directly ask for such opinions . Nations, individuals and NGOs outside the United Nations must not directly ask such opinions.
 Note that World Court advisory opinions are not considered legally binding .
 Neither the international organization that requested the opinion nor individual states need comply with the “advice” offered. Neither the organization nor individual state need comply .
 The opinion attempts to clarify the law and use the legal and political prestige of the court to influence world opinion . Instead of the law, it attempts to use the court's prestige and legal prestige to influence the world .
 High-visibility advisory opinion had to do with the security wall built by the Israeli government to restrict Palestinians who might pose a threat to Israel . The wall was built to restrict Palestinian threats to Israel from Palestinians .
 ICJ ruled in 2010 that Kosovo’s 2008 declaration of independence from Serbia was legal . In 2010, the ICJ also ruled in that decision . Kosovo declared its independence in 2008 .
 Some observers worried that this ruling would fuel separatist movements around the world . But the court advised that there was no prohibition on declarations of independence in international law .
 The second function of the World Court is to hear and decide contentious cases between states involving matters of international law . The World Court has two functions: Hear and decide disputes between states and international law.
 International organizations, NGOs, and individuals can neither bring contentious cases to the court nor be tried as defendants . International organizations and individuals cannot be brought contentious cases before the court and are not defendants .
 Decision in contentious case is considered legally binding . Unlike advisory opinions, decisions in contentious cases are considered binding . Decision in a contentious case can be legally binding, experts say .
 World Court to take a case in the first place and expect the parties to participate in court proceedings requires the prior consent of the states involved . However, for the first time, the World Court has taken a case, the parties involved must consent to participate .
 The World Court lacks the power of compulsory jurisdiction that domestic courts typically possess . Domestic courts typically require parties to show up for court or face legal sanctions .
 Under internatiodG^Afl|\liiid) AiDEQl^d ^CBy ^oluliBC £ E<lhfcHe)^d3d Court may acquire this Cjnsenj, tqjts j y|T
 First, consent can be granted via “special agreement” or “compromis,” in which two states in conflict agree to take the case to the ICJ for resolution . Second, consent is granted via "special agreement" or "compromise"
 Consent in this form is typically easiest to obtain where the stakes of the case are relatively low and the outcome of the court’s deliberations is uncertain . As one might expect, consent in such a case is typically easier to obtain when the stakes are low .
 States will be reluctant to commit voluntarily to the ICJ’s jurisdiction when vital interests are at stake, especially if the legal basis of the case is weak, says the lawyer . The ICJ's jurisdiction is crucial to the case, he says .
 jurisdiction by "special agreement" deals with relatively minor border disputes, fishing rights, and other matters where a loss in court would not be devastating . Thus, jurisdiction by “special agreement’s” typically deals with small border disputes .
 Second, jurisdiction can be acquired via treaties that commit countries that sign and ratify to submit their treaty-related disputes to the World Court . The World Court can also be used to obtain jurisdiction in disputes between countries .
 Third, jurisdiction can come via a formal declaration of acceptance of Article 36 of the Charter of the International Court of Justice . Article 36 is part of the charter of the court of justice .
 Article 36, commonly known as the optional clause, was intended as a compromise between those who wanted the World Court to have compulsory jurisdiction and those who rejected such a sweeping grant of jurisdiction in the name of protecting state sovereignty . Article 36 was intended to be a compromise .
 A state that accepts the optional clause voluntarily accepts the ICJ’s compulsory jurisdiction in any future case involving another country that has also declared such acceptance . The ICJ's compulsory jurisdiction is required in all cases involving other countries that have also declared acceptance .
 The World Court’s dependence on the voluntary acquiescence of states to its jurisdiction is a weakness that even ardent supporters concede . Even the most ardent supporters of the ICJ concede that even the court's supporters concede this weakness .
 State consent to World Court jurisdiction via special agreements, treaties often means less than meets the eye, due to reservations commonly attached to such consent . In fact, state consent to the World Court is often seen as a form of state consent . The World Court will hear the case for the first
 Those reservations can, however, limit the issues covered by the consent consent .
 Australia exempts maritime boundary issues from its acceptance of the optional clause . Slovakia exempts disputes involving protection of the environment, India exempts territorial border disputes . Australia, Slovakia and India exempt disputes over territorial borders .
 The United Kingdom exempts disputes involving current or former British Commonwealth members . A number of states exempt disputes with states with which they do not have formal diplomatic relations .
 The U.S. has had a stake in order and stability in the international system . On the one hand, as a status quo power throughout much of the post-World War II era, the United States has had an interest in order . The United States is a major player in
 To the extent that the World Court and the larger system of international law preserve that order, it can benefit the U.S. The World Court provides a basis for peaceful resolution of disputes, the author says .
 A superpower like the United States might find the World Court excessively constraining at times . But it is precisely because the main impact of law and courts is to limit the raw exercise of power, the U.S. might find it constraining .
 The United States has been reluctant to accept the ICJ’s jurisdiction . As a result, though generally supportive of the World Court in principle, in practice the U.S. has been .
 The United States agreed to submit a case to the World Court via special agreement on only one occasion . In the more than 60-year history of the world court, the U.S. has submitted a case only once in the past .
 In 1981, Canada and the United States agreed to seek a ruling on the location of the maritime boundary between the two countries in the Gulf of Maine . That was a relatively minor issue of the border dispute .
 Those last six words, as determined by the United States, drained all essential meaning from the U.S. acceptance of compulsory jurisdiction . The United States accepted compulsory jurisdiction in the death penalty .
 In November 1979 young militants stormed the U.S. embassy and took approximately 70 Americans hostage . The embassy was stormed by militants in November 1979 .
 The United States sought the World Court’s intervention . The U.S. says Iran violated the principle of aiplumatte imrn urntycBespitc Iiard&Tefuski fe participate in the Please donate to the site .
 The hostages were not released until January 20, 1981, just minutes following newly elected President Ronald Reagan’s inaugural address . That ruling notwithstanding, the hostages were released just minutes after Reagan's inaugural address.
 The United States refused to participate in ICJ proceedings in Nicaragua . A few years later, in Nicaragua the U.S. refused to take part in proceedings .
 The leftleaning Sandinista regime in power in Nicaragua accused the U.S. of engaging in various illegal military actions . In this case, the United States has been accused of trying to destabilize the Nicaraguan government . The Sandinistas say the United .
 In particular, Nicaragua pointed to the laying of mines to restrict access to ports . Nicaragua says the mines have been laid to restrict ports .
 The United States refused to recognize the jurisdiction of the World Court in this case . Despite having accepted the optional clause in 1946, the U.S. refused to accept the jurisdiction . The U.K. refused the jurisdiction in this decision .
 The United States terminated its acceptance of the optional clause, and rejected and ignored the substantive findings of the World Court . In response, the U.S. terminated its . acceptance of that clause, the United States did not accept the .
 U.S. behavior toward the ICJ in the Iranian and Nicaraguan cases suggests that the adage about the World Court being “a place you can go but not be taken” is apt . The adage is apt.
 Realists might argue that the World Court is a weak substitute for power and self-help in world politics . Realists may argue that it is a weaker substitute to power in the world .
 ICJ lacks the power to enforce its “legally binding rulings,” but it can’t even compel state participation in court proceedings . ICJ cannot even compel the state to participate in proceedings, the ICJ says .
 58 cases have been adjudicated since 1990, with another 16 either being heard or pending consideration in mid-2010 . All but 5 of the 58 cases are contentious cases, including 5 contentious .
 States that bring cases to the World Court must see some purpose and value in doing so . Clearly, states that bring such a case to the world court must see value in it .
 ICJ decisions can spill over into the larger court of world opinion, pressuring states that are in violation of international law even when they have failed to accept the World Court’s jurisdiction . At the very least, ICJ decision can pressure states that violate international law .
 ICJ rulings can provide part of the basis for other international organizations, such as the UN Security Council, to act . The ICJ has been criticized for its rulings in the past .
 The effectiveness of international law is closely bound with the effectiveness of the larger United Nation£styOWN LOAD ED FROM LIBGEN.ORG Please donate to the site .
 One of the most common criticisms of the international legal system is related to the perceived weakness of law enforcement . International Law and Organization is based in the United States .
 In domestic systems, an individual convicted of a crime in a court of law faces immediately enforceable punishment, such as a fine or imprisonment . In domestic . systems, individuals convicted of such a crime face immediate enforceable punishments .
 In the international system, the World Court might rule that a state has violated international law, but whether that state will terminate the law-violating behavior and make amends is an open question . In the world, a state might violate international law but not necessarily terminate it and make an
 Iran continued to hold U.S. diplomats hostage for months following the World Court’s ruling . The United States effectively ignored the court’�s decision that United States behavior toward Nicaragua was illegal . The U.N. continued to ignore the decision .
 The differences between domestic and international law in this respect are real and significant . Yet, one should not lose sight of the similarities, one says .
 Law enforcement in domestic setting is often enforced without the overt intervention of public authorities . Self-help is often used in the domestic setting to enforce the law .
 I refrain from parking my car on my neighbor’s lawn not only because I fear the police will be summoned to fine or arrest me but also because the law prohibiting such a practice is one that I have internalized and respect . The law prohibits parking cars on neighbors' lawns
 I would have to contend with the damage to my reputation as a decent person and good neighbor that such behavior would likely produce, he says . I would also be concerned about the damage caused by such behavior, he writes .
 It is, as constructivists would argue, the power of widely accepted norms of behavior that keep me from behaving in an unneighborly way . The power of the norms is to stop me from acting out in a different way, he says .
 If that isn’t enough to deter me, my neighbor can impose more concrete costs, he says . ‘I’m not going to let it happen again. If that’s not enough, I’ll have to pay it back,’ he
 He might not invite me to his next Super Bowl party, or he might park his car on my lawn . I'm not sure if he's invited me to a party or if he'll park on his lawn . He might never invite me .
 Police and courts are only the most visible tip of domestic law enforcement . In short, the situations in which the police and courts have been called on represent only one tip of the tip of law enforcement.
 Having signed a treaty, a state often respects it because of the power of the international norms of behavior established . The reputational damage that would likely occur if the treaty is casually violated would likely be likely to occur if it was casually violated .
 States also have to consider the possibility of reprisals by other states . States must also consider the prospect of reprisal by other countries .
 Often those reprisals, otherwise known as enforcement via self-help, involve perfectly legal actions by other states . Often those include the recall of an ambassador, nonparticipation in an athletic competition, or scaling back of a cultural exchange program .
 Other times, the reprisal might involve an action that would be illegal if unprovoked but that now is justified given the provocation . Sometimes, the action is illegal but now justified, but now, it's justified given provocation .
 The terms of a treaty might not bind a state whose own rights under that treaty have been violated by another state . Thus, the terms of such a treaty may not bind the terms .
 A state that limits the import of another country’s goods can expect to have its exports blocked in retaliation . The World Trade Organization functions as the court of international trade law, often with the approval of the WTO .
 No legal system, domestic or international, could survive without a critical mass of actors who maintain voluntary respect for the law or who are deterred from violating the law by the prospect of reprisals .
 The more powerful the actor, the more it can potentially withstand the threat of reprisals and contemplate illegal activity . The most powerful actor can be found to be a powerful enough to withstand the threats of reprisal .
 In such cases, the existence of a “sheriff’s” to enforce the law will be most noticeable . The existence, or absence, of a sheriff will be noticeable, in such cases .
 Sheriff is important to punish the few who break the law and reinforce the tendency of the many to obey it . Reliable enforcement by the sheriff is important for law enforcement in the United States .
 As realists would stress, however, the international system has no sheriff with universal authority . The international system is not a one-sided solution to the problems of global warming .
 World Court might rule that a state violated the law, but it has no army to stop that violation . The World Court has no power to stop the violation of the law . World Court may rule that the law was violated by a state, but that's not possible .
 One possible solution to policing the international system and enforcing international law is for a powerful state to take on this role . A powerful state is needed to enforce international law, says David Cameron .
 Hegemonic stability theory argues that stability and order in the international system is increased when a powerful state or hegemon is able to take on this role . Such a state is capable of exercising hegemony, or dominance in international system, in theory .
 At the end of the Cold War, some saw the United States taking on this role . Some saw the U.S. taking on the role .
 Bush: “America and the world must support the rule of law.” Bush said following the 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait . Bush: America and the rest of the world need to support the law .
 Bush: "Stand up to Iraq was important not just to liberate Kuwait but also to send a larger message that violators of international law would have to face the wrath of the U.S. led by the United States" Bush: Stand-up was important to send the message that
 Scholars disagree over whether hegemony, in the long run, supports or undermines the evolution of an effective international legal order .
 Some scholars argue that given the absence of effective global institutions, law enforcement by a hegemonic power is crucial . Others argue that law enforcement is crucial given absence of global institutions .
 Others see a tension between law and the interests of any single state, particularly one so powerful, which will invariably seek to enforce international law only when it suits that state’s interests . Others, however, see the tension between international law and interests of a powerful state, such as
 For liberal institutionalists, international law enforcement ultimately depends on developing international organizations that can pick up the responsibility for law enforcement when enforcement via self-help reaches its limits . Hegemonic stability theory says stability and order in the international system increase when a powerful state or ""hegemon""
 International organizations are voluntary associations created to achieve a common purpose and with a membership that extends beyond the borders of a single state . The Role of International Organizations is defined as voluntary associations .
 An intergovernmental organization is an organization whose membership is typically limited to states . Intergovernmental organizations are often limited to limited membership of states .
 The most obvious example is the United Nations, whose membership is virtually universal and its organs and specialized agencies deal with the full gamut of global issues .
 The EU is unique because of the amount of sovereign authority its individual member states have ceded to EU-wide institutions . As will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 7, Chapter 7 will discuss the EU's role in the EU .
 These functional or special-purpose organizations facilitate the achievement of some defined goal . Special-purpose groups are often used to help achieve some of the country's goals .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries was created for the purpose of controlling oil prices . The International Whaling Commission monitors issues relating to global whaling industry .
 IGOs seek to facilitate cooperation among members and thus can mitigate, if not eliminate, global anarchy . Whatever the type of IGO, these IGs seek to mitigate, or eliminate, worldwide anarchy .
 They can provide a forum for negotiation and a place to resolve disputes . They can also provide a place for negotiation, and a way to end disputes, experts say .
 States may be motivated to join at least in part by the common purpose that the IGO represents . But they will also consider their state interests, and votes will reflect those interests . States will vote in the vote on whether or not to join the International Olympic Committee .
 In their design and purpose, IGOs are closely linked with the development of international law . In their purpose, they are close to developing international law. In the future, they will be closely watched by the world's most powerful nations .
 IGOs are themselves created by treaties among their members . They are a product of international treaty law and also are bound by its obligations . IGs are created by treaty law .
 Some IGOs are established to monitor compliance with a particular treaty . Second, some IGOS are established for monitoring compliance with particular treaty treaties .
 Third, IGOs can also provide a forum for negotiating new treaties among member states . Third, they can also be used to negotiate new treaties with other countries .
 IGOs can, in some cases, act as the enforcement arm of international law, with both the authority and the means to punish violators of the law . Finally, they can also act as an IGO with both authority and means of punishment .
 In contrast to an IGO, a nongovernmental organization is an organization that is established and that operates independent of the formal control of governments . An IGO is an international organization that operates independently of government control .
 As a college student, you can become a member of an NGO like Amnesty International or Greenpeace by registering online and paying a membership fee . But you cannot join an IGO such as the United Nations . You can join a U.N. organization such as Greenpeace or Amnesty International .
 NGOs are established to promote and achieve some common mission such as human rights, environmental protection, or global health . Like IGOs, NGOs are set up to promote or achieve a common mission like human rights .
 Unlike an IGO, in an NGO the interests of specific states are irrelevant . In the case of an NGO, in the interest of the state is irrelevant, says the head of the NGO .
 Estimates of tens of thousands of internationally operating NGOs are common . The exact number is difficult to determine, but estimates are difficult .
 In pursuing their mission, NGOs pursue multiple strategies, including promoting human rights, facilitating economic development, or combating climate change . NGOs are pursuing multiple strategies to promote their mission .
 They provide direct assistance to individuals and communities in need . They monitor and publicize the actions of governments, and they can lobby states to enact desired policy initiatives .
 Liberal, constructivist, and feminist scholars have pointed to this proliferation of NGOs as evidence that the world is increasingly dated . Bie World works is increasingly important to women's rights .
 NGOs can apply for and receive formal consultative status with UN agencies . This trend is most readily seen in the United Nations where NGOs can get consultational status with the UN . NGOs can also apply to UN agencies to receive consultative rights to NGOs .
 Both IGOs and NGOs are central to the emergence and perpetuation of international regimes . Both are key to the success of the international regime, writes Peter Bergen .
 A regime is a set of principles, norms, rules, and procedures that guides the behavior of states in a specific issue area . The regime is set up by a regime that guides state's behavior in specific areas .
 For example, the nuclear nonproliferation regime is centered on the principle that nuclear proliferation is destabilizing . Nuclear proliferation has destabilized countries in the world, the author says .
 Nonproliferation is a principle against the development, acquisition, or sharing of nuclear weapons technology . Flowing from the principle are norms against the . development, . acquisition of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, and dealing with those who operate outside the norms and rules .
 The international regime is a set of principles, norms, rules, and procedures that guides and shapes the behavior of states in a specific issue area . Essential to this regime are the contributions of IGOs like the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 Since the end of World War II, the single most important international organization has been the United Nations . The U.N. is one of the world's most important organizations .
 Vatican City is the only UN-recognized sovereign state that is not a member of the group . Vatican City has a special observer status without a vote .
 Republic of China is not recognized by the UN as a sovereign state and thus also lacks UN membership . Though possessing de facto attributes of sovereignty, it is still not recognized as a sovereignty state . It is not a member of the United Nations, nor is recognized by any other state .
 The UN is the only global, general-purpose organization in existence today . In addition to the UN, the UN is also the world's only global and general purpose purpose organization .
 Through its organs and agencies, the UN deals with all matters of international affairs . Issues include issues of war and peace, the global economy, human rights, environmental management, and global health management .
 Many key international agencies of the post-World War II era are subsumed within the UN system . The International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Health Organization are among those subsumed .
 UN is the only international organization with the authority to use military power toipromote global ©£i©y EiR©MiftiJfS Gt&t^tjtOiRlC&w.
 The roles played by NGOs in Afghanistan are well illustrated by the situation in Afghanistan . The promise and pitfalls associated with NGO efforts can be traced back to the country's conflict with the Taliban .
 Following the 2001 U.S. invasion and the fall of the Taliban regime, the number of NGOs operating in Afghanistan proliferated . The Taliban regime was overthrown in 2001, but the Taliban was still in control .
 By 2009 as many as 2,000 NGOs were estimated to be in Afghanistan working in such diverse areas as education, human rights, the establishment of legal institutions, and economic development .
 Most of those NGOs are Afghan, the largest and bestfunded are international NGOs . Most of the NGOs are based in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 NGOs have provided much needed assistance to a country reeling from the challenges of poverty, war, and civil strife . The NGOs have helped provide much needed aid to the country .
 NGO personnel and resources have complemented those provided by the United Nations, the United States, and other national governments . NGO personnel, resources have been complemented by the U.N. and other governments .
 At the same time, the NGO role in Afghanistan has not been without problems, not least of which has been the problem of security . The NGO's role in the country has also been criticized for lack of security in Afghanistan .
 38 NGO staff workers were killed by armed opposition groups in 2008 alone . In 2008 alone, 38 of the 38 killed were staff members by armed groups .
 Afghan government revoked licenses of 1 72 NGOs (including 20 international NGOs) alleged to have engaged in misconduct in May 2010 . In May 2010, the government revoked the licenses of some of the NGOs .
 In part, the crackdown stemmed from a concern in some government circles that the weak Afghan government is too dependent on NGOs . Some government circles are concerned the weak government is dependent on NGO funding .
 Many Afghans are disillusioned with the role of NGOs in Afghanistan . But there is also more general disillusionment among many Afghans about the role they have in helping .
 The cooperative relationship that has developed in recent years between NGOs on the one hand, and IGOs and national governments has raised questions about the autonomy of NGOs . This is especially so in a place like Afghanistan where foreign troops are present .
 The Security Council is one of the principal organs of the United Nations . It has primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security . The U.N. Security Council has a key role in maintaining international security .
 Th WjfeUlfty AQiEjfD i ftR©f^4nLdfBlQ BWtVtth pnmary responsibility for mpintaiqiqi^g pj^^Mition^l peace ari^ecurity. Th W
 To act on any substantive measure, nine of the 15 members must agree, including all five of the permanent members . To act, a supermajority of nine of 15 must agree to a measure .
 A single ‘no’ vote, or veto, by one of the Perm-5—the five permanent members—effectively stymies Security Council action . A single "no" vote by a single “no” vote by one member of the Security Council
 The veto is related in part to the self-interested desire of the great powers after World War II to guard their sovereignty . It also reflects the great power unanimity principle, which means vetoing vetoes .
 The Secretariat is the bureaucratic arm of the United Nations, headed by the secretary-general . It is staffed by about 9,000 full-time UN employees who carry out daily activities .
 Economic and Social Council is one of the principal organs of the United Nations . It coordinates and oversees UN economic and social programs, including the work of various specialized agencies .
 Trusteeship Council is one of the original six primary organs of the UN established to supervise UN trust territories and facilitate their move to selfgovernment . Council was one of six primary UN organs established in the 1950s and 1960s .
 International Law and Organization would render the successful implementation of Security Council decisions highly problematic, thereby undermining the credibility of the council . International Law would render . implementation of the Security Council decision highly problematic .
 The General Assembly is the quasi-legislative organ of the UN . It has the authority to issue nonbinding resolutions and declarations . It is also a forum for discussion of international issues .
 Its membership is universal, with all states that are members of the UN represented . The organisation is based in New York City .
 The UN General Assembly is unhampered by the veto, and it is based on the principle of sovereign equality for all states . Unlike the Security Council, the General Assembly has no veto power .
 All members have a seat in the General Assembly; all, regardless of size, population, or power, have one vote . Decisions in most cases are based on the principle of majority rule . All members of the Assembly have a one vote; all have one seat .
 The UN Charter does not give the General Assembly the power to implement its decisions . However, it does give the UN Charter the power of implementing its own decisions . The U.N. does not have the powers to implement the decisions .
 The General Assembly cannot use coercive instruments such as economic sanctions or military power to put teeth behind its resolutions . While it can pass declarations and resolutions on any subject, it can't use coercive tools such as sanctions .
 It is staffed by about 9,000 full-time employees who carry out the day-to-day activities of the UN . The UN provides administrative support to other UN organs and other agencies .
 The UN secretary-general is often viewed as the “face of the UN” He is authorized to bring matters affecting international peace and security to the Security Council .
 Secretariat employees are considered international civil servants whose duty is to the UN and its mission, rather than to the state from which they come . Secretariat staff are considered 'international civil servants'
 The Economic and Social Council coordinates and oversees UN economic and social programs . It oversees the work of approximately two dozen specialized agencies such as the World Health Organization .
 Though accountable to the ECOSOC, these agencies are largely autonomous . These agencies are much more autonomous than the UN .
 Major UN efforts to combat poverty, promote economic development, and control the spread of disease take place under the ESOSOC organizational umbrella .
 ECOSOC operates on the principle of one state, one vote, and decisions are taken by a simple majority . The body of the United Nations is the largest body in the world of political powers .
 The International Court of Justice or World Court is the primary court of international law . The World Court, as previously discussed, is the main court of law .
 The Trusteeship Council was originally created to supervise UN trust territories and their move toward self-government . It was originally set up by the UN in order to monitor self-governments of the territories .
 The work of this organ was suspended in 1994 when Palau gained its independence . Palau is the last remaining trust territory of the Palau Islands .
 Through these principal organs, and the numerous agencies and programs whose work they authorize and coordinate, the UN plays an important role across a range of global issues . The UN is an important part of the world's most powerful body .
 The United Nations liberal institutionalists regarding the performance and potential of the UN centers on the issues of promoting global security and enforcing international law and order, they say .
 The United Nations is empowered by its charter to enforce international law and order in a number of ways . UN Enforcement of Law and Order is a key part of the U.N.
 The World Court can enforce decisions of the World Court, engage in collective security operations, and establish peacekeeping missions . It can also enforce decisions made by World Court members .
 In all these areas, the central actor is the Security Council, though the General Assembly sometimes plays a role as well . The U.N. Security Council is the body of the United States' most powerful body .
 Security Council may make recommendations or decide upon measures to give effect to the judgment . If any party to a case fails to perform the obligations incumbent upon it under a judgment rendered by the Court, the other party may have recourse to the Security Council .
 Given this grant of authority to the Security Council, the requirements of an effective system of international law seem to all be in place . The U.N. Security Council has been granted the power to enforce international law .
 A broad array of laws created by treaty and custom are available for interpretation and application by the World Court . World Court's decisions are given teeth by the enforcement authority of the Security Council .
 In practice, however, the law enforcement authority granted under Chapter XIV has been rarely used . In practice it has not been used .
 The Security Council’s enforcement of World Court decisions can be subject to political debates rather than strictly legal considerations . Thus, the Security Council's enforcement of the World Court decision is subject to a political debate .
 The result has been very few cases in which the Security Council has acted as the enforcement arm of the World Court under Article 94 of Article 94 .
 The Security Council is not limited to the execution of World Court decisions . However, the law enforcement role of the Security Council does not include the World Court . The council is not only able to enforce the decisions, it also has a legal role in other matters .
 In domestic legal systems, law enforcement is not limited to the punishment of criminals after conviction by a court . It is not only law enforcement but law enforcement can also be used to punish criminals .
 The most important law enforcement function of the police is to respond to calls regarding crimes in progress and to stop them before innocent individuals are hurt, police say . The police say it's important to stop crimes before innocent people are hurt .
 The UN Security Council's primary responsibility is to respond to threats to international peace and stability that are imminent or in progress . The same is true of the United Nations Security Council, which has a primary responsibility of responding to threats imminent or progress .
 Like any good sheriff, the Security Council has a law enforcement role that precedes court action . The Security Council is the subject of a lawsuit against the sheriff's office .
 International Law and Organization referred to simply as its Chapter VII authority, to determine when such threats are occurring, call on parties to take measures to prevent aggravation of the situation, implement nonmilitary measures .
 UN members are obliged to make available to the Security Council the forces required . UN members must make available the forces needed to implement military measures, UN says .
 In principle, the Security Council has significant authority to play that collective security role . However, in practice, its record has been spotty .
 United States and Soviet/Russian vetoes accounted for close to 80 percent of all vetoes cast, reflecting the realities of the bipolar Cold War era in which the U.S and USSR were on opposite sides of virtually every significant international issue .
 During the first two decades of the UN’s existence, the veto was almost exclusively wielded by the USSR . Only a handful of vetoes exercised by the United States and only a handful by the other three permanent members .
 The UN of that era was dominated by the United States and its allies . The U.S. could control the agenda of the Security Council and force the Soviet Union to repeatedly use its veto . That record reflects the fact that the UN had to use its own veto .
 Andrei Gromyko, the first Soviet ambassador to the UN, was sometimes referred to in the West as ‘Mr Nyet’ because of the number of vetoes he cast . He was sometimes known as “Nyet” because of his vetoes .
 Soviet vetoes declined, and United States vetoes increased . Over time, the pattern shifted . The pattern shifted.
 This shift reflected a larger shift in the membership of the UN and in international relations in general . This shift reflects the shift in membership in the UN, in particular, according to the UN .
 By the 1970s, an increasingly large bloc of Communist states and newly independent states made it much more difficult for the United States to control the UN agenda . The U.S. became a key ally of the Soviet Union in the Cold War .
 The U.S. increasingly used the veto to defend its interests and those of allies such as Israel . The veto is increasingly used to defend the United States .
 Only two collective security operations designed to enforce international law and order under Chapter VII authority have occurred . Only two of the operations have occurred since the veto .
 A U.S.-sponsored resolution demanding the withdrawal of North Korean forces from South Korea was passed without a dissenting vote in the Security Council . The resolution was followed by military intervention by UN forces under the direction of General Douglas MacArthur .
 The USSR had been boycotting Security Council meetings in protest over the refusal of the U.S.-dominated body to transfer Chinese representation in the UN to the new Communist government on the mainland from the U.-backed Taiwanese government . While one might have expected a Soviet veto, the USSR had
 It was not until four decades later that the second Security Council collective security operation took place . That was in response to Iraq’s August 1990 invasion of Kuwait, the council said in 1990 .
 By international consensus, Iraq had clearly and flagrantly breached international law in violating the political sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kuwait, says the U.N. Council .
 Security Council approval for resolution 678 authorizing use of "all necessary means" to remove Iraq from Kuwait . Resolution 678 was passed by the U.N. Security Council in 2003 .
 China ultimately abstained, while the USSR voted in favor of the resolution . The USSR, in the midst of internal political and economic turmoil and badly in need of Western aid, voted for it . China abstained .
 Some hoped that Security Council cooperation in responding to Kuwait situation marked a turning point . Some hoped it would usher in a new age of post-Cold War collective security .
 Post-Communist Russia reasserted its interests and its autonomy from the West in the 1990s . China emerged as an economic, political, and, potentially, military power in East Asia . However, those hopes dissipated over the 90s as postCommunist Russian reasserts
 The 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq seemed effectively to end hopes for a revived system of UN collective security . The 2003 United States invaded Iraq effectively effectively ended hopes of a revived UN security system .
 The United States bypassed the UN and assembled an ad hoc ‘coalition of the willing” in going to war against Saddam Hussein . The U.S. failed to secure explicit UN Security Council authorization for military action against Iraq .
 UN collective security operations under Chapter VII have been rare, but less ambitious UN peacekeeping operations have been frequent .
 Peacekeeping operations differ from collective security operations in a number of ways . Collective security operations are sometimes called peace enforcement actions .
 In the collective security operations in Korea and Kuwait, the UN was, in effect, going to war against a country that violated international law and threatened international peace and stability by engaging in aggression .
 UN forces needed to be large in number and heavily armed, UN says . As a result, the UN forces had to be heavily armed and large numbers of personnel .
 The UN intervenes to maintain a peace already established via political negotiation or military stalemate . In a peacekeeping operation, the UN is involved in maintaining a peace . In peacekeeping operations, the U.N. intervenes in order to maintain an already established peace .
 UN military intervention intended to maintain a peace already established by the parties involved via negotiation or military stalemate . UN peacekeeping is intended to keep a peace established by negotiation or stalemate.
 impartial buffer force . Also known as ""second-generation peacekeeping" impartial buffer forces . impartial peacekeeping." impartial peacekeepers .
 Peacekeeping forces tend to be smaller in number and more lightly armed than collective security forces . As a result, peacekeeping forces are smaller than collective forces . Peacekeepers are smaller in size and less armed than security forces in the United States .
 UN Security Council established majority of UN peacekeeping missions from 1948 to 2010 . UN General Assembly authorized some of the early missions, but majority of the missions have been established by the Security Council . Most of the 63 peacekeeping operations were established by Security Council members .
 In the 1990s, the Security Council initiated 45 peacekeeping missions . The U.S.-Soviet Cold War was relegated to history . The Security Council became especially busy in this regard and initiated 45 missions .
 UN peacekeeping missions became more ambitious as the Security Council sent in UN forces . UN forces intervened in Bosnia and Somalia to prevent humanitarian catastrophes caused by civil wars and ethnic conflicts .
 Second-generation peacekeeping sees UN forces intervening without a prior cease-fire having been established . This is in contrast with traditional or first-gen peacekeeping, peacekeeping . UN forces intervene without having established cease-fires .
 Sounp United Nation', ""List of i>tJp^j«jwy/.un.org. I Note^QiWfnilUQAQiEPthfc^QlvJlisLIiB^ . I Note: I Note .
 First-generation peacekeeping requires a larger number of more heavily armed UN forces than first-gen peacekeeping . As a result, it therefore often requires larger numbers of heavily armed forces . UN peacekeeping is often more difficult to maintain than previous peacekeeping operations .
 UN peacekeepers are often referred to as ""blue helmets" because of the color of their headgear . UN peacekeeping are often known as 'blue helmets' because of their color .
 Hotel Rwanda is a scene in which a reporter confronts a UN officer about the UN response to the 1994 genocide in Rwanda . More than 800,000 ethnic Tutsis and moderate Hutus would ultimately be slaughtered .
 UN peacekeepers, already on the ground in Rwanda as the killing began, seemed to be doing little to stop it . UN peacekeeping forces were already in the Rwandan capital, Rwanda, when the killings began .
 The UN mission in Rwanda was, in theory, a textbook case of a peacekeeping mission . The mission was a 'textbook' case of peacekeeping .
 It was created to maintain the Arusha Accords, a 1993 peace agreement signed by the Hutu-dominated government and the mainly Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front that had been fighting the government since 1990 . It was set up to maintain a peace deal between Hutu and the
 The UN mission was a relatively small, lightly equipped force placed in Rwanda to help two sides committed to peace successfully maintain peace . In keeping with the goal of classic, first-generation peacekeeping, the mission was in Rwanda .
 Hard-line Hutus had little intention of abiding by the Arusha Accords . However, hard-line Hutsuans were determined to abide by the agreement .
 The situation called for UN peacemaking rather than peacekeeping, the UN says . The situation calls for the greater commitment of forces, weapons, and will that the former requires, he says .
 Romeo Dallaire, the commander of the UN mission in Rwanda, pleaded for such increased assistance . The UN mission commander in Rwanda has pleaded for more assistance .
 10 Belgian UN peacekeepers were slain by Hutu forces in Rwanda . The UN evacuated Westerners and then curtailed the UN mission, leaving the Tutsis to fend for themselves .
 For realists, the overriding lesson of this event is the weakness of international institutions like the United Nations . The United Nations is weak in its ability to deal with the world's economic woes, says Julian Zelizer .
 For liberal institutionalists, the lesson is the need to strengthen those institutions in order to avoid future Rwandas . The lesson is that for liberal institutions, the need is to be strengthened .
 For constructivists, Rwanda becomes a focal point for diffusion of norms about the obligation of the international community to act to stop genocide . Rwanda becomes the focal point .
 Srebrenica had previously been designated as a UN “safe haven” where refugees from the fighting would be protected . The Bosnian Serb ethnic war erupted in July 1995, when the fighting broke out in the Bosnian capital .
 UN forces stood by as Serb forces rounded up and executed Bosnian Muslim men . UN forces were fearful they would be attacked or taken hostage . However, UN forces in Bosnia stood by, standing by as the men were executed .
 UN commander of the Dutch UN forces in Srebrenica unheeded . Pleas for reinforcements and air support from the Dutch forces in the Bosnian war were ignored . U.N. troops were attacked by the Serbans in the early 1990s and early 2001 .
 In the end, fi£S \7:C0ii^ll3£D©T wRQWed, lS©£FWFW©JRiGction Force s the UN Self-Protection Force .
 The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone is a good example of a peacekeeping success . The U.N. mission is based in the country's capital, Freetown, Sierra Leone .
 A relatively large contingent of more than 17,000 UN peacekeeping forces maintained the cease-fire to the point that by 2002, relatively free and fair elections could be held . UN peacekeepers maintained a relatively free, fair elections in 2002 .
 UNAMSIL had disarmed and demobilized tens of thousands of fighters and repatriated close to 300,000 refugees previously displaced by the war . By the end of the mission in 2005, the UNAMIL peacekeeping mission had been able to demobilize and disarm thousands of
 In 2007, a hybrid UN/African Union mission was established to deal with the human rights situation in Darfur . More recently, in 2007, the mission was set up by the African Union .
 Total expenditure on the 20 peacekeeping operations in progress during fiscal year 2007 was $6. billion . Total spending on peacekeeping in progress in the U.S. was $7.7 billion .
 Only 0.6 percent of global military spending in 2006 . That figure represents only 0.9 percent of the global military budget .
 Key structural problem is that the UN organ with coercive power (Security Council) is stymied by the veto . Organ in which there is no veto power has little coercive authority . Organ with veto power in which UN organ in which no power has .
 The UN represents a compromise between a desire to transcend self-help in the quest for international order and a continuing attachment to the principle of state sovereignty . Instead, it reflects that the UN reflects that it reflects a desire .
 The 1950 Korean situation, however, revealed the limitations of this compromise . The Korean Korean situation was revealed in the 1950 Korean conflict .
 The UN collective security operation on the Korean Peninsula would surely have been vetoed . Flad it not been for the fluke of the Soviet boycott of the UN . The Soviet boycott would have saved the operation from being vetoed .
 It was passed by an overwhelming 52-5 vote in the General Assembly, opposed only by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union and a few of its allies opposed the move .
 At the time United States dominance in the UN ensured that issues contrary to United States interests would not make it onto the Security Council agenda . Although theoretically the resolution could be used to circumvent the United States veto, at the time .
 In principle, this resolution opened the possibility of the UN General Assembly taking on a collective security function . The resolution was passed by the U.N. General Assembly in 2007 .
 In practice, operations under the Uniting for Peace Resolution have been limited to peacekeeping operations . The General Assembly has been largely unwilling to challenge great powers on vital security matters .
 Many felt renewed hope and optimism that the U.N. could finally fulfill its promise as an effective institution of collective security and enforcer of international law and order . Still, during the early 1990s, many felt renewed .
 The successful UN collective security action in the 1991 Persian Gulf War seemed to some to represent the promise of a new era . The successful Gulf War was seen to some as a new age .
 The disintegration of the USSR at the end of 1991 and the emergence of a more positive relationship between the United States and postCommunist Russia added to the sense that “great power unanimity” among the permanent members of the Security Council could become a reality .
 UN Security Council authorized military intervention in dozens of places around the world in the 1990s . In fact, the Security Council did appear increasingly active in the 90s, as it authorized military action .
 All were peacekeeping or peacemaking missions whose record of success, as previously noted, was mixed . Instead of peacekeeping missions, they were peacekeepers, peacekeepers .
 Because of the proliferation of UN peacekeeping, the UN also faced budgetary problems, as resources were being spread thin . The UN has also faced budget problems as resources are spread thin across the world .
 The United States refused to pay all its UN dues because of concerns regarding UN mismanagement of funds . This financial challenge was compounded in the late 1990s when the United States was responsible for almost one-quarter of the UN peacekeeping budget .
 Despite a 1999 compromise on this issue, the U.S. still not completely caught up on what it owed . The United States still owes the United States for both general UN funds and peacekeeping missions . The U.N. has not been able to fully recover what it owes .
 As of April 2008, the United States owed more than $2.2 billion in past dues, much of which was to fund overstretched UN peacekeeping missions . Much of that money was to pay for overstretched missions .
 U.N. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon labels U.S. as a “deadbeat donor’s” 26 . Obama administration pledges to pay what the United States owes . U.K. President Barack Obama has pledged to pay the money .
 By 2003 the United Nations had failed to deal effectively with Saddam Hussein or prevent the United States from bypassing the U.N. on its road to war in Iraq . The optimism of the early 1990s came to an end in 2003 .
 Corruption scandal surrounding UN’s Oil-for-Food Programme . Iraq allowed to sell some of its oil in exchange for food and other humanitarian items . Iraq under strict UN economic sanctions since the end of the Persian Gulf War .
 Billions of dollars illegally made their way into Saddam Hussein’s coffers . UN officials and foreign governments faced accusations as well as UN officials .
 When they disagree, especially when they disagree over vital interests, collective security is doomed . The 2003 U.S. war against Iraq was true in the case of the 2003 war .
 Liberal supporters of the UN argue that the problem is less with the concept itself than with its execution . Liberal supporters say that the UN is not about the concept but about the execution .
 In recent years, a variety of structural reforms have been proposed to make the UN more effective . The UN system has been criticised for being ineffective .
 Reforms are intended to update the UN so that it reflects the changing realities of world politics more than 60 years after it was first created . Those reforms are intended .
 Among the potentially most significant but controversial areas of reform are those related to the Security Council veto, Security Council enlargement, and the creation of a standing UN military force .
 A frequent subject of discussion among those who want to empower the United Nations is the Security Council veto . The veto veto is a frequent topic of discussion .
 Numerous commentators have suggested phasing out or restricting the issues on which the veto power can be exercised .
 Each of the Perm-5 has made it clear that it would oppose any attempt to eliminate the veto . However, each of the lawmakers has made a clear that they would oppose an attempt to remove the veto.
 Despite the decline in the number of vetoes, these five major powers still see it as an important insurance policy . The vetoes are still an effective tool in shaping Security Council discussions and resolutions .
 The ability to get one’s way by threatening to use the veto is known as the closet veto . It greatly enhances the veto's impact . The closet veto is also known as "the closet veto"
 Security Council Enlargement of the Security Council is a frequent topic of UN reform . The addition of permanent members beyond the existing five would be a major step in reform .
 Supporters of enlargement argue that the world has changed significantly since 1946 . Asia, Africa, and Latin America have emerged economically, politically, and militarily as significant players in the world .
 If we were creating the Security Council from scratch today, we might pass over France or Great Britain in favor of Japan, given its status as one of the world’s largest economies, or India . We might also pass over Great Britain given its size, population, nuclear weapons,
 Model A envisioned six new permanent seats and three additional rotating seats . Model A also envisioned six permanent seats, three rotating seats, and six rotating seats per person .
 Model B envisioned no new permanent members but, instead, a new category of eight seats with four-year renewable terms, along with the addition of one nonrenewable two-year seat . Model B also envisioned no permanent members, instead of a permanent member .
 Both models would raise the total membership of the Security Council from 15 to 24 . The current model would increase the number of Security Council members to 15 .
 Both models would assign new seats on a regional basis to represent the geographic distribution of states in the United Nations as a whole .
 Both models would limit the veto power to the original Perm-5 . The veto power would be limited to only the original version of the veto . But both models would avoid compounding the problem .
 Of course, designing such models of Security Council enlargement in the abstract is easier than filling in the countries that would hold the new seats .
 Model A would be particularly difficult in that regard, as it envisions six new permanent seats . Model A has been criticized for not being able to accommodate six permanent seats in the car .
 Every new addition would lead other countries to demand the same . While some candidates might be more or less obvious, such as Japan or India .
 Regional rival Pakistan would likely demand a permanent seat, but adding both India and Pakistan would use up the remaining space .
 If an expansion excluded Japan, then the assumption that Europe’s additional seat would be granted to Germany on economic grounds would be called into question .
 Brazil has been campaigning for permanent seat status in the World Cup . Based on size alone, it might have a case for permanent status .
 Brazil’s singular status as a Portuguese-speaking country on a predominantly Spanish-speaking continent might become an issue . However, Mexico, Argentina, and others might have different ideas .
 Model B avoids some of these dilemmas by creating an entirely new category of renewable four-year seats . Model B will be the first of its kind in the world .
 Some key states have the potential for reelection on a continual basis . One might imagine some of those eight new seats taking on a quasi-permanent character .
 At the same time, the model has enough flexibility to appease those who might otherwise feel excluded . The model is flexible enough to accommodate those who feel excluded, but also has flexibility .
 Model B perpetuates the status discrepancy between the Perm-5 and the rest of the Security Council . Model B has been described as a 'model of the world' by the UN .
 The former would retain the exclusive privilege of veto of the veto . The newcomers would face no risk of losing their Security Council seats .
 The requisite consensus for action has not yet emerged for the Security Council enlargement . The Security Council has discussed the possibility of enlargement of the U.N. body .
 A standing UN military force would be a contentious Security Council reform idea . A standing military force is a controversial idea for the Security Council .
 Boutros Boutros-Ghali proposed this idea back in the early 1990s as the post-Cold War proliferation of UN peacekeeping missions was beginning . During his term as UN secretarygeneral, Boutros was in charge of peacekeeping operations in Africa .
 The process of assembling a UN force from the contributions of member nations was very slow, typically requiring three to six months after the Security Council decided to act . In many cases where urgent intervention was required, the process was often slow .
 Having a standby UN “rapid reaction force” could potentially cut down on the time involved from decision to deployment . The U.N. has a standby force in place of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Proposals for such an initiative typically involve a modest-sized force of 5,000 to 15,000 peacekeepers deployable by the secretary-general upon authorization from the Security Council . Security Council members typically have to approve the initiative .
 As proposed in the mid-1990s, SHIRBRIG involved about 5,000 troops trained and available for peacekeeping missions . The proposal was first put forward in the 1990s .
 16 mainly European states have participated in the SHIRBRIG initiative . Sixteen mainly European countries have participated .
 It is a relatively small force in the context of the rapidly mounting number of peacekeeping missions . The troops remain based and scattered in their home countries and would be assembled for the first time only upon deployment for use in a crisis . The deployment of troops requires case-by-case consent
 SHIRBRIG countries have been criticized for being slow to contribute their forces . Most recently, in the context of the Darfur crisis, they were criticized for not contributing to the conflict .
 Most states remain reluctant to relinquish sovereign control over decision to put their soldiers’ lives in danger .
 For some critics of the idea, to do so would run afoul of domestic conflict situations . For others critics, it would be a violation of domestic law .
 The record of international law and the U.N. suggests some general points on which most observers agree . Most observers agree on the record of the Syrian conflict .
 Clearly international law and international organizations like the UN have a role to play in world politics . Clearly, international law has a role in international law .
 Most observers see utility in state participation in state institutions . Those institutions provide opportunities for cooperation and problemsolving on a range of issues .
 The fact that membership in the United Nations is nearly universal, that the number of international organizations has expanded so dramatically in recent decades, is a sign that states see such participation as worthwhile . States spend so much time and effort negotiating treaties that such participation is worthwhile .
 The record provides plenty of ammunition for disagreement and debate on how the world works . At the same time, the record provides a chance for disagreement .
 The question remains as to how effectively international law and institutions can constrain the behavior of states, especially the great powers, and especially when vital interests are at stake . At the center of that debate is the question of how effective international law can be constraining states .
 Left-leaning institutionalists in the U.S. share with right-wing neoconservatives a similar view of international law and institutions . John Mearsheimer suggests that despite their differences, liberal institutionalists share with neoconservatives .
 Both groups assume that those institutions are able to ‘push states around’ and constrain the behavior of even the greatest powers .
 The constraints can be seen as good—the liberal view -- insofar as they commit states to rules that limit misbehavior . The constraints are good, the liberal view, in insofar as they limit state misbehavior, he says .
 They can also be seen as bad—the neoconservative view— because they tie down even powerful states like the United States and complicate their ability to protect their interests . The U.S. is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Realists believe that institutions do not have the capability to push great powers around . As Mearsheimer notes, Realists think that institutions don't have the power to push around .
 If an institution tells the United States that it should do X, the U.S. will either ignore the institution or rewrite the rules . If the institution says X is not in the American national interest, it will not be in the national interest of America .
 In short, for realists, states use institutions to suit their own purposes . And that logic doesn't just apply to the United States, it applies to other great powers as well .
 Mearsheimer: International law and institutions do not challenge realist understanding of how the world works . They confirm it, he says, but they confirm it . He says international law does not challenge the realist view, but it confirms it .
 The willingness of the United States to ignore the World Court when it has suited its purposes . The U.S. decision to bypass the UN on the road to war in Iraq, and the general reluctance of the great powers to embrace reforms of the UN that would seriously challenge their state sovereignty
 While states try to wield such institutions for their own purposes and flout the rules, they often pay a price for doing so . States often pay the price for flouting the rules when it suits state needs .
 Working through the UN system in the 1991 Persian Gulf War, the U.S. garnered international support and legitimacy . The United States emerged from the conflict with heightened prestige and influence after the war .
 The U.S. worked around the UN in the 2003 war against Iraq, however, lacked such legitimacy . That meant a decline in United States prestige and influence around the world, he says .
 As a prescriptive matter, liberals suggest that institutions do need to be strengthened . Liberals say that institutions should be strengthened in order to protect the public .
 Most would concede at least part of the realist argument that institutions can constrain misbehavior by the great powers is incomplete . But most would concede that the ability of institutions to restrain misbehavior is incomplete, too .
 International law, most agree, is a “primitive legal system” that falls far short of the standards set by the most effective domestic legal systems . International law is a "primitive system" that falls short of international standards, experts say .
 Liberal liberals say the appropriate response is to strengthen not abandon law and institutions . However, for liberals, it is not to abandon law or institutions, they say .
 liberals see increasing global cooperation via such institutional development as the best bet human civilization can make to avoid future self-annihilation . Realists see such efforts as a distraction from the effort to strengthen one’s sovereign power in a dangerous, anarchic world . Liberals see global cooperation as
 Bush: “Toward a New World Order,” speech to joint session of Congress, September 11 . Bush: "Toward World Order" is a declaration of intent to create a new world order .
 No member of the U.N. can claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely its own business . The United Nations can't claim that its citizens are mistreated by its own citizens .
 No member can avoid its responsibilities to review and speak when torture or unwarranted deprivation occurs in any part of the world . Foreign policy is not social work, says Jimmy Carter, 1977 .
 You don't send U.S. soldiers to die to assuage troubled consciences at home, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't think it's a good idea to send troops to die for good reasons"
 Realists would agree with the sentiment expressed by Charles Krauthammer in the quote above that the overriding goal of foreign policy is to promote the national interest . Realists agree that the goal is promoting national interests .
 Considerations of justice, morality, and human rights have no role in the international context . Considerations are of justice and morality, though they might engage us as individuals .
 In effect, for realists, human rights are down to human rights . Please donate to the site to help us make sure we have the right .
 The Human Rights Revolution is a matter between a government and its citizens, says Amnesty International . It's a matter of government and citizens, Amnesty International says .
 For global human rights activists and many scholars, this realist view is not only a gross abdication of moral responsibility but is also increasingly outdated . However, for global . rights activists, this . realist . view is an abdicated . responsibility for human rights .
 UN Charter speaks of commitment to human rights to which all those who have signed are legally and morally bound . Jimmy Carter indicates in the quotation above that the UN charter speaks of a commitment to the human rights .
 Constructivists and liberals would argue that the realist emphasis on national interest, state sovereignty, and self-help cannot explain this human rights trend . Constructivist and liberals argue that this is not the case .
 The basic question of this chapter is whether the new emphasis on human rights constitutes a revolution in our thinking about how the world works . The question is whether it will be enough to change the world's approach to human rights, he says .
 If the human rights revolution is not matched by behavioral changes, it will be an empty shell, says Amnesty International . Human rights activists say the revolution has not been matched with behavioral changes .
 If the record of global concern and action to protect human rights matches the rhetoric, then one might argue that the human rights revolution is real and that it challenges the principle of state sovereignty on which the Westphalian international system has been based .
 Most realists, presumably, prefer to see a world in which all leaders treat their subjects humanely . But most realists prefer a world of leaders treating their subjects and citizens humanely, they say .
 Human rights and inserting them into the agenda of international relations are not one and the same . However, preferring a world in which human rights are respected and not one of the same are not the same, it is said .
 The International Order Argument is the potential impact on global order . Human rights should be an issue of international politics, says David Frum .
 As it is, states have a multitude of reasons to go to war with one another, including conflicts over territory, vital resources, and the balance of power .
 If we made the internal relationship between a government and its citizens a topic meriting international attention, then the occasions for conflict and war could expand greatly . The relationship between government and citizens should be a topic of international attention .
 Some states could use human rights concerns as a smokescreen for intervention and wars motivated by territorial conquest and political expansionism . Human rights concerns could be used to justify intervention in war-torn countries .
 NATO intervention by NATO to protect ethnic Albanians from Serbian mistreatment produced almost 1 million Albanian refugees . In Kosovo, the intervention produced almost a million refugees who fled to neighboring countries .
 More than 200,000 Serbs and other non-Albanian minorities also left Kosovo following the intervention and the defeat of Serbian forces .
 In the face of clear human rights violations, nonintervention leaves innocent people at the mercy of bad regimes, says Amnesty International . Nonintervention "leads innocent people to the mercy" of bad governments .
 In Kosovo, deaths and displacements produced by the war must be weighed against the conflict’s very real success in limiting government-sponsored human rights violations and prosecuting former Serbian dictator Slobodan Milosevic for human .
 The unintended consequences of the Kosovo case suggest, one can make a moral case for the principles of sovereignty and nonintervention . However, as the unintended consequences suggest, the case is not entirely clear .
 To the extent that they contribute to global order, they can potentially help avoid wars and conflicts in which human rights would be greatly imperiled . Human rights would also be greatly affected by the wars in which they would be particularly harmful .
 A second reason for hesitation in internationalizing human rights has to do with prioritizing the national interest in foreign policy . The National Interest Argument is that the U.S. should prioritize human rights rights in the country .
 Realists argue that resources are limited and should be reserved for the most clear-cut threats to state interests . Realists say resources should only be used to protect the interests of the state .
 Citizens in democratic countries have limited tolerance for accepting the death of their soldiers in battle . Those limited resources include more than economic and military assets, says CNN's John Defterios .
 In a dangerous, anarchic world where self-help is the key to survival, the expenditure of scarce military, economic, and political capital on ‘elective” wars for human rights could leave a nation unprepared when threats to vital interests appear .
 The balance of power system in which the enemy of your enemy can be your friend, can be a friend, says the author . It may arise in which servicing the national interest requires cooperation with regimes that have less than stellar human rights records .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. often supported regimes with problematic human rights records because they were allies in resisting the spread of Communism . The United States often supported countries with human rights abuses .
 Even President Jimmy Carter sometimes found that his emphasis on human rights had to be trumped by more basic geopolitical security considerations . Jimmy Carter often found that he had to choose between human rights and national security .
 He provided substantial financial aid to Egyptian dictator and former Soviet ally Anwar Sadat due to the strategic necessity of brokering peace in the Middle East and keeping Egypt in the pro-Western camp .
 Saudi Arabia is one of the world’s worst violators of political rights and civil liberties, according to Freedom House . The strategic value of oil clearly drives America's long relationship with Saudi Arabia, which is ranked by Freedom House.
 A single-minded focus on short-term national interests may not only abandon people in immediate human rights distress, but may also ignore the potential long-term benefits of promoting human rights .
 Idea that a common set of Asian cultural values emphasizing community rights runs contrary to Western notions of human rights emphasizing individual rights . Asian values emphasize community rights, rather than individual rights, say experts .
 The Human Rights Revolution dictators in the Middle East helped form the hostility toward the U.S. in evidence throughout that region today . The United States is in the midst of a war in the region .
 The world’s worst regimes from the point of view of human rights tend to be authoritarian, least democratic regimes . In general, the worst regimes are among the most authoritarian and most democratic regimes in the world . The world's worst regimes tend to come from authoritarian regimes .
 Human rights can indeed be good for the national interests and national security of fellow democratic states . Human rights challenges legitimacy of regimes and leads to their replacement by more open, less aggressive regimes .
 A North Korea that respects the human rights of its citizens is less likely to pose a threat to South Korea, to other countries in East Asia, and therefore to the interests of the U.S. The United States. The U.N. should respect human rights in North Korea,
 For states facing immediate, short-term national security challenges, such an enlightened, long-term view is often difficult to keep in focus . However, for states facing such challenges, it is difficult to focus on national security issues .
 Realists would contend that cases will inevitably arise where national interests and human rights will not conveniently align . Moreover, realists would say, realist would contend, cases will always arise where human rights and national interests don't align .
 In such cases, where the national security stakes are high, national interests should and will prevail over considerations of human rights . The U.S. should and should not be concerned about human rights in such situations, the author says .
 The idea of a revolution in human rights can also be challenged on the grounds of cultural relativism . The Cultural Relativism Argument is based on the argument of the concept of human rights .
 Any attempt to impose universal notions of human rights runs the risk of imposing alien standards . The argument here is that different cultures have different perspectives on what constitutes a human right .
 From this perspective, there can be no such thing as universal human rights . From this view, there are no such rights to human rights, says the author of the book .
 For some, the notion of universal human rights is seen as a smokescreen for imposing Western norms on other cultures . For others, it's seen as an attempt to impose Western norms onto other cultures. For example, the idea of universal rights is often seen as being a smokecreen for
 In the 1990s this cultural relativism perspective was articulated most clearly in the debate over Asian values . In the 90s, this was articulated in the debates about Asian values and culture .
 Individuals like former Prime Minister Lee Kwan Yew of Singapore argued that the Western emphasis on rights of the individual contrasts with the Asian emphasis on the needs of the larger community . Neither Westerners nor Asians should attempt to impose their concept of human rights on the other, he says .
 Rights related to issues of women and gender roles are often a source of international contention . They illustrate the tension between the idea of universal human rights and cultural diversity .
 Among the most controversial practices, sometimes defended on cultural grounds, is the practice of female genital mutilation . The practice is a form of mutilation that is sometimes defended by some .
 The practice involves removing all or part of the female genitalia . Still widespread in sub-Saharan Africa, in parts of the Middle East, and among some immigrant communities in developed nations .
 Amnesty International and most Western observers condemn the practice as barbaric and a violation of human rights . Others see it as a cultural ritual to be defended .
 At least one scholar has suggested a distinction between an extreme, radical version of cultural relativism in which human rights are entirely culture bound and a weaker version of human rights that accepts the universality of certain basic human rights while allowing some space for cultural difference .
 Even a weak cultural relativism leaves much room for debate . The second option might seem to allow for a meeting of minds, even though the second option seems to seem to be the first .
 All three arguments for hesitation in internationalizing the issue of human rights raise reasonable concerns .
 The fact that dictators and other human rights abusers might use arguments about Asian values or international order as political and moral cover does not relieve us of the need to confront and consider those arguments . Dictators use arguments against Asian values as political or moral cover as political .
 Human rights abuses are so extreme and abhorrent that those reasons for hesitation seem like a weak excuse for apathy and inaction . Nonetheless, certain human rights abuses seem to be so extreme that they seem like an excuse for inaction .
 6 million men, women, and children were murdered for no reason other than their Jewish identity . arguments about order, interests, and cultural differences seem largely irrelevant . The murder of 6 million Jews was a systematic murder of millions of people .
 The impetus for the post-World War II human rights revolution was at least, in part, driven by what happened to European Jews during the war and by the collective sense of global guilt at the failure of the international community to stop it .
 These networks may work with receptive individuals within governments and international organizations to achieve their agenda . Composed of varying combinations of individuals (such as prominent scholars, former government leaders, and well-known movie stars and pop singers)
 The Human Rights Revolution as well as the United Nations itself, was largely concerned with buttressing rather than undermining state sovereignty . The U.N. was concerned about buttressing state sovereignty rather than buttressing the rights of citizens .
 International community adopted two breakthrough human rights documents in 1998 . One of them was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . In that year, the international community adopted the U.N. Declaration .
 The declaration spells out in 30 articles a variety of rights to which every human is entitled . Drafted by the newly established UN Commission on Human Rights under the leadership of Eleanor Roosevelt .
 Some political theorists term negative rights and positive rights . Negative rights include negative rights, positive rights, according to some political theorists . Those rights include those negative rights .
 The Universal Declaration refers to the right to be free from torture, the right of free movement, and the rights of free expression and peaceful assembly . For example, the Universal Declaration .
 In each case, government inaction is what protects that right from infringement . Government inaction protects the right to be protected from infringement.
 In contrast, positive rights are attained only by positive government action . Positive rights can only be achieved by government action. Positive rights are achieved only by negative government action, says the author .
 The Universal Declaration includes the right to education and to an adequate standard of living . Among those listed in the Universal Declaration are education and an adequate living .
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the product of an up or down vote by the countries represented in the UN General Assembly . The original idea was that the Universal Declaration would be formalized in a legally binding treaty on human rights .
 In the American case, a treaty must be signed by the president and then ratified by two-thirds of the United States Senate . In the U.S. case, for example, the president must sign a treaty and then then ratify it .
 For the better part of two decades, this process was caught up in Cold War politics . For the past 20 years, it has been caught in the shadow of the Cold War .
 73 economic rights such as the right to employment, as their systems arguably performed better in those areas than they did on negative rights . Establishing Human Rights Norms 1. 73 .
 The 1948 Universal Declaration and the two 1966 treaties are collectively referred to as the International Bill of Human Rights . The two treaties were signed in 1966 and are collectively known as the Human Rights Act .
 American hesitation to sign and ratify these treaties reflects a general concern about loss of state sovereignty . The CESCR treaty is about the legitimacy of the positive, economic rights that make up much of that treaty .
 The other major human rights event of 1948 was the adoption of the Convention on Genocide . Aside from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the convention on Genocide was the first major event of the year .
 The Genocide Convention was just the first of a series of international treaties intended to treat in much greater detail key issues of human rights . It was intended to address key human rights issues .
 Transnational advocacy networks were crucial to the adoption of most of these treaties . Transnational groups were key to the success of the treaties .
 The 1984 Convention Against Torture, for example, owed much to the work of Amnesty International . The Genocide Convention was adopted largely due to one man, Raphael Lemkin, a Polish Jew who fled the Nazis and settled in the United States .
 Lemkin’s greatest struggle was to get the U.S. to ratify the treaty . Lemkin's greatest challenge was to convince the United States to approve the treaty, he says .
 At the time, NGOs like Amnesty International or Human Rights Watch did not yet exist . Amnesty International was founded in 1973 .
 Lemkin was aided in his efforts by a network of advocates including the American Jewish Committee, the Federal Council of Churches of Christ, labor unions, and the National Council of Women . Lemkin's efforts were aided by a number of advocates .
 Senator William Proxmire of Wisconsin gave a speech per day on the floor of the Senate advocating ratification of the bill . Eventually, they garnered the support of Sen. William Proexmire . The bill was passed in 1967 .
 Nineteen years and 3,211 speeches later, the Genocide Convention was finally ratified . The Convention was ratified by the United States .
 The documents pose a challenge to those who resist the internationalization of human rights, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 Every independent, sovereign state has signed and ratified at least one human rights treaty . Most of the world's most sovereign states have signed or ratified many of them, including the UN .
 According to the 1948 Genocide Convention, acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial, or religious group."" 1 74 chapter 6 The Human Rights Revolution. 1 74 .
 States voluntarily signed away their sovereign right to treat children in their own territory . States have, in so doing, they have, by effect, they've signed away the right to do so, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Realists and other human rights skeptics might counter that signing treaties is one thing; enforcing them and conforming to their provisions is quite another . Realists say that it's not just about signing treaties, but it's about enforcing them, conforming them .
 A serial human rights violator like North Korea is a party to the Convention on Civil and Political Rights . North Korea has a long history of human rights violations, including human rights abuses .
 Saudi Arabia has ratified the Convention on Elimination of Discrimination Against Women . Women who walk unaccompanied are at risk of arrest on moral offenses . Saudi Arabia, where women walk unaccompanied, has ratified a similar convention .
 Setting human rights standards is only the starting point of the human rights revolution, says Amnesty International . Human rights standards are only the beginning of the revolution, he says .
 We monitor human rights by gathering information about violations and violators so they can become known to those who can do something about human rights abuses . The Human Rights Watch monitors human rights in order to prevent abuses .
 In the world today, this monitoring function is carried out via UN-based bodies, NGOs, and national and regional reporting systems . UN bodies and NGOs are often involved in monitoring of human rights violations .
 UN-based human rights oversight bodies are simultaneously among the most important and the most criticized human rights organizations in place today . UN Monitoring bodies are both important and criticized .
 They constitute the core of a truly global human rights regime working under the mandate of the U.N. and its state members . They are most important, as they constitute the . core of the . global human . rights regime .
 They have a formal legitimacy that other monitoring mechanisms do not enjoy . Thus, they have formal legitimacy, they can't be monitored by other monitoring systems .
 Many see their successes as incomplete at best . They are most criticized, however, because many see them as incomplete, best .
 Created in 1946, the first dedicated UN human rights institution was the UN Commission on Human Rights . The Commission was the centerpiece of UN human human rights monitoring for 60 years .
 Its original purpose was to develop human rights standards, and it was the setting within which the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was hammered out .
 UN Commission on Human Rights was created in 1946 to promote the development and, later, the monitoring of global human rights norms . It was replaced in 2005 with a new UN Human Rights Council .
 UN Commission on Human Rights high commissioner for human rights . Intended to be a more effective successor to the UN Commission of Human Rights .
 The Human Rights Revolution is authorized to examine allegations of gross and systematic abuses of human rights . It will examine allegations that human rights abuses have been committed in the country .
 It could appoint either an individual expert known as a ‘special rapporteur’ or a panel of experts called a “working group” to investigate .
 The effectiveness of the Commission on Human Rights was mitigated by several factors . However, the effectiveness of this commission on human rights was not fully achieved .
 Names of countries whose human rights practices were under discussion were publicly announced . Most countries did what they could to avoid being placed on this “black list” The dirty human rights laundry was kept behind the commission’s closed doors .
 Commission members were not independent human rights experts or activists . Instead, they were sovereign states with interests to protect and scores to settle . The commission members are not independent . They are sovereign sovereign states .
 Some member states of the commission were countries with very poor human rights records . Indeed, some member states had very poor Human Rights records .
 In 2005, Sudan was a member of the commission as it faced accusations of genocide against non-Arab inhabitants in its Darfur region . Sudan was accused of genocide in Darfur .
 The commission often could not keep pace with fast-developing human rights tragedies . Finally, the commission often failed to keep pace of human rights tragedy .
 Signs of trouble in Rwanda long preceded these tragic events, and Rwanda was in fact discussed under the confidential 1503 procedure in 1992 and 1993 .
 It was only on May 25, 1994, seven weeks after the killing began, that a rapporteur was appointed to investigate and report back to the commission . Yet it was only seven weeks later that the report was made .
 Supporters of the new council wanted a body that would meet year-round and whose members would be more carefully scrutinized for their own human rights performance . Supporters say the body would meet in winter and be scrutinized more closely .
 Belarus was defeated in its bid for election to the HRC in 2007, and Sri Lanka suffered the same fate in 2008 . Sri Lanka was also defeated in 2007 and 2008 elections .
 Human Rights Watch is leading an international campaign for human rights in the Philippines . The campaign was spearheaded by NGOs such as human rights Watch . Human rights campaigners have been critical of the country's human rights record .
 Constructivists would argue that these developments illustrate the power of transnational advocacy groups to promote norms that constrain the behavior of states . Constructivist would argue these developments .
 Other states on the HRC continue to have questionable human rights records . However, other countries on the list of nations with questionable rights records continue to do so .
 Despite its suppression of demonstrations in Tibet, China is a member of the Human Rights Council . Russia is also a member, despite its record in Chechnya . China and Russia are members of the Council of Human Rights .
 The United States initially refused to be considered for membership of the HRC . The U.S. was initially skeptical as to the merits of the organization .
 Obama administration sought and achieved election to council in 2009 . Obama administration reversed that Bush administration policy, seeking and achieving election to the council .
 The monitoring work of the Human Rights Council is supplemented by the individual treaty-monitoring bodies created in conjunction with the human rights treaties adopted since 1948 . The monitoring of individual treaty monitoring bodies is carried out by individual treaty monitors .
 Seven such bodies currently exist, including the Human Rights Committee . The Committee Against Torture and Committee on the Rights of the Child are monitoring compliance with the 1966 Covenant .
 The creation of this new office and the appoiftQ^V M a ©^>DcEfilifiiRfe)l'£4rLblfiiSiB^UtOl^i0partly in recognition of th^i|igii^
 The UN human rights monitoring system is slow, cumbersome, and dependent on states with interests at stake and even questionable human rights records . It is dependent on the success of the monitoring system on states that have their own human rights record .
 The UN system is not the only source of information on human rights practices around the world . However, the UN system does not provide the best information about human rights in the world.
 NGOs sometimes help develop human rights norms, but they're probably better known for tracking compliance with those norms once established . NGOs are best known for helping to track compliance with norms .
 Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch are among the most prominent human rights NGOs in the world . Amnesty International is one of the most important human rights groups .
 Human Rights Watch is shedding light on human rights practices and abuses . It focuses on individual cases of abuse, and on the general records of states .
 NGOs report on human rights trends in each of the world’s sovereign states . Central to the work of both these NGOs is the publication of their annual country reports .
 The seriousness with which those reports are taken is manifested in the often swift and harsh reaction of governments to what is found in them . The seriousness of those reports is shown by the seriousness of their seriousness .
 Amnesty International’s 2005 criticism of the United States for its treatment of detainees in the war on terror at Guantanamo and elsewhere provoked a swift and stinging rebuke from the highest levels of the U.S. government .
 Complementing the publicity given to human rights abuses by human rights organizations are the actions of the global media . The global media should be more aware of the human rights violations in the U.S. and around the world, says Amnesty International .
 Human rights monitors are not dedicated human rights monitors per se, but the media play a crucial role in two respects . The media is crucial to human rights monitoring in the United States .
 Amnesty International can publicize human rights abuses on its webpage and in its publications . Most people learn about them only through media coverage of the reports . Amnesty International says it can't publicize abuses in advance .
 First, the media often do investigative work and reporting on human rights abuses, thereby serving a monitoring function of their own. Second, they often serve as a monitoring tool for themselves, the author says .
 At times, one picture in a newspaper will be enough to shame the international community into action . At times it is enough to shock the world into taking action .
 A video clip carried on a global television network is worth even more . If a picture is worth a thousand words, a video clip is worth more .
 In what has been called the CNN effect, footage of genocide, ethnic cleaffi&i', or IvirlS&pi&ok abusers, is shown in what is known as the 'CNN effect' The CNN effect has been dubbed 'the CNN effect' in the past .
 CNN effect: Impact and power of images of human rights abuses transmitted via the media in galvanizing world opinion to pressure governments to do something about abuses . One of many photos of abuse and torture of Iraqi detainees by U.S. personnel at the Abu Chraib prison .
 The photos put enormous pressure on the Bush administration . They illustrated the power of the media and human rights NCOs to monitor and publicize human rights violations .
 UN bodies and NGOs, regional organizations and even individual governments provide yet another layer of human rights monitoring . Along with UN bodies, NGOs and regional organizations, regional . organizations .
 The United States Department of State provides a yearly, systematic review of human rights practices in countries around the world . The U.S. State Department, for example, provides a similar review of rights practices .
 Most other governments do not publish such a systematic yearly review . They often monitor and call attention to human rights abuses . Most other countries don't publish systematic yearly reviews .
 While bias in such reports might be expected, their utility cannot be summarily dismissed . While bias is expected, the utility of these reports cannot be dismissed .
 The U.S. State Department is often critical of human rights practices in countries where the United States has strategic interests and good government-to-government relations . It is unlikely to agree entirely with assessments found in reports from Amnesty International or Human Rights Watch .
 One must note the monitoring and reporting systems of various regional human rights regimes . Finally, one must note that the monitoring of these regimes is a key part of the system .
 The European Commission on Human Rights is empowered to receive, review, and report on complaints from individuals, NGOs, and sovereign states . The most developed of these is in Europe, where the European Commission receives complaints .
 Variations on this regional approach are found in the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the African Commission . Variations are found to be found in other regional human rights bodies .
 Regional commissions and their reporting and monitoring systems tend to be weak and undeveloped . However, compared with the European system, these other regional commissions are weak, say experts .
 None of the mechanisms of monitoring and reporting on human rights is without its flaws and biases . Taken individually, none of the systems are without flaws, says Amnesty International .
 The ultimate success of the global human rights monitoring system is found in the layers of overlapping reporting done by states, NGOs, the media, and international organizations at the global and regional levels . The international community is key to the success of a global monitoring system .
 Ideally, the publicity given to human rights violations and the damage thereby done to the violators would be enough to deter most human rights abuses . The publicity given to the violations would deter most abuses .
 Regrettably, we have little evidence that bad publicity alone equals deterrence . Regrettally, there are few good reasons for bad publicity to deter deterring criminals .
 The potential of the human rights revolution must also rest on enforcement, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: Human rights must also be protected from dictatorships .
 The international community must be able to enforce the standards it has set if the human rights revolution is to be taken seriously . Human rights must be enforced if the international community is to take seriously, says Amnesty International .
 Faced with reports and evidence of serious human rights abuses, the first and lowest-cost response of concerned states is noncoercive diplomacy . The first response of concern states should not be coercive diplomacy, says Amnesty International .
 Government-togovernment meetings, recall of ambassador, cancellation of meetings, or withdrawal of participation in some cultural or athletic events might, in some cases, get the offending government’s attention .
 Diplomatic pressures succeed only if backed by the threat of measures that can cause the offending government real pain . However, in many cases such diplomatic pressure only succeeds if backed up by threats of real pain.
 Economic Sanctions involve the imposition of limitations or prohibitions on trade, investment, or aid in order to get a country to change its policies . Sanctions are imposed to get countries to change their policies and impose restrictions on trade and investment .
 Sanctions are a popular tool of coercive diplomacy, as they satisfy the desire to “do something” in response to a challenge or provocation . Sanctions can satisfy the need to "do something" in a response to provocation, such as a provocation .
 The Human Rights Revolution have included fighting terrorism, discouraging weapons proliferation, punishing interstate aggression, and stemming the trade in illicit drugs . It has also been the focus of efforts to discourage weapons proliferation .
 Perhaps the best known and most successful use of economic sanctions in the service of human rights was the case of South Africa . South Africa was the subject of sanctions for human rights .
 By the 1960s global calls to end apartheid were being backed by economic sanctions . By the 1970s, calls for an end to apartheid in South Africa were backed by sanctions .
 The UN General Assembly called on member countries to engage in a trade embargo with South Africa . The Security Council called for an arms embargo, and many countries followed through with those measures .
 At the same time, private businesses came under increasing pressure to disinvest from South Africa and to eliminate any new economic investment there .
 In 1994 Nelson Mandela, former political prisoner and head of the anti-apartheid African National Congress, was elected as the country’s first black president . By the 1990s the system of apartheid was unraveling, and Nelson Mandela was elected president .
 To the extent that sanctions made a difference in South Africa, the fact that they had broad global support certainly helped . The fact that sanctions helped. certainly helped certainly helped. It was a huge success for South Africa.
 The United States, for example, was relatively slow to get on the sanctions bandwagon . The U.S. has been relatively slow on sanctions against Russia .
 Some in the U.S. government argued that the best way to improve the human rights situation in South Africa and elsewhere was constructive engagement .
 Individuals argued that the U.S. could better influence human rights by maintaining economic relations . These individuals argue that the United States should not rely on economic relations with Russia .
 U.S. companies in South Africa, via policies of equal treatment of black South Africans, to set an example for emulation . Those relations would allow U.K. companies to set example for empathetic behavior .
 Some say involvement would contribute to economic development, which in the view of some was the path to a more enlightened order . Moreover, such involvement would help economic development .
 U.S. hesitation notwithstanding, South African sanctions had more global support than virtually any other set of post-World War II sanctions . Still, United States hesitation notwithstanding notwithstanding, the South African Sanctions had more support than any other sanctions .
 Sanctions imposed by one country can be easily undermined by the actions of others . Without global support, sanctions imposed by a country can't be backed up by others, experts say . The U.S. should not have to rely on other countries' support, they say .
 Other grain-exporting countries, including Australia, Argentina, and Canada, responded by replacing U.S. sales .
 The big loser here was less the USSR than farmers in the Midwestern United States . President Ronald Reagan eventually lifted the sanctions on the Soviet Union .
 The USSR eventually withdrew from Afghanistan, but that decision had little to do with U.S. economic sanctions . The USSR withdrew from the country in 1980s and 1990s .
 One study found that of the 39 cases involving unilateral U.S. sanctions between 1970 and 1990, only five produced a desired policy change .
 Only about 20 percent of all U.S. sanctions (unilateral and multilateral combined combined) achieved even partial success . Between 1970 and 1999 only about 20 per cent of all United States sanctions achieved success .
 The essence of sanctions logic is that they should not be allowed to be imposed on Russia . Perhaps even more troubling than the question of the effectiveness of economic sanctions is the issue of their human cost .
 Depending on the nature of the sanctions, ordinary citizens often bear, directly or indirectly, much of the economic pain . The sanctions are imposed on Russia and the West .
 This always raises ethical issues, but especially so when the purpose of the sanctions is to address human rights violations . This is especially true when sanctions are aimed at human rights abuses . The U.S. has been accused of using sanctions against Russia to target the country's alleged violations .
 Many prominent South African critics of apartheid supported the imposition of economic sanctions . Other anti-apartheid leaders opposed sanctions . That is why many South African leaders opposed them .
 A good illustration of the moral ambiguities of economic sanctions is found in the comprehensive UN economic sanctions imposed on Iraq on August 6, 1990 . The sanctions were imposed by the United Nations on Iraq .
 Sanctions came as a response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, but were maintained following 1991 expulsion from Kuwait to pressure Saddam Hussein to eliminate weapons of mass destruction . These sanctions came after the 1991 expulsion of Iraq from Kuwait, and were maintained after 1991 expulsion .
 Claims that more than 500,000 children under five years of age died in the 1990s due to the economic sanctions . On one end of the spectrum are claims that more . than 500 .000 children died in 1990s because of sanctions .
 Some blame Saddam Hussein’s regime for refusing to comply with the conditions that would have lifted sanctions and misusing available economic resources to take care of his population . At the other end are those who dismiss such numbers or blame such deaths on Saddam Hussein's regime .
 Study suggests one-quarter of those deaths were a legacy of the 1991 Persian Gulf War . The remainder of the deaths were attributable to sanctions, the author says .
 While ordinary Iraqis were dying without adequate food, medical care, and sanitation, he was paying for his military and building palaces . He was also paying for the military while ordinary Iraqis died .
 Iraq's leader used chemical weapons against his own people, but sanctions were not a major concern for him . On the other hand, as a leader with such an atrocious human rights record, it's hardly surprising that deaths of ordinary Iraqis produced by sanctions weren't a concern for Saddam Hussein
 Sanctions were initially imposed after a series of incidents in the 1990s . The sanctions were eventually adjusted, but they were never lifted .
 The UN Oil-for-Food Programme allowed limited oil sales by Iraq that, in turn, allowed for the import of certain food and medical supplies . The UN allowed limited sales of oil to allow for the imports of food and medicine .
 The UN Security Council, at the urging of the United States and Great Britain, adopted the sanctions in May 2002 . This was a step in the direction of the smart sanctions that the U.S., Great Britain and the EU adopted .
 Sanctions loosened or eliminated the ban on Iraqi import of civilian goods, while tightening restrictions on imports of arms and other goods essential for the Iraqi regime .
 The long-term impact of the smart sanctions in Iraq was never really tested . However, the impact of those smart sanctions on Iraq has never really been tested . The U.S. has never been able to test the effectiveness of the sanctions .
 The outbreak of war cut them short, and the program had been rife with corruption . Proceeds were funneled both to Iraqi leaders and to UN officials, according to reports .
 Many have suggested that a more politically astute response by Albright would have been to challenge the number of sanctions . Albright has been criticized for his comments on sanctions in Russia .
 September 11 was partly in response to the deaths of Iraqis produced by U.S.-supported sanctions, says Osama bin Laden . "Not quite an apology, but certainly a recognition of the politics involved," he says .
 The Iraqi case and Albright's response also illustrate the moral complexities involved in human rights enforcement . The human cost of enforcing human rights can sometimes be quite high, Albright says .
 Matt Welch, ""The Politics of Dead Children,"" Reason Online, March 2002 . Welch: "The politics of dead children" is a political issue .
 The use of the military in response to human rights abuses is often referred to as humanitarian intervention . Military intervention is often known as 'humanitarian intervention'
 Though human rights abuses often provoke international outrage, governments and citizens only reluctantly put their own soldiers in harm’s way unless clearly identified national interests are on the line . Human rights abuses are often provoked international outrage .
 NATO’s 1999 humanitarian intervention in Kosovo was one of the most recent examples of NATO intervention in the Balkans . NATO's 1999 intervention was the best recent example of the intervention .
 The disintegration of Yugoslavia and its aftermath did not proceed peacefully . Yugoslavia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Serbs, Croats, and Bosnian Muslims were a decade of bloodshed ifegk'j&ftgRg tO the Site. Complicated by latent ethnic and religious suspicions .
 No one ethnic group constituted a majority in Bosnia, where decades of intermingling and intermarriage had produced an ethnic mosaic once hailed as a triumph of interethnic peace and cooperation .
 In the 1990s the idea of ethnic integration was replaced by ethnic cleansing, whose goal was to rid an area of an unwanted ethnic group . Ethnic cleansing was the goal of ethnic cleansing .
 The tactics were often brutal, including attacks on school buses, marketplaces, and other places where innocent men, women, and children went about their daily business .
 In the perverse logic of those who perpetrated such offenses, the situation would become so dangerous that the unwanted would feel compelled to flee, the author says . The unwanted would then “cloans’s” the region and render it ethnically pure .
 By 1994 approximately 250,000 had been killed, with another 2 million rendered homeless . Another 2 million had been rendered homeless by the conflict .
 Kosovo, a part of Serbia but with a population of 2 million that was 90 percent Albanian and Muslim (Serbs were Eastern Orthodox Christian) Kosovo was ready to explode . Kosovo is a region of Albania and Muslim, 90 percent of the population .
 Kosovo was viewed as the cradle of Serbian civilization, a region that needed to be kept as part of a greater Serbia . Some nationalists viewed Kosovo as the region that had to be cleansed of non-Serbs .
 By early 1999 thdQQQjVltfalLQl. d(afc£2oFipelleii t h k tBs h uEdN d Gi 1 ri^Sa t ion to act . By 1999 the ion had to be removed from
 NATO airstrikes against Serbian targets began on March 24, 1999 . Milosevic refused to comply, and NATO airstrikes began .
 U.S. national interest in putting an end to the conflict in the Balkans, he said . In so doing, he discussed the American interest in preventing a larger war .
 At the core of Clinton’s justification for war in Kosovo were human rights . Human rights were at the heart of the justification for the war, Clinton said .
 Serbia agreed to remove its forces from Kosovo, and an international peacekeeping force took their place . Serbia had agreed that Serbia would remove its troops from Kosovo . The U.S. joined the peacekeeping operation in Kosovo .
 Milosevic remained in power, but his loss in Kosovo undermined his authority . Kosovo was the only country to fall victim to the Serbian government .
 In 2000 the political opposition ousted him, and in 2001 the new Serbian government handed him over to the UN International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia . He was tried on numerous charges of human rights violations committed in Bosnia and Kosovo .
 Kosovo illustrates effective international human rights enforcement . Kosovo's situation remains far from perfect, but it is a good example of human rights law enforcement .
 Kosovo case set a precedent for intervention to protect human rights within the boundaries of a sovereign state . Kosovo case sets a precedent to intervene in the protection of human rights in a sovereign country .
 Justice trumped power in contrast to the ‘realist’ view of how the world works, says David Cameron . State sovereignty took a back seat to human rights, says Cameron .
 The principle of non-interference must be qualified in important respects, says David Cameron . But it is not the first time the UK has intervened in the way it has done so .
 Unlike Putin, Milosevic was not leader of a country with thousands of nuclear warheads as well as armed forces numbering in the multimillions . Putin was not the leader of the country with nuclear warheads or armed forces .
 The Clinton contribution to the human rights revolution is not insignificant . Clinton's contribution to human rights was not insignificant, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The leader of the world’s greatest superpower said the international community has any obligation to intervene in the name of human rights is a significant challenge to state sovereignty and a noteworthy advance of the human rights revolution . The public acknowledgment, in both word and deed, by . the leader of
 The Kosovo intervention was, moreover, a significant departure from the Clinton administration response to the genocide in Rwanda . Clinton administration responded to the Rwandan genocide in 1994 .
 Part of the motivation for Clinton’s intervention in Kosovo was a sense that the U.S. and the world had failed to respond adequately in the Rwandan case .
 A renewed commitment to fortify the world’s commitment to respond to human rights abuses was also in evidence at the global level . The world was seen to be in a strong mood at the summit .
 As noted in the summit’s official outcome document, each individual state has the primary responsibility to protect its population from genocide .
 The responsibility to protect falls to the international community working through the U.N. However, when states fail to do so, the responsibility falls to them .
 R2P sought to promote new global norm establishing that a state’s claim to sovereignty cannot be considered absolute protection from external intervention if it is committing or allowing extreme human rights abuses to occur on its territory .
 Human rights atrocities are under way in Sudan, says Human Rights Watch . The Sudanese state has been accused of human rights atrocities in recent years .
 Beginning in 2003, regime-backed Arab militias were destroying villages in the largely black African Darfur region, raping inhabitants, killing perhaps hundreds of thousands . More than 2 million people have been displaced in Darfur since 2003 .
 The 1948 Convention on Genocide requires the international community to act if genocide is deemed in progress anywhere in the world . The 'G-Word' is the phrase used to refer to genocide in the United States .
 U.S. and other world leaders and officials have been reluctant to use the ""g-word" to refer to an intervention that they and their citizens wish to avoid . For that reason, United States and other . world leaders are reluctant to . use the 'g-words'
 Hundreds of thousands of thousands had been killed in Rwanda in 1994 . The U.S. State Department had a press briefing on June 10, 1994, after the genocide .
 Constructivist scholars would see in this the power of words and ideas (in this case, the word and idea of ""genocide"") to impact world politics . Realists would say that the exchange confirms the reluctance of states to follow through with human rights enforcement .
 "We have every reason to believe that acts of genocide have occurred in Rwanda," says Amnesty International . The Rwandan government says it is investigating a genocide in Rwanda .
 "We have every reason to believe that acts of genocide have occurred. What we have seen so far, as best we can, is based on the evidence," he says . "What we have done so far is as best to understand what has happened," he adds .
 There are formulations that we are using that are trying to be consistent of our use of them . There are some formulations that are being used that are consistent of their use of these formulations .
 "I don't have an absolute categorical prescription against something, but I have the definitions," he says . He says he has definitions of what he says he thinks is a problem .
 I have phraseology which has been carefully examined and arrived at as best possible to apply to exactly the situation and the actions which have taken place . I have been carefully examining the situation in order to make the best use of the phraseology .
 There is a reason for the selection of the words that we have made, and I'm not a lawyer. Because, Alan, there is a choice of words . Alan says he is not a legal expert, but he says there's a reason behind the choice of language .
 A small contingent of African Union troops has been on the ground in Sudan since 2004 . European Union troops were sent to neighboring countries to deal with refugees from Darfur .
 In July 2007 the UN Security Council established a UN/African Union hybrid mission in Darfur . A larger contingent of 26,000 peacekeeping troops were authorized in July 2007 .
 Critics of humanitarian intervention have argued that this lack of action is predictable . Critics say it is predictable that humanitarian intervention is not taking action .
 In Kosovo, NATO won by bombing from high altitudes, without use of ground forces, and without losing a single soldier, humanitarian war might be possible . In a case like Kosovo, where NATO won without using ground forces and without loss of a soldier, a humanitarian war may be possible
 Few conflicts will conform to this pattern, and where the expectation of a clean, bloodless war on the side of those interveners cannot be assured in places like Rwanda or Darfur, effective intervention is unlikely . But few conflicts will be as bloody as Rwanda, Darfur or Rwanda,
 The success of the human rights revolution also depends on bringing violators to justice . Ultimately, the success of this revolution depends on justice for human rights violators .
 This is especially true given the spotty record of the world community when it comes to stopping violations while in progress . The world community has a spotty track record of stopping those violations while working on the project .
 Justice would be incomplete if perpetrators remained in power or retired quietly to some country dacha or seaside haven . Even where humanitarian intervention succeeds, justice would not be complete if perpetrators remain in power .
 In some cases, justice will be administered internally, in the country where the human rights abuses occurred . Justice will also be administered in the countries where the abuses occurred, officials say .
 In many countries where severe human rights abuses occurred, truth commissions have been established to investigate, but the reach and power of those commissions vary considerably . Truth commissions are established in many countries, but their reach varies considerably .
 Many domestic justice efforts are weak, and also because perpetrators often have flagrantly violated international human rights treaties . Prosecution at the international level is also a possible option .
 Former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet was arrested in his Londo0©^$£N IhOAfifeEilBe IwRQMpLrffilJg on a herniated disc . Pinochet, 82, was arrested on October 16, 1998,
 The Human Rights Revolution overthrew the democratically elected socialist leader Salvador Allende . Allende was overthrown by a coup that overthrew Allende's democratically elected government .
 Some credit some of Chile's policies with creating one of Latin America’s most successful economies . Pinochet's 17 years in power were also characterized by significant human rights violations .
 The Rettig Report issued by Chile’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 1991 documented more than 2,000 deaths and more than a thousand “disappearances” linked to the Pinochet regime .
 A report issued in 2003 by Chile’s National Commission for Political Imprisonment and Torture established that the use of torture by the Pinochet regime was systematic state policy . The report documented more than 28,000 cases of torture .
 The Truth and Reconciliation Commission was intended to establish and document the record of human rights abuses rather than to prosecute . The commission was set up in 1991 to document the human rights record .
 A 1978 Chilean amnesty law protected those accused of human rights violations, and when Pinochet stepped down in 1990, he was made a senator for life . Pinochet was granted a grant of lifetime immunity under the terms of the constitution .
 The London arrest in 1998 resulted not from actions taken by Chilean authorities, but from an indictment handed down by a Spanish judge alleging human rights abuses including genocide, terrorism, and torture . The arrest was the result of a Spanish indictment against Chile .
 The judge requested that the British government extradite Pinochet to Spain for trial . Judge requested that Pinochet be extradited to Spain to face trial .
 More than a year of legal debate followed, during which time Pinochet remained under house arrest in Great Britain . Pinochet was held in house arrest for more than a decade .
 The British House of Lords proceeded with the extradition, only to be overruled by a decision of the government to return Pinochet to Chile . In the end, Pinochet was returned to Chile, given the fragile state of his health . The Chilean government decided not to extradite Pinochet
 The 1998 indictment, arrest, and agreement in principle to extradite Pinochet to Spain set a precedent for universal jurisdiction in matters of international human rights law . However, the 1998 indictment and arrest of Pinochet set a legal precedent . Pinochet's arrest, arrest and extradition to Spain was
 In some especially grave crimes, the duly recognized judicial bodies of a state may exercise jurisdiction without regard to the territory where the crime was committed or the nationality of the perpetrators or victims . According to this principle, in some especially serious crimes, a state can exercise jurisdiction in such cases without regard
 In the Pinochet case, a Spanish judge indicted and the British police arrested a Chilean citizen and ex-president for crimes committed on Chilean territory largely against Chilean citizens . Some crimes against Spanish citizens were also noted in the indictment, though some crimes also noted .
 Universal jurisdiction is highly controversial, as it directly challenges state sovereignty . Universal jurisdiction has been controversial in the past, with many claiming it is a violation of sovereignty in the U.S.
 All four of the 1949 Geneva Conventions on war embrace the idea of universal jurisdiction in instances of “grave breaches” of these conventions . The 1949 Conventions include universal jurisdiction for cases of grave breaches of the conventions . All four are signed by the Geneva Convention .
 1984 Convention Against Torture provides first that jurisdiction should be established in torture cases by states directly impacted by torture cases . Likewise, the 1984 Convention against Torture says jurisdiction should also be established by the states directly affected .
 Article 6, Section 4, of the 1998 International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings adopts the above language from the Convention Against Torture almost word for word, thereby extending universal jurisdiction to that area as well . Most recently, Article 6 of the . 1998 . Convention
 Supporters of universal jurisdiction hail it as a trend toward further prosecution of human rights abusers . Supporters say universal jurisdiction is a good step toward further human rights abuses .
 Critics worry that states, or even individual judges, could use it to settle political and ideological scores . Critics say it is ripe for abuse in the courts .
 Some human rights advocates have emphasized the need for international tribunals duly authorized by the world community to prosecute human rights violators . In recognition of this dilemma, some human rights advocate calls for international tribunal to be established .
 International courts could, in principle, end the ability of such individuals to escape prosecution by hiding behind the walls of state sovereignty . This would avoid the potential for abuse inherent in the universal jurisdiction approach .
 The Nuremberg Charter authorized the prosecution of Nazi officials for crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against humanity . The Charter was authorized to prosecute Nazi officials in war crimes and war crimes .
 It was the last of these three areas of jurisdiction that was most controversial . It was also the last area of jurisdiction in the country .
 The door was opened to prosecuting individuals for human rights abuses against their own citizens, irrespective of domestic law . Thus, in a direct challenge to state sovereignty, the door was open to prosecution .
 The Nuremberg precedent was followed in the 1990s, first with the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in 1993 and then with the creation of the ICTR for Rwanda in 1994 .
 Unlike Nuremberg, the 1990s tribunals were established under the authority of the UN Security Council . They were effectively insulated from the claims of ‘victor’s justice” sometimes used to critique Nuremb. Unlike N.Nuremberg .
 In both the Yugoslav and Rwandan tribunals, dozens of people have been indicted . Many have been put on trial and convicted, and prison sentences are being served . Dozens of people are currently serving prison sentences in Rwanda .
 The most famous defendant was former Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic . Former Serbian leader was former president of Yugoslavia .
 A charJelO^MNJkQiAelDi died in 2002 for his part in ; i jihorizing . He was first indicted in 1999 for war crimes and crimes against humanity .
 Nuremberg Tribunal was established by the victors of World War II to prosecute Nazi officials for crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against humanity . Tribunal established by victors to prosecute officials for war crimes . Tribunal was set up by the winners of the war in 1945 .
 In 2001 he was arrested by the new Serbian government on domestic corruption charges . He was subsequently transferred to The Hague, where the ICTY conducts its proceedings . His trial, which began in February 2002, ended due to his death in 2006 .
 The establishment of both the Yugoslav and Rwanda tribunals was, in principle, a significant step in putting some muscle behind international human rights law . It sends the message that future violators will be brought to justice .
 The Yugoslav and Rwanda cases also demonstrate the shortcomings of the ad hoc approach . However, the Yugoslav and Rwandan cases also show the shortcomings .
 While many indictments have been handed down, not all of those indicted have been apprehended and tried . Not all of the indictments were tried and convicted .
 In both cases, but especially in the Rwandan case, progress was initially very slow . The Rwandan government has been accused of corruption in both cases .
 In the first seven years of the ICTR’s work, verdicts were issued on only nine individuals . Many more of those responsible still live freely around the world .
 To some extent, the slow pace was understandable, as these tribunals were blazing new trails . The slow pace of the trials is understandable, but it's understandable, to some extent .
 1990s tribunals have no authority to try cases of severe human rights violations anywhere else in the world . They are charged with attending to human rights cases in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia .
 The Yugoslav and Rwandan tribunals have failed to find a permanent solution to the challenge of prosecuting human rights violators . Human rights advocates want to establish a more global and permanent solution for the challenge .
 The idea for a permanent international court of human rights is rooted in the lessons of the ad hoc tribunals . Permanent human rights courts have been operating at regional levels . The International Criminal Court of Human Rights is based on the experience of ad hoc courts .
 The European Court of Human Rights was established by the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights and began hearing cases in 1959 . The most significant court of human rights was established in 1959 and is now hearing cases .
 ECHR receives 50,000 requests in 2006 alone to hear new cases . The ECHR has been increasingly busy in recent years . The European Court of Human Rights has been involved in more than 100,000 cases .
 The European Court of Justice is a regional court whose jurisdiction is confined to Europe . It is by design that it is meant to be by design to be a European court .
 The Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court was intended to create a body with truly global reach . The Rome statute establishing the ICC was intended for a truly global body, the court says .
 Prosecuting Human Rights Violators ratified by July 1, 2002 . Prosecuting human rights violations ratified .
 The purpose of the ICC is to try cases against individuals . Unlike the International Court of Justice where parties to cases are always states, the ICC tries cases against individual individuals .
 Court authority to try crimes of aggression was also debated . It was decided to postpone inclusion for at least seven years . Agreement on definition of aggression could not be reached until agreement is reached .
 In 2010 the state parties agreed, under limited circumstances, to allow the court to try cases involving aggression beginning in 2017 . In 2010, the court agreed to allow it to do so .
 The court has jurisdiction in all areas where it is authorized to adjudicate . Its jurisdiction includes crimes committed by nationals of countries that have ratified . The court is also authorized to investigate crimes committed in the territory of states that have signed up .
 Security Council can halt ICC proceedings if proceedings imperil efforts to make and secure peace . Conversely, it can also halt proceedings if those proceedings are deemed to imperil peace efforts . ICC proceedings can also be halted if proceedings threaten peace efforts, Security Council says .
 Such Security Council action also requires a supermajority of nine votes, including all of the five permanent members . The Security Council is currently only one of the six permanent members of the Security Council .
 Only with a significant consensus in the Security Council can halt ICC proceedings . ICC proceedings can only be halted with a consensus of support from the U.N.
 As of mid-2010, the court has investigated five situations and issued indictments for 14 individuals . The court has also indicted 14 individuals in the past .
 Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir's case has received the most attention . The case that has received most attention was that of Sudanese President Omar al Bashir . Sudan's president has been accused of corruption .
 In 2009 an arrest warrant was issued for Bashir on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity . Sudan is not a member of the ICC, but the Security Council authorized the ICC prosecutor to investigate the situation in Darfur .
 Bashir remained in office, but he was subject to potential arrest when traveling abroad . Bashir is now a member of the U.S. State Department .
 Critics say ICC lacks accountability because of broad powers of investigation and indictment given to prosecutors . U.S. critics say it shifts power away from UN Security Council to ICC .
 Under the ad hoc tribunal system, prosecution, indictment, and trial could not begin until a Security Council majority without veto so authorized . The tribunal system is known as the "ad hoc tribunal"
 Under ICC system, it takes the same majority without veto to halt court action . Under the ICC system it takes a majority of the vote to halt the action .
 The United States is a permanent member of the Security Council with veto power . Its influence on human rights adjudication would be notably reduced under the ICC approach .
 ICC critics worry that U.S. superpower status and global reach could make Americans tempting targets of ICC prosecution and harassment . Some ICC critics fear that United States superpower status makes Americans tempting .
 Some fear it could lead to indictments of U.S. soldiers and officials for war crimes allegedly committed in internationally unpopular wars like that in Iraq . For example, some fear it may lead to an indictment of soldiers and even officials in the war .
 It could lead to indictments against Israel for crimes against humanity related to its treatment of Palestinians . Likewise, it could also lead to charges of crimes against human rights violations .
 0im£Ndh£l thdSUsfiiRlOilizecL^cfifiHigatfiiBildrprosecute add to the concptvp,yer^h& poss ibl e pohticiratujmpf .
 ICC issued an arrest warrant for Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir for war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur in 2010 . ICC issued the arrest warrant in 2010 for Sudan's president . The Human Rights Revolution is the result of an international human rights movement .
 It was the first time that the court issued a warrant for a sitting head of state . The warrant was issued for the president of the country .
 The United States is protected by the principle of complementarity, which provides that the ICC steps in only if national courts are unable or unwilling to investigate and prosecute . Supporters of the ICC and of United States participation counter that the U.S. is protected .
 One should emphasize that the principle of complementarity does not require findings of guilt or even indictments of suspected human rights violators . The principle does not need to be found guilty of human rights violations, he says .
 ICC would not have jurisdiction as long as the United States investigates and prosecutes alleged human rights violations in good faith through the American judicial system, the U.S. says .
 Even though the United States is a nonparty to the ICC, U.S. citizens can be prosecuted if their crimes occur on the territory of states that are parties to ICC . The United States can also be prosecuted for crimes committed in the U.N.
 Supporters argue it is in the U.S. interest to participate in selecting and removing prosecutors and judges . They say it's in the United States interest to help define the future role of the court .
 Supporters argue that as a country with a global commitment to human rights, the U.S. needs to be out in front of the pack, not lagging behind .
 Full-fledged U.S. membership in the ICC would require ratification of the Rome Treaty by the United States Senate . The Senate is a body that is highly polarized along ideological lines .
 Debate over the International Criminal Court is a debate over the larger human rights revolution in microcosm. The debate is over the international criminal court's role as a human rights advocate .
 Evidence suggests that over the past half-century or so, the idea of human rights has affected how the world works in important ways . On the one hand, evidence suggests that human rights have affected the world .
 The first ICC case involving human rights abuses in Uganda was undertaken in late 2005 . Individuals accused of human rights violations on the territory of member states face indictment and prosecution irrespective of whether they have ratified the Rome Statute .
 NATO warplanes launched a war against Serbia over human rights in Kosovo in 1999 . Serb leaders eventually went on trial at the ICTY for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity . In 1999 NATO war planes launched warplanes against Serbia .
 Former leaders with human rights skeletons in their closets may still face consequences for their past actions . Augusto Pinochet felt the reach of the human rights revolution in his hospital bed in London, and other former leaders .
 Ethnic cleansing and genocide in places like Chechnya and Sudan have occurred with minimal intervention by the international community . The international community has not intervened in the past to stop ethnic cleansing .
 Following the events of September 11, 2001, terrorists and the fight against them pose new challenges to human rights . The fight against terrorists poses new challenges for human rights in the United States .
 In 2005 even the secretary-general of Amnesty International noted a “lethal combination of indifference, erosion and impunity” that marks the human rights landscape today . In 2005 Amnesty International said the situation was “inevitable”
 We can still see a change in the balance between state sovereignty and human rights in world politics . However, we can still be optimistic about the future of the Middle East, writes David Cameron .
 Human rights successes and failures to support the views of both realists and critics . Thus, we can find sufficient success and failure to support both realist and their critics .
 Realists suggest that the world continues to work in essentially the same way it always has . sovereignty and national interest continue to trump global concern with human rights, they say .
 Others argue the U.S. is seeking to elevate concern with human rights . Others argue that in refusing to participate in flawed institutions, the United States is raising concern .
 Sikkink, “Transnational Politics, International Relations Theory, and Human Rights,” 519, is published in the New York Review of Human Rights .
 Geneva Conventions for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, and Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, are among them . The Conventions relate to the Treatment of Prisoners of War and Prison
 This language is contained in all four of the Geneva Conventions on war . This language was contained in the Geneva Convention on War . The language was used by the U.S. during World War II .
 Generally speaking, I think it's a good thing that the sun comes up every morning . "The sun comes out every morning. It's not a bad thing," he says .
 "Even if I didn't care much for the dawn there isn't much I could do about it," she says . But even if she didn't like the dawn, there's not much to do with it, she says.
 I didn't start globalization, I can't stop it—except at a huge cost to human development—and I'm not going to waste time trying. —Thomas Friedman, 1999 . The Achilles heel of that ""inevitabilist" vision of globalization was its rigid economic determin
 High politics is concerned with the competition between states for power and geopolitical influence . Low politics has to do with the interactions among states and nonstate actors in relation to global economic, environmental, and other nonmilitary issues .
 The terms reflect a realist bias that the primary concern of international relations is the military and political power struggle, while the primary concerns are the military, political power struggles .
 Globalization such issues as global trade, finance, and migration, though important in their own right, are secondary to the core security interests of states . State security is a key priority for states, especially in the Middle East .
 In the 1990s, the end of Cold War military competition combined with the increasing trend toward global economic integration led to a resurgent interest in low politics .
 More optimistic adherents of the liberal commercialist paradigm argue that globalization is rendering high politics obsolete . The more optimistic adherents say globalization is due to its integration and increasing interdependence .
 Optimists assert that the benefits of global economic interdependence and the consequent cost of disrupting it are making war and the realist preoccupation with military power increasingly unthinkable .
 The entire realist view of how the world works is becoming passe, Friedman says . Friedman says globalization is as unstoppable as the dawn of the dawn .
 For realists like David Rieff, the celebration of globalization and acceptance of its inevitability was shortsighted . For realist realists, globalization was a failure to embrace it, he says . The U.S. should embrace globalization, he writes, but not embrace it .
 As he suggests, states can slow or reverse the forces of economic globalization if such globalization appears contrary to their interests . States can slow, even reverse such globalization if it appears to be contrary to them, he says .
 Rather than an unambiguous force for peace, globalization, globalization also contains the seeds of interstate conflict, he says . He says globalization, in his view, is a form of international conflict that could lead to conflict .
 From a different perspective, neo-Marxists challenge liberal views of economic globalization . Neo-Marxist views of globalization are different from those of neo-liberal liberals .
 neo-Marxists believe that international economic relations produce both winners and losers . This is as likely to lead to conflict as cooperation in world politics, they say . Like realists, neo- Marxists believe economic relations are more likely to produce conflict .
 neo-Marxists argue that it is competition between socioeconomic classes rather than between states that is central to the global economy . Unlike realists, they argue that competition is not between states but between classes .
 This chapter begins with a comparison of realist, liberal, and neo-Marxist perspectives on the global economy . This chapter includes a comparison with realist and liberal perspectives on global economic issues .
 From there we will turn to an examination of the key issues and institutions of the international economic order as they have evolved from World War II to the present . From there, we will look at the key institutions and key issues of the economic order .
 Many features of the international economic order established in the 1940s continue to shape international economic relations today . Though the world economy has changed significantly over recent decades, the world has not changed significantly .
 The chapter culminates with an extended discussion of the globalization debate . The chapter will culminate with a discussion of globalization .
 As we will see, globalization is the logical extension of the liberal paradigm, and it provides a powerful challenge to realist understandings of how the world works . We will see that globalization is a logical extension to a liberal paradigm .
 This chapter will examine the nuts and bolts of how the world of international economic relations works . The goal is to help you assess the merits of that challenge to the realist paradigm .
 The three paradigms that have the most to say about the global economy are realism, liberalism, and neo-Marxism . Realistic, liberalism and neo Marxists are the key to understanding the world's economy .
 In its classic sixteenth-century conception, mercantilism was a policy aimed at increasing the national wealth via the accumulation of precious metals like gold and silver . In its modern conception, the policy was aimed at . increasing national wealth .
 Modern mercantilism is focused instead on accumulation of national wealth via a trade surplus . A trade surplus is the result of exporting more than one imports . The result of a surplus is a result of exports of more imports .
 When a country has a trade surplus, it both accumulates monetary reserves and promotes the development of domestic industries . A trade surplus can also be used to boost the country's monetary reserves .
 Many scholars view mercantilism as the realist paradigm applied to international economic relations . This concern with national wealth accumulation is consistent with realist emphasis on national power .
 For many realists, mercantilist policies that promote a nation’s economic wealth and power are essential, as military power ultimately rests on a strong economic foundation . The U.S. needs a strong foundation for its military power, realists say .
 Even if all states become more prosperous as a result of global trade, those who enjoy the greatest boost will be advantaged in the global balance of power . Those who benefit from global trade will be able to gain the most in the world .
 For realists, the world economy is essentially a zero sum game in which every gain for one country is a loss for another . Realists believe that every gain in one country's economy is lost for another in a world economy .
 The realist or mercantilist approach to the world economy requires that governments play an activist role in promoting and protecting their national industries from foreign competition .
 If importers of such goods pass the cost of that tax onto consumers, it will raise the price of imports . Domestic goods will be more price competitive and attractive to consumers .
 Nondariff barriers are used to similar effect . They include any protectionist barriers that are not tariffs . The nontariff barrier is also used to reduce trade barriers .
 The most common nontariff barrier is a quota, or a limit imposed on the amount of a particular good that can be imported within a given time period . The quota is a limit on how much of a certain good can be brought in .
 By limiting the supply of that product, the effect is, like a tariff, to raise the price of the import and make domestic products more competitive . The effect of a tariff is like a tax hike, raising the price and making domestic products competitive .
 Governments can sometimes be very creative in devising nontariff barriers . Governments can often be creative, says Peter Bergen . Governments need to be creative and creative, he says .
 Health and safety inspections required for imports can often work well in protecting domestic industries . For example, strict health and safety inspection required for imported imports can work well .
 Governments can help domestic industries by providing subsidies . Subsidies are designed to lower the cost of production . The goal is to make domestic products more desirable than foreign imports .
 When we buy manufactured goods abroad, we get the goods and the foreigner gets the money . We buy the goods, and the foreigners get the money. We buy them from abroad, and they get them from us .
 Please donate to the site. When we buy the manufactured goods we ..get both and the rest of the site .
 A quantitative limit is imposed on the number or amount of a particular good that can be imported within a given period . Subsidies are intended to lower the cost of production and to make those industries more competitive against foreign competitors .
 Protectionist views are likely to hold political sway in periods of economic recession or depression, when unemployment is high . Economic Globalization protectionist views likely to be especially strong in times of high unemployment .
 Restrictions on imports can seem like a quick way to solve unemployment problems . In such circumstances, restrictions on imports seem to seem like an easy solution .
 Such beggar-thy-neighbor policies were pervasive among industrial nations during the Great Depression of the 1930s . Such policies were prevalent during the Depression .
 Liberalism stands in stark contrast to mercantilism and realism is economic liberalism . Liberalism is the antithesis of mercantillism, realism, and realism .
 Economic liberals today believe in minimizing government intervention in the free market . Adam Smith's views are rooted in the eighteenth-century views of classical economists like Adam Smith .
 Liberal perspective argues that governments should refrain from interfering in the free flow of goods and services across international borders . Applied to the global economy, the liberal perspective is that it should not interfere with the flow of trade .
 In some circumstances, the liberal case for trade and opposing protectionism can seem obvious and intuitive . But it's not always obvious or intuitive . The liberal case against protectionism is not always intuitive .
 A farmer in Minnesota decides to switch from producing soybeans to growing bananas . A farmer decides to grow bananas instead of growing soybeans .
 His banana plantation will be the only one in the continental United States . His reasoning is that unlike soybean fields, which are very common in the U.S., banana fields are common in Europe .
 The temperature, humidity, and soil will be perfect for growing bananas in Minnesota . The cold climate in Minnesota will make growing bananas difficult .
 Of course, these Minnesota “hothouse’s bananas will be very expensive . Consumers will likely continue to buy cheaper bananas imported from Central America .
 The farmer has persuaded his local congressional representative to introduce legislation imposing high tariffs on imported bananas .
 If that legislation passes, the cost of the tariff will be passed onto the consumer . Central American bananas will be more expensive and Minnesota bananas more price-competitive .
 Most observers will likely dismiss Minnesota farmer's idea of banana plantation idea as foolish . Minnesota farmer hopes idea will boost economy .
 Even assuming that the U.S. Congress passes the banana tariff legislation, the results will be counterproductive for consumers and producers alike . Even if the legislation passes, it will harm consumers, producers alike, according to the economist .
 Consumers who continue to buy bananas at their newly expensive price levels will find their standard of living in decline as disposable income to buy other goods and services is reduced . Consumers will continue to be unable to afford bananas at the newly expensive prices .
 Workers in other Minnesota industries could, as a result, lose their jobs . High-priced bananas could squeeze out purchases of the goods and services they produce .
 Some might argue that one cannot grow bananas in Minnesota, but one can produce steel there . The difference is the difference between producing bananas and producing steel in Minnesota .
 The use of greenhouses to produce bananas in Minnesota as well is possible . The farmer understood that it is possible with the use of the greenhouses .
 The issue is not whether growing bananas in Minnesota is possible, but at what cost it's possible . Growing bananas could be a problem for the state, Minnesota, but the cost of growing bananas .
 In the language of professional economists, the case against growing bananas in Minnesota rests on the theory of comparative advantage . The theory was explained in the early nineteenth century by British economist David Ricardo . The case rests on Ricardo's theory, which was explained by the British economist .
 According to theory, countries should produce those goods that they can manufacture most efficiently in comparison to other goods . Countries should produce what they can produce most efficiently, according to theory .
 Ricardo’s key insight was that even when a country has an absolute advantage in the production of a good, it would still benefit by producing the goods that it can produce most efficiently in comparison to other goods . Ricardo's key insight is that even though a country can produce more cheaply
 Given the amount of money he could earn from basketball and related activities, he would clearly be better off “outsourcing” the lawn mowing to a landscaper or even to a 13-year-old kid .
 The money he made from the additional hour gained to play basketball or film a television commercial would be more than enough to pay for the lawn mowing .
 Jordan had an absolute advantage in both basketball and lawn mowing, but his comparative advantage was basketball . Both Jordan and the local landscaping company benefit when he concentrates on that activity .
 The theory of comparative advantage suggests that specialization and trade minimize costs of production and raise the standard of living for the world as a whole and the individual countries involved in trade .
 Liberals believe that trade leads to absolute gains for all countries . Liberals see international relations as a positive sum game, where everyone who participates benefits .
 From the liberal perspective, the case for free trade in steel or textiles or any other manufactured good does not differ in any essential way from that of bananas . Free trade in textiles, steel or other manufactured goods is not the same case as in bananas, he says .
 In all those cases, the call for tariffs or nontariff barriers is simply a way to protect an industry that lacks a comparative advantage from foreign competition, and should be avoided . The call for tariff barriers should not be avoided, the author says .
 A theory of trade developed by Adam Smith but superseded by Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage . Policy that rejects participation in the global economy in favor of economic selfsufficiency. positive sum game. autarky .
 The interactions increase the total pool of benefits available to all who participate in the program . The interaction increases the pool of funds available for all participants .
 Vladimir Lenin was the leader of the 1917 Russian Revolution . Lenin was a leader in the Russian Revolution that led to the death of the revolution . Lenin died at the hands of the Bolsheviks in July 1917 .
 Marx noted the poor living and working conditions of Europe’s new industrial working class . Marx wrote during the era of Europe's Industrial Revolution .
 The wealth and profit produced by industrialization remained with the capitalists who owned the means of production, while workers, including children, toiled long hours for little pay in dirty, unsafe conditions .
 Marx predicted that this exploitation of the working class would eventually lead to Communist revolutions throughout Europe in which workers would rise up to overthrow the capitalist system . Marx predicted this would lead to a Communist revolution in Europe .
 Lenin explained this failed prophecy by citing imperialism, which Marxists define as a policy of extending national power over other states and peoples for economic gain . Lenin explained that imperialism is a policy that extends power over others for economic benefit .
 Lenin: The rich capitalist states of Western Europe acquired colonies in Asia, Africa, and Latin America where labor and resources could be exploited . According to Lenin, the rich . capitalist states acquired colonies where labor, resources were exploited .
 The profits obtained by imperial ventures were then used to improve conditions for workers at home just enough to temporarily prevent the domestic class struggle from spilling over into revolution . The profits from these imperial ventures would then be used to help improve conditions in the home .
 Most neo-Marxists have abandoned predictions of worker revolution and renounced the kind of political regimes created in places like Russia and China in the name of Marx and Lenin .
 Marx and Lenin's analysis of international economic relations remains central to their analysis in three areas . However, the understanding of international . economic relations rooted in the words of Marx and . Lenin is central to the analysis of their analysis .
 neo-Marxists see the global economy as characterized by constant economic rivalry among developed capitalist states . neo- Marxists see a constant economic competition among developed countries .
 While European states once struggled to establish direct colonial rule, in our postcolonial era states seek more indirect access to and control of resources, markets, and places for investment .
 Neo-Marxists would view economic and trade disputes among the capitalist powers as part of the unavoidable logic of global capitalism .
 Some commentators have welcomed China’s embrace of market capitalism as promising better relations with the developed Western countries . neo-Marxists anticipate increased tensions with the West .
 China, the newest player in this global intracapitalist struggle, challenges the economic position of those Western countries . They say this because China is the new player in the struggle for the future of the West .
 neo-Marxists continue to emphasize the exploitation of poor countries by the developed capitalist states . Second, neo- Marxists emphasize the exploitive of poor by the rich .
 While liberals tend to see poverty and economic underdevelopment as the result of poor internal policy choices, neoMarxists place the blame on external factors . NeoMarxists believe the exploitation of poor countries by rich developed ones is to blame for poverty .
 A version of this argument known as dependency theory was popular in the 1960s and 1970s . The argument was used to argue that dependency theory is a theory of dependency .
 neo-Marxists argue that the more integrated the global economy, the more workers in developed economies will lose, as they now face competition for jobs with workers in low-wage countries thousands of miles away .
 neo-Marxists reject the liberal view that international economic relations are a positive sum game in which all involved will benefit . In short, neo- Marxists share with realists a rejection of the view that all involved in economic relations benefit .
 neo-Marxists see the global economy producing both winners and losers . Like realists, neo- Marxists see realists and neo-Maoists see both winning and losing . The global economy is producing both losers and losers, says Marxists .
 neoMarxists are more interested in the advantages and losses it produces for social classes . Realists assess the world economy in terms of relative advantages or losses for different states . NeoMarxists look at the relative advantages of the global economy for social class .
 An American firm that establishes a profitable factory in Mexico may benefit its corporate bottom line at the expense of both Mexican workers and U.S. workers . From this perspective, an American firm .
 During the Great Depression of the 1930s, powerful neomercantantist pressures developed around the world as countries sought to solve their economic problems on the backs of their neighbors .
 Tariffs and other protectionist measures proliferated in the 1990s . The volume of international trade plummeted, and political tensions escalated . Tariffs have proliferated, and the volume of trade plummeted .
 The Depression and World War II provided a significant boost to Marxist and Communist parties in many West European nations . The Depression, combined with the subsequent economic devastation produced by the war, also provided a boost to the Communist parties .
 As the war was ending, economic liberalism was under challenge from both mercantilist and neo-Marxist constituencies in many countries . Economic liberalism was challenged by both Mercantilists and Neo-Marxists in many nations .
 The U.S. pushed for the creation of a postwar economic order based on liberal principles of free markets and free trade . The world’s dominant postwar military and economic power pushed for a free economic order .
 In July 1944 representatives from the U.S. and the other 43 Allied countries met at the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire . The hotel was nestled at the base of the White Mountains in New Hampshire.
 The purpose of the meeting was to establish rules and institutions that would govern the postwar international economic order . The meeting was held in 1945 to establish the post-war world's economic structure .
 The Bretton Woods system was designed to prevent the global economy from sliding back toward self-defeating neomercantilist policies . The rules and institutions, collectively referred to as the Bretton-Woods system, were intended to prevent global economy slipping back toward neo-ne
 Many of the original features of the Bretton Woods system have evolved or been replaced over time, many of the decisions made and institutions created in the 1940s continue to influence international economic relations in the twenty-first century .
 Bretton Woods system was established by the U.S. and its Allies in 1945 . Post-World War II international economic system was intended to support the development of a liberal economic order . Bretton-Woods system was set up by the United States and its allies .
 GATT and WTO members must provide all other members equal access to their home market . Replaced by the WTO in 1995 . Nation whose goods and services receive the most favorable treatment in trade .
 The 1995 successor to GATT, it is the de facto court for resolving trade disputes among member nations . The World Trade Organization is the international forum for negotiating trade agreements . It is the world's de facto trade court .
 1947 GATT aimed to realize the liberal vision of a world of free trade . Less a formal organization than an international treaty, the GATT aims to realize a liberal vision .
 It did so by providing a forum within which countries committed to free trade in principle could negotiate a reduction of protectionist barriers, it says .
 GATT requires that all countries who are members of GATT grant other members most favored nation status, which gives them all equal access to the others’ home markets . That principle requires all countries to grant others most favored nations status .
 If Canada imposes a 10 percent tariff on shoes imported from Italy, it must impose 10 percent on all other GATT countries . So, for example, if Canada imposed a 10 per cent tax on shoes from Italy it would have to impose a 10% tax on footwear imported from all other
 Canada cannot discriminate either in favor of or against Italian shoes . Canada can't discriminate between the shoe industry and Italian shoes, it says .
 The aim of GATT is not just to have equal tariff levels among countries, but lower tariff levels as well . GATT aims to lower tariffs among countries as well as lower tariffs as also .
 GATT process is based on a series of discussions or “rounds” in which further liberalization of world trade is pursued . Thus, the GATT talks are based on discussions or "rounds" in which more liberalization is pursued.
 Since its creation, GATT has gone through eight completed rounds of discussion . The Uruguay Round, which got under way in Uruguay in 1986, lasted seven and one-half years .
 By the end of the Uruguay Round, GATT had achieved significant success . The Uruguay Round was one of the most successful rounds of GATT in history .
 The number of GATT member countries increased from 23 founders to 123 . Tariffs on industrialized goods declined to a global average in the single digits . The volume of world trade increased dramatically .
 GATT had less success in freeing up trade in agricultural goods and services . Domestic lobbies objected and made trade liberalization in such areas politically risky for national leaders .
 Even in manufactured goods, countries often compensated for GATT-mandated reductions of tariffs by erecting nontariff barriers to protect domestic industries . Countries compensated for reductions of GATT's reductions of tariff reductions with nontariffs .
 The nontariff barriers were often difficult to identify and regulate . They were often portrayed as health and safety regulations to protect consumers .
 High oil prices and slowed economic growth led to rising levels of unemployment in many countries . Nondariff barriers were often the protectionist instrument of choice in the 1970s .
 The GATT was the absence of a mechanism for resolution of interstate disputes over the implementation of international trade law . Another problem with the GATT is that it does not have a mechanism to resolve interstate disputes, says the OECD .
 If one state believed another was engaging in protectionist practices in violation of GATT agreements, there was no place to take one’s complaint for formal resolution . There is no place in the U.S. to file a complaint against GATT .
 Doha Round talks begun in 2001, the first round of global trade talks of the WTO era, began in 2001 . The central objective has been to promote development in developing countries . The talks are scheduled to take place in Doha, Qatar .
 A key to achieving this objective is reducing agricultural production in developing countries . Please donate to the site .
 Many call centers have been established in India to service consumers in the U.S. can compete in the United States. Many of the centers are located in India .
 This move involves cutting high agricultural tariffs in Japan and the EU and reducing domestic subsidies to farmers . The EU and the U.S. have large domestic subsidies for farmers that characterize both of them . This move will also reduce high tariffs in both countries .
 Doha Round talks were essentially stalled as countries could not agree on these issues . However, as of 2010, the Doha round talks were effectively stalled .
 WTO members who believe a trading partner is violating international trade agreements can take a case to the WTO for a hearing . WTO members can take the case to a hearing if they believe a trade partner is breaking international trade laws .
 The WTO functions as a court of international trade law, and its authority to apply sanctions makes it more powerful than even the long-established International Court of Justice .
 Doha Round ■ First round of global trade talks of the WTO era, begun in 2001 and uncompleted as of 2010 . Doha is the name of the Doha round of talks, which began in 2001 .
 Called the ""development round"" because of the stated intention to focus on promoting development in developing countries . Called the "development round" because of its stated intention of promoting development . Called 'development round'
 In a world with multiple national currencies, how those currencies are valued in relation to one another is a key issue . The International Monetary Regime is the subject of discussion .
 An American student studying in Europe, for example, will need to have euros in order to buy European goods and services . American students in Europe will need euros to pay for European goods .
 The student will perhaps visit a currency exchange booth in an airport and buy euros with American dollars . The student is perhaps best advised to buy euros in the U.S.
 How many TJ.,S . dollars it costs to buy euros will be partly aifected by the riarartrof . rate system .
 The choices are essentiall)ft'te>agft)d:&|ia4@fte<ihl&l&rt§hrate system. The choices were made in the system .
 One of the early tests of the WTO dispute settlement process was the U.S.-EU banana war . WTO Dispute Settlement in the early years of the process began in 1994 .
 In 1993 the EU placed quotas on banana imports coming from outside its North African preferential trade zone . In 1993, the EU banned banana imports from outside the zone . The EU placed the ban in place in 1993 .
 Although the United States has no domestic banana production, U.S.-based multinational corporations such as Dole and Chiquita operating in Central America were affected . The United States does not have a domestic banana industry .
 The United States filed a complaint against the EU at the WTO and was joined in that complaint by Mexico, Honduras, and Ecuador . The U.S. filed the complaint against EU .
 The EU appealed, but that appeal was rejected, forcing the EU to change its banana regime . The EU now has a banana regime in place of the EU .
 Those sanctions remained in place until April 2001, when the EU finally caved . Those sanctions were imposed by the European Union in 2001 .
 EU 'could not avoid the process and the negative publicity attached to it' EU 'cannot avoid the one-sided process' on the one hand, the EU says .
 Practice Practice eventually had to change its banana policy, and international trade law was upheld . International trade law upheld .
 In the GATT era, it would have been much less likely that the EU policy would have changed . The EU policy is much more likely to have been changed in GATT than in the past .
 Liberals would argue that the case illustrates the power of institutions to regulate and constrain state behavior for the benefit of the world economy as a whole . Liberals would thus argue that this case illustrates how powerful institutions are to regulate state behavior .
 The process took five years from the establishment of the dispute settlement panel until final resolution . The EU says the process took even longer if you go back to the initial EU banana regime .
 The EU would not have changed its policy if the U.S. had not been involved in the case . The United States is denying the EU access to the lucrative United States market for the sanctioned European goods .
 Realists might argue that it was United States power and United States interests that drove this decision . Realists may argue that the U.S. interests drove the decision .
 Whether Honduran sanctions alone, in combination with the legal status of a WTO ruling, would have been enough remains an open question . Honduran Sanctions alone, combination with legal status, would've been enough .
 Floating exchange rate system is a system in which the relative value of national currencies fluctuates in response to supply and demand . The system is called a floating currency system .
 In a floating exchange rate system, the relative value of currencies fluctuates in response to supply and demand . In the past, currencies fluctuated in the direction of demand and supply .
 If Americans were buying large amounts of European goods and services, leading to a U.S. trade deficit with Europe, demand for the euros necessary to buy those goods would increase .
 The relative cost of the euro in U.S. dollars would increase, making European goods more expensive for American consumers . American goods would be cheaper for Europeans and cheaper for Americans .
 The fixed exchange system collapsed in the 1970s as the U.S. faced with mounting balance of payments pressures . The United States announced a devaluation of the United States dollar in relation to other currencies and withdrawal of its longstanding commitment to exchange dollars for gold .
 A floating exchange system gradually emerged, and today most countries allow their currencies to float . Today most countries have a floating currency system, allowing it to float freely .
 The choice of exchange rate system is important because it influences the response to balance of payments problems . It is important to choose a currency system to cope with balance-of-payment problems .
 Balance of payments refers to the net flow of money into and out of a country in connection with activities such as trade, investment, and foreign aid . The balance of payments is a balance of the country's finances and the economy .
 When more money flows into a country than out, the country is said to be enjoying a surplus in its balance of payments . This is when more money is flowing in than out of the country, according to the IMF .
 When more money is flowing out than in, a country is experiencing a deficit in its balance of payments . Conversely, when more money flows out than into the country, that country experiences a deficit . The deficit is caused by the flow of money flowing out of the country's finances .
 While it is possible to endure balance-of-payments deficits for a time by borrowing, in the long run, large deficits are unsustainable for most countries . Large deficits in most countries are unsustainable, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Countries with large deficits will eventually find themselves unable to borrow the additional funds needed to finance their imports of foreign goods and services . Countries with a large deficit will eventually be unable to afford to borrow additional funds .
 In a floating system, balance of payments deficits are partly self-correcting . Balance of Payments deficits are self-deficiting, say experts .
 A country experiencing high deficits will see the value of its currency fall in relation to others . The value of a country's currency will fall if it is experiencing high deficit .
 The deficit would help correct the deficit since it would make foreign goods more expensive and reduce foreign imports . That, in turn, would help reduce the deficit .
 To correct these problems in a fixed exchange rate system requires painful domestic measures like reduction in both government and consumer spending . To correct the problems, the government and consumers will have to reduce their spending .
 IMF offers loans to countries facing persistent balance of payments difficulties . IMF loans are offered to countries with persistent balance-of-payability difficulties .
 The money for such loans comes from the member countries, each of which is required to contribute its “quota,” based on the relative size of its economy . Each country must contribute to a ‘quota’ based on its size of the country .
 The United States has always been the world’s largest contributor to the IMF . The U.S. accounted for a little over 17 percent of IMF funding in 2010 .
 IMF normally attaches conditions when it makes loans to countries in need . IMF usually attaches conditions to the loans, such as bail-outs . IMF loans are made to countries that are in need of funds .
 IMF loans will be required to adopt structural adjustment programs . Structural adjustment programs are designed to make changes in economic policy to eliminate the source of the country’s financial difficulties .
 IMF reforms were known collectively as the Washington consensus in the 1990s . The reforms were supported by the United States, which supported the reforms .
 State economic regulation, privatization of state industries, elimination of protectionist trade barriers, reduced restrictions on foreign investment, and reductions in government spending . They included reduction of state economic regulation and privatization .
 IMF provides loans to countries facing persistent balance of payments difficulties on the condition that recipient countries adopt economic policies prescribed by the IMF . IMF loans are given to countries with persistent balance-of-payment difficulties .
 World Bank provides low-interest loans for economic development projects to countries with demonstrated need . World Bank is an international institution created after World War II .
 Critics argue that the one-size-fitsall advice provided by the IMF often ignores the specific political, economic, and cultural context of countries in economic crisis . The IMF has been criticized for not providing a "one-size fitsall" IMF advice .
 Criticism of the IMF reached a peak in response to its handling of the East Asian financial crisis of 1997 . Criticism of IMF reached peak in 1997 when it was criticized for handling of East Asian crisis .
 In previous decades, governments had loosened restrictions on the flow of capital across national borders . In previous years, the restrictions had been loosened .
 Up-andcoming “emerging market economies” in places like Southeast Asia received billions of dollars of capital from Western investors . Western investors looking to earn higher rates of interest than they could at home .
 This cash infusion proved a boon to those recipient countries and accelerated expansion of their economies . The cash infusion led to a surge of investment in infrastructure projects, real estate, and construction activity .
 Money began to flow out of the region as quickly as it had once arrived . In the summer of 1997, doubts set in about the future of these economies, and money began to stop .
 Growth stalled, construction projects halted, jobs lost, and local currencies declined in value . Growth stalled and construction projects were halted .
 Some suggested that the 1997 crisis was an inherent problem of the unregulated global market in capital that had come to characterize the world economy by the 1990s . Others suggested that it was the result of an unregulated global .
 IMF largely blamed internal factors such as corruption, corruption . IMF offered to bail out countries only if they implemented Washington consensus . IMF largely blames internal factors, including corruption, for the crisis .
 Critics argued that for countries facing economic collapse, that IMF medicine was the wrong prescription . IMF medicine is the wrong medicine, critics argued .
 Neo-Marxists argued that this crisis was just one more illustration of the IMF and Western nations trying to reconstruct others in their own image and dominate developing countries’ economies whatever the local cost, they said .
 Even less radical critics of the IMF argued that this was not one of its most shining moments . The IMF has been criticized by some of the world's most radical critics .
 1944 Bretton Woods conference led to the establishment of a third institution, the World Bank . The World Bank was founded by the GATT and the IMF . World Bank is the largest bank in the world .
 Like the IMF, it acts as lender of last resort for countries with demonstrated need . The IMF is also a lender for countries that have demonstrated need.
 IMF traditionally emphasizes short-term loans for countries facing balance of payments crises . The World Bank focuses on making loans to finance longer-term economic development projects .
 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development was created in 1945 to facilitate post-World War II reconstruction . The International Development Association was established in 1960 to help the poorest nations .
 Like the IMF, the World Bank has adopted a weighted voting system that gives predominant authority to the developed countries . The World Bank's voting system is similar to that of the IMF .
 Initially the focus of the Bank was on the reconstruction of postwar Europe . Initially, the focus was on reconstruction of the continent .
 For each goal, specific objectives have been set, with a target date of 2015 . Specific targets have been established for each of these goals .
 Kofi Annan commissioned the Millennium Project to develop a concrete plan for implementing the eight goals . Jeffrey Sachs headed the project in 2002 . Sachs was a Harvard economist .
 Sachs advocated that developed countries make available as much as $195 billion per year from 2005 to 2015 . Sachs: The ultimate goal of “ending poverty in our time” by 2025 is to end poverty by 2025 .
 The professor and the rock star joined forces to promote the global fight against poverty . They traveled around the world, giving speeches, and calling on governments to combat extreme poverty .
 William Easterly argues that the record of the World Bank and IMF in fostering economic development has been bleak . Easterly says the IMF and World Bank have failed to foster economic development in the past .
 After more than four decades and more than $500 billion of aid to Africa, that continent is still stuck in poverty . Africa's poverty rate is still the highest in the world, despite billions of dollars in aid .
 Easterly is especially critical of the Millennium Development Goals approach . He says it's aimed at satisfying the needs of rich Western countries more than the poor . Easterly says the plan is a “utopian plan” aimed more at satisfying rich Western needs than at serving the world�
 The debate over the record of the World Bank and the potential of the Millennium Development Goals provides a window into a much larger debate about the causes of and solutions to poverty and economic underdevelopment characteristic of much of the global South .
 Liberals, mercantilists, and neo-Marxists each have a different perspective on these issues . Liberals and mercantsilists have different perspectives on the issues of capitalism and capitalism .
 For liberals, the keys to closing the North-South development gap and reducing global poverty are policy adjustments taken by the poor countries themselves, they say .
 Millennium Development Coals aims to stimulate industrialization by erecting barriers to imports and serving the local market through domestic production . UNestablished goals focusing on poverty reduction, primary education, gender equality, child mortality, maternal health, disease, environmental sustainability and economic development .
 The Distribution of Global Poverty by Region % of Population Living at $1.25 per Day or Less . Europe and Central Asia 3.0% of population living at $2.00 per Day . The distribution of global poverty by region is based on the distribution of people living in Europe
 PPP or "purchasing power parity" figures adjust for the fact that the U.S. dollar will buy more goods in poor countries than in the United States . PPP is based on purchasing power parity figures in the US .
 An example of an effort to emphasize good governance as the key to growth was the establishment of the Millennium Challenge Corporation .
 The MCC administered a fund of development aid available from the U.S. government . The fund was administered by the MCC .
 Eligibility to receive aid would depend on countries’ scores on 17 selection indicators . Countries’s scores on these indicators would be based on their ability to receive the aid .
 President Obama's administration has been criticized for its openness to world trade . The White House has been accused of being too open to trade in the past .
 Indictment dealt with domestic policy and governance issues such as rule of law, control of corruption, government effectiveness, civil liberties, political rights, and public expenditure on health, and natural resource management .
 In tying aid to domestic reforms, the MCC approach was clearly not rejecting aid as a part of the solution to the problem of global poverty . The MCC's approach is not to reject aid as part of a solution to global poverty, it says .
 While liberals argue that integration into the global economy is the key to development is integration . neo-Marxists take issue with that view . The views differ from liberals who say integration is key to developing nations .
 In 2010 “developing and transition countries” received a boost in their voting power, bringing them up to 47.19 percent . That still leaves developed countries with majority control of the vote .
 The Doha Round discussions have stalled in large part precisely because Europe and the U.S. have been unable to agree to reductions of subsidies to agriculture in their own countries . The United States and Europe have not been able to agree on reductions of agriculture subsidies to farmers .
 Southern countries are dealing with large multinational corporations with annual sales greater than the country’s gross national product . In many cases, Southern countries deal with companies with sales exceeding their GDP . Southern countries dealing with multinational companies with annual revenue greater than GDP .
 The United States devoted approximately 0.0 percent of GNP to foreign economic assistance in 2008 . The Millennium Challenge initiative discussed above discussed .
 Mainstream economists and policy advocates argue for increasing foreign development aid, reforming international institutions, and opening up developed state markets to developing countries .
 The difference is that mainstream observers accept the possibility of reform, while neo-Marxists suggest that the system is not reformable . Some say exploitation of the poor by the rich is inherent in the capitalist system .
 Mercantilist view of development differs from that of both liberals and neo-Marxists . The mercantilists' view differs from those of neo-Maoist and liberals .
 Unlike neo-Marxists, mercantilists do not see an inherently exploitative relationship between rich and poor in the world economy . Mercantilistists see the relationship as exploitative, not exploitative .
 The strategy for development is not open borders and adoption of the Washington consensus policies advocated by the IMF, the World Bank, and the U.S. government . Unlike liberals, the strategy for developing nations is open borders .
 In fact, the most successful developers were those that combined an embrace of export-led growth with significant protection of newly developing domestic industries from foreign competition .
 While liberals sometimes cite the successful development of East Asia as evidence of the success of the liberal development strategy, mercantilists argue that in each of those dliiiitQP^;tecti;)TJst4)hlidi^ftlGt included
 Informal 2002 agreement among developed countries to devote at least 0.0 percent of GNP to foreign economic assistance . Monterrey Consensus: "Foreign economic assistance is essential to the survival of the world"
 Even developed countries like the U.S. and Britain had a long history of mercantilism that gave way to liberalism only once those countries had successfully developed, they argue .
 The mercantilist development strategy is based in part on the concept of infant industry protectionism . It is based on the idea of infant protectionism in the United States .
 The idea is that a new industry needs some nurturing and protection in its formative years before it can compete with established companies in the global marketplace .
 Some have suggested that China has practiced a version of this approach . China has also practiced a similar approach to Russia .
 In 2010, the Chinese government announced a new series of regulations governing the emerging e-book reader market . The Chinese government has been cracking down on e-reader technology .
 Some observers have suggested that those regulations are an attempt to protect emerging Chinese producers of that technology from established foreign competitors .
 The Chinese policy of keeping the value of its currency artificially low against the U.S. dollar provides the most comprehensive protection for the Chinese economy as a whole . In fact, one might argue that the RMB is artificially low is the best protection .
 The low value of the RMB makes Chinese goods relatively cheap for U.S. consumers, thereby stimulating Chinese industry and adding to the United States trade deficit with China . Low value means Chinese goods are cheap for United States consumers, adding to trade deficit .
 Bretton Woods system created the GATT, IMF, and World Bank to focus on global approaches to trade, monetary relations, and economic development . It also made a place for regional organizations designed to promote trade liberalization and economic integration among smaller groups of countries .
 Members can freely move goods and services as well as labor and capital across national borders with other member countries . They adopt a common currency and common monetary and fiscal policies, they say .
 All three forms violate the GATT/WTO principle of nondiscrimination, since imports from fellow members of a regional organization are treated more favorably than those of nonmembers . Technically speaking, all three forms violates the principle .
 Flowever, the original GATT agreement exempted such regional organizations from the nondiscrimination rule on the grounds that, on balance, these organizations liberalized trade and could provide, in combination with GATT, a dual-track approach to the same free trade goal . Flowever .
 In eliminating most barriers to trade among its members, it was a textbook example of a customs union . It was also imposing a common external tariff on nonmembers, it says .
 Economically, European integration promised a fast track to prosperity because it took advantage of the efficiencies of specialization and trade identified by the theory of comparative advantage . European integration will take advantage of these efficiencies, experts say .
 Integration promised more peaceful relations, as economic interdependence would make the cost of war too great to contemplate . Politically, as the liberal commercialist perspective on international relations would predict, integration promised more peace . Integration promised to make war among member states too great for member states to contemplate
 The 1992 Treaty of Maastricht officially changed the name of the organization to the European Union . The treaty was signed by the European Commission in 1992 .
 The change in name symbolized both the broadening and deepening of European integration . The name of the European Union has been changed to reflect the changing nature of the continent .
 The most recent enlargement in 2007 increased the total membership to 27 states, including almost all the countries of Western and Northern Europe and a number of post-Communist states of Central and Eastern Europe .
 By 2009, the euro had replaced the traditional national currencies in 16 EU countries . The euro was adopted by 16 countries in 2009, replacing national currencies with national currencies .
 EU countries account for approximately 20 percent of global trade . Although accounting for only 7 percent of the world’s population, they account for about 20 percent trade .
 The heavy trade orientation of the EU countries is in large part due to the absence of protectionist barriers among members . About two-thirds of the trade of EU members is with other EU members .
 Europe's per capita GNP and standard of living make Europe among the most prosperous places on the planet . Today, Europe is one of the world's most prosperous countries .
 EU has been uniquely successful in inducing countries to give up elements of their sovereignty . EU has also succeeded in inducing nations to relinquish elements of sovereignty, says David Cameron .
 The EU transcended the limits of an international organization within which sovereign states interact and pursue their interests . The EU long ago transcended limits of the international organization, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It is better categorized as a supranational organization, as it has an elaborate governance structure separate from that of its constituent state members . Instead, it is best categorized as an international organization .
 EU member states have remained at peace with one another for the past half-century . The EU is the most notable success of the EU, with its member states at peace .
 Unlike domestic legislatures, the European Parliament cannot initiate legislation . The 27 members of the European Commission are appointed by their member governments rather than directly elected . The European Commission is the largest body in the European Union .
 Decisions made by EU bureaucrats in Brussels lack the degree of legislative and popular oversight common in the domestic politics of democratic states . Brussels is the de facto capital of the EU, but Brussels lacks a degree of democratic oversight . The EU is one of the most powerful powers in the world,
 The 2004 EU Constitution was intended to codify the fundamental rules of the EU and to energize movement toward further political integration, iridiQhes a isubAiEiEtE).
 The EU success in promoting intra-EU trade has come at the expense of countries and industries left on the outside looking in . Europe’s external trading partners say the EU success is due to the fact that the EU has been successful in promoting trade in the past .
 U.S. industries and policy-makers have become more concerned about the discriminatory impact of EU trading practices . The EU trade practices have been discriminatory in the United States, authors say .
 The EU appears as a mercantilist trade bloc intended to bar access to the European market by nonmembers . For many of its trading partners, the EU appears to be an anti-EU trade bloc .
 The EU provides impressive protections of workers’ rights and generous government social programs . The EU is the world’s most powerful economy, with generous social programs and generous protections .
 This system came to define continental Western Europe’s ‘third way’—an approach between the Eastern European Communist economies and the Anglo-American ones that emphasize markets over government . This system became part of the Western European model of capitalism .
 The European model may no longer be tenable, and efforts to trim back workers’ rights and social programs have led to sharp domestic political battles . Now challenged by low-cost Asian producers, the European model no longer tenable .
 The success of the EU in broadening its membership to 27 has made deepening the integration more difficult . EU's success of broadening membership has made it more difficult to deepen the integration process more difficult.
 This is due partly to the political challenge of reaching consensus among a larger group of members . This is partly due to the difficulty of reaching an agreement among members of the party .
 Economic integration is inherently more difficult among states that are at different levels of economic development . It reflects the fact that economic integration is more difficult for states that have different economic development levels .
 Post-Communist states of Central and Eastern Europe need assistance in modernizing their economic infrastructure and reversing decades of Communist-era environmental degradation . In particular, it has been difficult to incorporate the post-communist states with their lower levels of GNP per capita, lower wages, and
 The global economic crisis that began in 2008 exposed many of these underlying challenges . Global economic crisis exposed many underlying challenges in 2008, experts say .
 By 2010 Greece was plagued by enormous budget deficits and the prospect of default on its government debt . Greece is one of the 16 countries in the Eurozone, one of Europe's largest economies .
 Some observers speculated that Greece might need to drop out of the Eurozone . Some observers speculate that Greece may need to be forced to pull out . Greece is one of the biggest economies in the eurozone .
 Fearing the implications that this would have for the larger EU project, many called for a bailout of Greece by other EU members . But economic problems of their own made many EU governments and their publics reluctant to help .
 Still, the virtually unbridled optimism that characterized Europe and Europe-watchers in the early 1990s has largely dissipated . Still, there are still pockets of optimism in Europe, but the optimism has largely faded .
 The North American Free Trade Agreement went into effect on January 1, 1994 . It is a classic example of a free trade agreement . It was signed in 1994 .
 The United States, Canada, and Mexico have agreed to phase out tariffs and other trade barriers among themselves . The U.S., Canada, Mexico and the U.K. all agreed to do so .
 Unlike the EU, it is not a customs union with a common external tariff, nor does NAFTA aspire to become an economic union . NAFTA is not intended to be an economic and customs union, unlike EU .
 waIQ Et Qvfr siaQmalt leitEi in the hfitecjCltates, where it became an irppj<gt^g| hg)>“ in the ^-99^ j-jp^g sft
 He argued that NAFTA would produce a “giant sucking sound” of jobs leaving the U.S. for Mexico . He said it would be a "suck sound" of jobs moving to Mexico .
 What united them were concerns that U.S. industries would be unable to compete, given Mexico’s low wages and lax environmental protection enforcement . The sovereignty of the United States would be compromised, they said .
 George W. Bush, his Democratic opponent Bill Clinton, and important representatives of the U.S. business community attended the event . The event was held in New York City, New York .
 In large part, the NAFTA discussion reprised old arguments about the costs and benefits of free trade . The NAFTA discussion was a debate about the benefits and costs of trade .
 NAFTA supporters point to the potential benefits to consumers . NAFTA supporters say it could be a boon to the U.S. economy . Critics say it threatens domestic jobs and other industries .
 NAFTA would allow U.S. companies to invest in Mexico, they could reduce costs and more effectively compete with Asian producers . Because NAFTA allows companies to compete with Asia, they can reduce costs .
 Opening the borders to free trade would stimulate economic development in Mexico itself . The benefits would be seen in both Mexico and the United States, authors say .
 Some suggested that NAFTA would reduce illegal Mexican immigration, as more jobs would be available in Mexico . Others suggested that it would also reduce illegal immigration .
 NAFTA trade jumped from $297 billion to $810 billion between 1993 and 2005 . U.S. government data indicate impressive trade growth among NAFTA countries . Trade growth grew173 percent among NAFTA nations .
 All three economies experienced growth rates of more than 30 percent during NAFTA’s first decade . Meanwhile, Mexican exports to both Canada and the United States have soared .
 The opening of the economic border with Mexico coincided with a surge rather than a reduction in illegal immigration . Mexico itself, despite the increase in exports to the U.S. and Canada, has found its economy under siege by lower-cost competition from China .
 NAFTA is difficult to separate the impact of NAFTA on its member economies from the worldwide trend toward economic integration represented by globalization . NAFTA's impact on its members economies is hard to separate from the global trend of economic integration .
 In the past few decades, use of the term “globalization” has proliferated . The term has been used to refer to globalization in the past .
 The definition of integration and increasing interdependence among economies, societies, and cultures on a global level captures the essence of recent trends . The definition provided early in this chapter is the process of integration, integration .
 Students of international relations might usefully think of globalization in contrast to the notion of sovereignty . Globalization is a model for international relations in contrast with sovereignty, the author says .
 Sovereignty assumes that national borders matter, because within those borders are distinctly national societies, economies, and cultures governable by national political institutions . The U.S. should be able to claim sovereignty in its entirety, and that sovereignty is sovereign .
 Globalization is a direct challenge to sovereignty in all those respects, as it entangles national and local economies, societies, and cultures within a web that national governments are increasingly unable to control .
 Critics view the realist paradigm, and its privileging of the position of the sovereign state, as antiquated . The assault on sovereignty inherent in globalization is one reason that critics view realist paradigrams as increasingly antiquated.
 As an economic phenomenon, globalization involves the expansion of international trade, production, and finance . As a result of globalization, globalization has expanded international trade and production . globalization is a global phenomenon that involves international trade .
 Whether taken individually or as a group, none of these things are entirely new, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Multinational corporations —corporations based in one country but with production facilities scattered across other nations—have been around for decades . Multinational companies have been based in the U.S. but have production facilities in other nations .
 Such familiar brand names as Coca-Cola, Ford, and General Motors were globally traded and produced long before the current globalization era . Such familiar brands such as Ford, Ford and GM were produced before globalization era began .
 As long as international trade and investment have taken place, the system of international finance has existed to support this movement of real goods . Moreover, as long as . international finance have existed, international . trade has existed, says David Cameron .
 Three things, however, distinguish the contemporary globalization era from the international economic interaction of previous eras . Three things that distinguish the modern globalization era are different from previous eras: globalization .
 The volume of global trade and overseas investment is at an all-time high . Global trade and investment in the U.S. is at a record high .
 The only comparable period is what many refer to as the “first era of globalization” when international trade and investment also surged . International trade also surged during that period .
 Early-twentieth-century globalization era might be part of a single, long globalizing trend that was interrupted for a few decades by the two great twentieth-century wars . The two great wars were interrupted in the early twenty-nineteen-century era .
 The world has been moving along a globalizing trajectory for the better part of a century . Thought of in these terms, the world's globalization trajectory has been globalized for more than 100 years .
 Modern telecommunications technology links far-flung parts of the globe instantaneously . Modern technology links people across the globe .
 We see this most clearly in the speed with which financial transactions now take place . We see the speed of transactions now taking place in the world's most complex financial transactions .
 At the click of a computer mouse, millions of dollars can be moved around the world to buy and sell stocks, national currencies, government securities, and other assets . Millions of dollars move around the globe to buy, sell and buy stocks and currencies .
 Even in the pre-World War I phase of globalization, the “world” economy involved Europe and European-settled countries like the U.S. Even before World War I, the world economy was dominated by Europe and Europe .
 When countries in Asia or Africa were integrated into the global economy, it was largely as colonies and economic subjects of the Europeans . Asia and Africa were largely as colonial subjects of Europeans .
 Non-European states like China and India are becoming influential economic players . Today, non-European countries like India and China are becoming key economic players in Europe .
 Post-Communist states of Central and Eastern Europe are slowly being integrated into the world economy . The post-communist states were isolated from the rest of the global economy for decades . Central and eastern European states are slowly becoming more integrated into global economy .
 Globalization is a product of both technological change and policy choices, says David Frum . He says it's a result of both technology and policy decisions .
 The late-nineteenthand early-twentieth-century phases of globalization were made possible, in large part, by improvements in transportation . Improvements in transportation made possible by improvements to transportation, transportation .
 Railroads and steamships could transport goods over long distances more cheaply and faster than ever before, rapidly expanding both global trade and global production . Railroads could expand both trade and production .
 The midcentury rise of air travel was yet another step in the transportation revolution, further shrinking and integrating the world . Air travel was a key part of the air travel revolution .
 The computer-based communications revolution stimulated globalization by allowing buyers and sellers, employers and employees to stay in touch . More recently, it allowed companies to stay connected almost as easily as if they were located in the same office building .
 While technology is an important part of the story, policy choices also play a part in globalization . Policy choices play a role in globalization, as well as technology and policy choices .
 In the early post-World War II era, the U.S. commitment to a liberal international economic order was crucial . Bretton Woods institutions were crucial in reigniting the globalization cut short in previous decades .
 This political commitment to globalization was backed up by U.S. military power, which could protect shipping lanes or threaten regimes that sought to nationalize the holdings of MNCs . This commitment was backed by American military power .
 For realist scholars such as Robert Gilpin, the U.S. role is central to understanding the globalizing trends of the post-World War II era . Gilpin: The United States role in understanding the changing nature of the world is central .
 U.S. policy-makers concluded that a vibrant, integrated international economic system binding the United States, Western Europe, and Japan together served United States national interests . In his view, United States efforts to contain Soviet Communism led United States to conclude that an integrated economic system served U.
 At the same time, U.S. power and hegemony enforced the rules of the integrated Western world economy that the United States sought to establish . The United States wanted to establish an integrated Western economic model .
 By the 1980s and 1990s, an increasing number of countries were participating in the larger global economy via trade and foreign investment . By the 1990s and 2000s, a growing number of nations participated in the global economy .
 VNld'QiAiBfeE-lodkin J^rkty^GHiNp^BtRlffistitution industrialization was abatpjlcyjied as c|C | >ur|.^iji^s sought
 In the Communist world, from China to Russia to Eastern Europe, markets and economic liberalization came into fashion, and joining GATT (later the WTO) became a common objective . Similarly, in China, Russia, Russia and China, joining the WTO was a common target .
 IMF and World Bank tied multilateral aid to the adoption of Washington consensus polices of liberalization . U.S. encouraged and promoted these trends through the IMF, World Bank, says .
 Not all countries have participated equally equally in the new globalization system . Not all nations have participated in the globalization system, says CNN.com .
 At one extreme, Singapore, Ireland, the Netherlands, and the United States, stand in sharp contrast to resisters such as Cuba and North Korea . Singapore is one of the world’s most globally integrated countries .
 The question for the early twenty-first century is whether the benefits will overcome the resistance of those who remain outside the globalization system . The question is whether a more broad-based backlash to globalization might emerge, whether it will overcome resistance .
 Supporters argue that it has increased economic efficiency, productivity, and growth . Supporters say it has resulted in higher standards of living for people around the globe .
 For liberal economists, the “secret’s of globalization is that it unleashes the power of comparative advantage on a worldwide scope . The ‘secret” of globalization, liberal economists say, is to unleashes comparative advantage .
 As barriers to trade and investment are reduced and as more of the world joins the global economy, efficiency and productivity gains expand, productivity gains will expand .
 In short, from this perspective, 20-first-century economists can tell us little that Adam Smith and David Ricardo had not anticipated two centuries ago .
 The low inflation rates characteristic of the U.S. and other developed economies in the 1990s and in the first decade of the twenty-first century were attributable, at least in part, to inexpensive foreign imports . Low inflation rates were attributable to cheap foreign imports in the United States and
 The case in favor of globalization also rests on the success of developing countries catching up with the developed world in many areas . Developing countries have caught up with developed countries in some areas .
 The level of literacy increased from 70 to 76 percent from 1995 to 2005 . Literacy in the U.S. increased by more than a decade .
 The mortality rate for children under the age of five has plummeted since 1960 . Since 1960 the mortality rate has plummeted for children in under five .
 The chances of reaching the age of five have increased by 15 percent since 1990 . Since 1990 the chances of a child reaching age of 5 have increased 15 percent . The chance of reaching age five has increased by more than a decade .
 Developing countries have much ground still to make up, as achievement in all the areas noted above continues to lag considerably behind the developed world . Developing nations still lag behind developed countries in achievement achievement .
 Millions of people across the world still have inadequate levels of income, education, and health care . People who have managed to rise slightly above the very low, $1.25 per day cutoff for “extreme poverty” remain very poor by standards of the developed world .
 Wal-Mart has become the largest retailer in the world and largest private employer in the United States . Wal-Wal-Mart started out with a single store in 1962, and is now the world's largest retailer .
 In 2003 it was the world's second largest company, with total sales of $256 billion . In 2003, in terms of revenues generated, in 2003 it had $256billion .
 Beginning in the 1980s, WalMart began to feature large numbers of imported goods at rock-bottom prices . WalMart has been selling imported goods since 1980s .
 Wal-Mart accounts for 10 percent of U.S. trade deficit with China . Wal-mart says in 2003 it accounted for about $15 billion in Chinese imports, or 10 percent in 2003 .
 Other estimates put Wal-Mart's imports from China at double that figure . Wal-Wal-Mart imports are thought to be at least double that estimate .
 Wal-Mart works closely with Chinese companies, telling them what to produce to meet its needs . The company even teaches the Chinese how to produce those goods to Wal-mart's specifications . Wal-Wal-Mart says it's working closely with the Chinese companies to meet needs .
 For liberals, the measure of economic success is the impact of economic activity on individual consumers . The measure of success is how much economic activity is done by individual consumers, liberals say . For liberals it's important to see how much consumers are affected by economic activity .
 Wal-Mart accounts for approximately 8 percent of total U.S. retail sales, excluding auto sales . Wal-mart accounts for about 8% of total retail sales .
 For realists who look at the world through a mercantilist lens, the better measure of economic success is how much one produces . Realists say the best measure of success is to produce more than one person's wealth .
 Wal-Mart's China connection drives U.S. manufacturers to shift their production overseas or go out of business because they can't compete with ""the China price" Critics say our gains as consumers as consumers are outweighed by our losses as producers and workers .
 Mao Zedong was the leader of the 1949 Chinese Revolution and founder of the Chinese Communist regime, died in 1976 . China was largely isolated from the global economy when he died .
 Trade and investment relations with the developed countries of the West were limited . The internal economy was largely state-owned and controlled .
 Under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping, China began to reform in the late 1970s . Under Deng's leadership, the country began to become more democratic . China is now the world's most populous country .
 Domestically, the role of the state was reduced, and markets and private ownership were allowed to emerge . Domestic and international markets were reduced to private ownership in the 1930s .
 China began looking to the world economy as a source of investment and as a place to sell Chinese-made goods . Internationally, China began to look to the . world economy .
 Deng responded to those who cautioned against abandoning Communism for capitalism with such responses as “To get rich is glorious” and “Whether a cat is black or white makes no difference.” Deng responded with ‘To get richer is glorious.’
 As Bhagwati predicted, that growth has dramatically improved the quality of life for millions of Chinese people .
 Adult illiteracy has fallen to 7 percent, a drop of two-thirds . Adult life expectancy rose to 71 years in 2000, just a few years short of the 77-year life expectancy .
 The expectation is that China will bypass the United States and become the world’s largest economy sometime in the next couple of decades . Germany is expected to bypass the U.S. and become one of the world's largest economies after the US .
 China remains a developing country based on its per capita levels of income and GDP . The gross output and income of the Chinese economy have to support the world’s largest population .
 China's economic growth has been breathtaking, and the resultant impact on living standards for millions of Chinese has been undeniable . Nevertheless, the economic growth in China is still breathtaking .
 Some argue that India, with its long-established democratic political system, its strong and growing high-tech sector, and its abundance of highly educated and highly skilled workers, may have a bigger upside than China .
 Despite the successes to which proponents of globalization point, it has been a lightning rod for controversy .
 In 1999, thousands gathered in Seattle to protest a WTO meeting . Thousands gathered in 1999 to protest the WTO meeting in Seattle .
 The protests, some of which grew violent, required cancellation of the opening ceremonies and largely overshadowed the meetings . The protests were some of the largest in the country's history .
 The protesters were a diverse group of U.S. labor unions, environmental and animal rights groups, human rights organizations, farmers’ groups, industry associations, and women’s groups . The protesters included representatives of United States labor unions .
 Ideologically, protesters ranged from anarchists and anticapitalist leftists to people who, on many issues, would fit comfortably within the U.S. Democratic or Republican parties . Protesters range from anarchists to anti-capitalists .
 Since 1999 the WTO has become the central institutional symbol of the globalization era . Similar protests have occurred at subsequent WTO meetings both in the U.S. and around the world .
 Thomas Friedman dismissed the protesters as “senseless in Seattle,” 28 others suggested that the Seattle backlash against globalization and other protests are rooted in legitimate complaints .
 Critics say benefits of globalization are unevenly distributed . Critics say the benefits should be distributed more evenly distributed .
 East Asia’s annual economic growth for three decades has been close to 6 percent per capita per capita . Sub-Saharan Africa has been economically stagnant, experiencing negative growth for much of that period . East Asia's annual growth for 30 years has been around 6 percent .
 As Bhagwati anticipated, this differential has produced very different results in terms of poverty reduction . The country's poverty rate has been much higher than that of the previous two decades .
 In East Asia, led by China, the share of the population living on less than one U.S. dollar per day fell from 56. percent in 1981 to 14. percent . In sub-Saharan Africa, the population at that extreme level of poverty increased from EHQ W M
 Critics say globalization has increased inequality not only across national boundaries but also within countries . According to critics, globalization has also increased inequality in the United States .
 This result would not surprise neo-Marxists, who see the world economy as driven primarily by the pursuit and clash of class interests . The world economy is driven by class interests, neo- Marxists say .
 Average real wages in the U.S. have been stagnant since the 1980s . However, one need not be a neo-Marxist to note that average real wages are stagnant since .
 The income of the richest 1 percent of the U.S. population has doubled . That top 1 percent now earns 20 percent of United States income, the highest level of income inequality since the 1920s .
 A good part of this trend has been attributed to globalization, which has created an integrated labor market . Workers in developed, high-wage nations compete with workers in Shanghai, where labor costs are far lower .
 To take advantage of low overseas labor costs, companies now routinely engage in outsourcing . Subcontracts are subcontracting parts of a company’s business activity to suppliers abroad .
 A new term, “offshore outsourcing,” or offshoring, has been coined . To distinguish this behavior from domestic outsourcing, a new term has been created .
 This increased inequality is not limited to developed countries like the U.S. It's not just a problem for developed countries, it's also a problem in developing countries .
 Although China and India are dynamic emerging economies, not all who live there benefit equally . Not all people who live in India and China benefit equally from the emerging economies .
 In China, an enormous gap in income, growth, and quality of life exists between the coastal regions and the still largely rural interior of the country . The gap exists in China's largely rural and poor interior .
 India's image of a globalization success story with high-tech call centers, a growing middle class, and highly educated, technically proficient citizens poses a competitive challenge to U.S. workers is in large part true in the urban areas .
 In large swaths of northern and rural India, extreme poverty, child mortality, and illiteracy prevail . Extreme poverty, high rates of child mortality and child mortality prevail .
 Critics complain that with globalization, a range of noneconomic values are sacrificed on the altar of economic efficiency . Critics say with globalization it is sacrifice for economic success .
 Environmental protection, animal rights, human rights, and local cultural traditions all take a back seat to the goal of increasing economic efficiency via free trade . Free trade is the focus of free trade in the United States .
 As the philosopher Peter Singer puts it, in the current era of globalization, economics “trumps” all of these other considerations, Singer says . Singer: "Economy "trumps" all of the other considerations .
 In the United States and Canada, many producers of beef add growth hormones to the diet of cattle . In the U.S. and Canada,. many producers added growth hormones .
 North American consumers eat beef containing growth hormones . If you are a North American consumer who eats beef, you almost certainly, will eat beef with growth hormone .
 The United States government and beef industry argue that growth hormones are not only perfectly safe, but that cattle fed hormone supplements grow more quickly and with less fat in their flesh, making their beef cheaper and healthier .
 EU officials have suggested that we lack evidence for the long-term health implications of consuming beef hormones, especially for vulnerable populations such as the very young, pregnant mothers, or older people . EU officials say there is no evidence that the health implications for consuming beef hormone-treated beef are long
 Beginning in the 1980s, the EU banned imports of hormone-fed beef from the meat . The EU also banned the use of hormones in beef .
 Article 20 of the original GATT treaty allows trade restrictions based on such considerations as animal rights, human health, and environmental protection . Article 20 allows the WTO to uphold trade restrictions .
 In practice, the WTO has been reluctant to act on that basis, fearing that trade discrimination based on differing values could be a slippery slope . Countries disguise simple trade protectionism behind those more noble-sounding objectives .
 The result is that globalization and its goal of free trade have run roughshod over real differences in values across nations and cultures, critics say . The result, they say, is that free trade has run rough shod over values across the world .
 Supporters say globalization is associated with democracy and good government . Supporters claim that globalization is linked to good government and democracy . Supporters of globalization say it is good for democracy .
 States that are most highly integrated into the global economy tend to be the most democratic and least corrupt . States with the most integration into global economy are the least corrupt and most democratic, the author says .
 In contrast, states with closed, isolated economies tend to be disproportionately corrupt and authoritarian . Of course, correlation is not causation. States with closed economies are disproportionately corrupt .
 Democracy and good government might lead to integration into the global economy rather than the reverse, says David Cameron . Democracy, good government and good governance could lead to global integration, he says .
 Or globalization and democracy might both be caused by some third variable . Or globalization or democracy may both be due to a third variable, they say . Or it might be a factor in democracy and globalization .
 For critics, a deeper problem lies in the relationship between democracy and globalization . Critics say the problem is not just about democracy, but about democracy itself .
 Even if globalization is associated with the formal institutions of democratic government, it weakens the sovereign control those governments have over policies central to their citizens’ well-being and values, writes David Frum .
 The WTO intervenes to strike down laws protecting the environment, animal rights, or public morals in the interest of free trade . This problem results in cases where the WTO strikes down national laws protecting animal rights and public morals .
 Even without WTO intervention, governments could find that business and industry flee to more hospitable business environments . Governments seen as excessively regulating business or imposing excessive taxation to finance national policy goals .
 Critics often claim that globalization leads not only to a ‘race to the bottom’ as countries try to attract business by lowering regulatory standards . But democratic governments become unable to regulate an increasingly globalized economy, they say .
 Pascal Lamy has been a strong advocate of efforts to "humanize" globalization . Lamy took over as director general of the World Trade Organization in September 2005 .
 He has suggested that the Washington consensus with its narrow emphasis on free trade and free markets should be replaced by a new Geneva consensus (Geneva is the headquarters of the WTO), which takes into account the costs that free trade imposes .
 Lamy proposes movement toward global governance and global regulation . He believes it is only at the global level that these costs of economic globalization can be addressed . Lamy: To accomplish this humanizing agenda, he proposes global governance .
 Lamy’s position at least partially accepts some of the criticisms made by the Seattle protesters, but resistance to this Geneva consensus is strong . Lamy: “I’m not sure what I’ve done with the U.N.”
 It stems not only irhQ Vftif'aktOat pi&lijKfy ii^K^ld&aLcoi^DSMifDtRiSsist regulation but also f of cj^ve|p,^yig
 The quest to “humanize” globalization via global regulation often leads to an odd alliance of human rights activists, labor unions, and some developed country governments against an equally odd alliance . Many developing country governments and global corporations often oppose each other .
 The debate that swirls around globalization is not limited to its economic and social consequences . The debate is not only about economic, but also about its social and political consequences . Globalization is the subject of much of the world's most important debate .
 Considerable disagreement also surrounds the relationship of globalization and geopolitics . Considerable disagreements also surround the relationship between globalization and geopolitical issues .
 "The geopolitical consequences of globalization most directly challenge the realist paradigm," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says . He argues that globalization's geopolitical consequences challenge the 'realist paradigm'
 According to liberal commercialists, the political impact of economic globalization has the potential to change international relations and world politics as realists have traditionally understood them . Liberal commercialists say the impact of global economic globalization could change world politics and international relations .
 liberals argue that the web of interdependence, defined as a set of mutual relationships that would be costly to break, has bound together the states of the world in a manner that will cause them to avoid conflict and war .
 Liberals argue that this theory of peace has been most convincingly demonstrated in Western Europe . Liberals argue this theory has been proven most convincing in Europe .
 This now largely peaceful and prosperous chunk of the world’s real estate was once, not too many years ago, one of the bloodiest places on Earth . It was once a bloodiest place on Earth, but now it's largely peaceful .
 The two most horrific wars in world history measured by the death and destruction produced in a relatively compressed period, were the two world wars of the twentieth century . Both were fought largely on European territory, and both were fought in Europe .
 The idea of another war between such historic adversaries as France and Germany is almost inconceivable . Today, the idea of a war between France and the Germans is almost unthinkable .
 More than half a century of economic integration has transformed those two countries and 25 of their neighbors into a single economic union . Many of those countries share the same currency, with many sharing the currency .
 The original architects of post-World War II European economic integration wanted to make another world war on European soil unthinkable . In fact, a primary motivator for the post-war planners was the desire to make a world war in Europe unthinkable .
 Jervis identifies many possible explanations for this development . Liberals would include mutual economic dependence .
 For neo-Marxists and for realists, however, this liberal optimism is naive . For realists and neo- Marxists, it's naive, they say .
 For neo-Marxists, such conflicts would be rooted in global inequalities and competition among capitalists in developed countries to dominate world markets and resources .
 For realists, economic globalization reveals and exacerbates fundamental differences in national interests . Realists say globalization reveals fundamental differences between nations' interests . The world's most powerful and most powerful can be found in China .
 A good illustration of these differences can be found in competing assessments of the geopolitical impact of China’s recent economic boom . China's economic boom has been the source of tension between Beijing and Beijing .
 For liberals, economic development and integration into the global economy will motivate China to develop a stake in global stability and in good relations with its trading partners, including the U.S. Liberals want China to become a major player in the world .
 Conflict with the U.S. would risk access to the United States consumer market on which much of China’s economic miracle has been based . Conflict would risk the U .S. consumer market .
 Even the Taiwan Straits, long a world hotspot, look less dangerous to liberals in the globalization era . The Taiwan straits look less likely to be a hotspot to liberals .
 If the Chinese attack Taiwan, they risk $100 billion in Taiwanese investments in China, Thomas Friedman argues . The Chinese risk access to the Taiwanese experts who are crucial in the mainland’s emerging high-tech sector, he says .
 The United States, Japan, and the EU would likely impose economic sanctions . Moreover, the U.S. and Japan would likely also likely impose financial sanctions .
 Neo-Marxists would argue that World War I emerged from the competition among capitalists of the developed countries to reap the benefits of globalization . World War 1918 emerged from competition among the . capitalists of . developed countries . The economic interdependence of the early twentieth century did not deter the outbreak
 Realists would suggest that the economic development of Germany contributed to war because Germany sought political status commensurate with its emerging economic strength, and because neighboring states felt threatened . Realists say that Germany's economic development contributed war because of its political status .
 Contemporary China may be the Germany of today, some realists have suggested . Asia could become the center of geopolitical conflict in the twenty-first century, just as Europe was in the twentieth .
 China’s rapid economic development has been accompanied by a significant modernization of Chinese military capability, raising concerns in Washington, Tokyo, Seoul, and other Asian capitals .
 China’s rapid economic development has forced the Chinese to dramatically increase imports of oil, another potential source of conflict in a twenty-first-century world .
 While for liberals Chinese economic growth is a positive development, for realists it represents the potential emergence of a world power capable of challenging the interests of its neighbors and the geopolitical hegemony of the United States in Asia .
 Even a limited war over Taiwan would belie the liberal assumption that globalization equals peace . World War I did to the early-twentieth-century phase of globalization, it could halt globaiizinPt©A^UfsU£©AH^ED from LIBC .
 Short of major war, one might imagine still other circumstances under which globalization might be slowed, if not completely reversed . Other circumstances might also be under consideration .
 The circumstances could involve continuing security issues, a slow erosion of support for globalization in key countries, or a deepening of the recent global economic crisis . Those circumstances could include security issues or the recent economic crisis, the author says .
 Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, border security was given a new priority . Border security has been a priority since 9/11 attacks .
 One area of special concern has been the cargo coming into U.S. ports on container ships . The cargo coming in from container ships is a key concern for the United States .
 Approximately 7,500 ships make 51,000 port calls on a yearly basis . More than 6 million containers filled with goods are delivered from around the world .
 Some fear that one of those containers might one day deliver a weapon of mass destruction . The percentage of containers subject to inspection has been very small .
 The cost of greater vigilance would be very high, and the demands of security from such a terrorist threat have to be balanced against the interruption of global commerce that could result .
 If another spectacular attack were to occur, the worst fear was to materialize in the form of a nuclear device smuggled into a U.S. port, then one might easily imagine a recalibration of the security versus commerce trade-off that could considerably slow the process of globalization .
 Dubai Ports World, owned by the government of the United Arab Emirates, acquired a British firm that had been managing several major U.S. port facilities in 2006 . In 2006, the company acquired the British firm, which had managed several major US port facilities .
 Supporters of the acquisition pointed to the strong track record of DPW . U.S. critics were concerned that even a friendly Arab government would be overseeing port management .
 DPW sold control of U.S. ports to a United States company . DPW faced strong congressional criticism for selling control of ports to the United States .
 Supporters of the original deal argued that this episode sent a bad signal to the rest of the world regarding American commitment to globalization . Supporters said it undermined United States interests by chilling foreign investors that the United States wants to attract .
 While a spectacular terrorist attack could dramatically reverse globalization, the more likely threat may be an erosion of support for globalization in key countries . The most likely threat could be a loss of support in some key countries, experts say .
 The new competitive challenge from Asia coupled with national security considerations may lead to a realignment of domestic political forces in the U.S. and Europe against globalization, author David Rieff says .
 Critics assumed globalization was a policy and economic order that served the interests of the richest nations at the rest of the world’s expense . One irony of this situation is that, for years, many critics assumed globalization served the rich at the expense .
 The United States, the richest and most powerful country of all, has long been globalization’s most important promoter . Indeed, the U.S. has been an important promoter of globalization, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Second thoughts about globalization have been most notable in recent years . Evidence of that trend pre-dating global economic crisis began in 2008 . Yet it is precisely in the U.S. where second thoughts are most notable .
 Between October 1999 and January 2004 the proportion of Americans who viewed globalization as “positive” fell from 53 to 40 percenr. Americans who view globalization as "positive" fell to 40 percent .
 This shift in U.S. attitudes toward globalization has been shaped by enormous trade deficits, offshoring of jobs, rising illegal immigration, and fear of terrorism . The shift in American attitudes to globalization is shaped by huge trade deficits and rising illegal immigrants .
 In 2007, the U.S. had a trade deficit of $712 billion, of which $256 billion was a result of the American bilateral trade deficit with China .
 91 percent of Chinese citizens surveyed thought trade was good for their country . Only 59 percent of the American respondents thought trade trade is good for the United States .
 There is a growing perception of relative U.S. decline, which can continue to erode support for globalization . But it does reflect a growing belief that the United States is losing support for globalization .
 A change in attitudes toward globalization would be accelerated by a continuation and deepening of the global economic crisis . The world's economic crisis is likely to accelerate by a further deepening .
 The stock market crash of 1929 and the worldwide economic depression that ensued quickly reversed things once again, and governments began to impose protectionist measures . However, the world's economic depression quickly reversed once again .
 The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 raised U.S. tariffs on manufactured goods to almost 60 percent . The act led to a dramatic drop in imports and retaliation by trading partners .
 The economic crisis that first manifested itself in 2008 has posed the greatest threat to the global economy since the 1930s . The crisis is now the biggest threat to global economic stability since the 1980s .
 The problem originally centered on mortgage loans, which U.S. financial institutions made to high-risk borrowers . The problem initially centered on mortgages, which were made to borrowers .
 Once those borrowers hit with declining home values and escalating payments on adjustable rate mortgages, they began to default on their loans . The default rate on some of the mortgages is more than $1 billion .
 Those defaults reverberated throughout the U.S. economy as banks cut back on lending and as a glut of houses in default further depressed home values in many parts of the country . Those defaults have also depressed the economy .
 Because of the declining value of their homes, homeowners felt less wealthy . Also faced also with soaring energy prices, they began cutting back spending in other areas .
 Foreign banks owned a large chunk of the subprime loans extended to U.S. borrowers . Foreign banks own a good chunk of those loans . The subprime loan industry has been in decline for years .
 Any recession in the United States is bound to impact other economies that depend on U.S. consumers to buy their goods . Any recession is bound for impact on other economies, such as the U.K.
 Efforts to contain the crisis included at least three primary lines of attack . Efforts were aimed at containing the crisis in the Philippines .
 First, the U.S. and other governments have spent trillions of dollars to bail out financial institutions in crisis to prevent them from collapsing . Second, the United States and other countries have spent billions of dollars on financial institutions .
 Second, led by the United States, many governments implemented large stimulus programs designed to spur economic activity . Third and fourth largest stimulus programs were implemented by the U.S.
 As of mid-2010, worst-case scenarios of a global economic meltdown have been averted . Worst-case scenario of global economic collapse has been avoided, experts say .
 Unemployment remains high in many countries including the United States . Despite large stimulus packages, unemployment remains very high in some countries .
 Many observers are concerned with the enormous growth in government debt produced by stimulus spending . On the other hand, many other observers have expressed concern about the growth of government debt .
 The Greek crisis of 2010 was a warning of the dangers of a looming crisis for other governments with large public debts . Greece's debt crisis was the result of a debt crisis in 2010 . The Greek debt crisis has been blamed for the collapse of the Greek economy .
 Trade wars reminiscent of the 1930s have yet to materialize . Despite some indications of protectionist responses to the economic crisis, trade wars have not yet materialized . Trade wars are still not expected to materialise .
 A more substantial recovery, or a deepening of the crisis, might lead to a revival of protectionist sentiments with the potential to reverse globalization trends . But absent a more substantial economic recovery, one might imagine a revival in protectionism .
 The 1930s protectionism was an era of protectionism in the 1930s and 1930s trade policies . Today, the WTO has a more elaborate system of international trade rules and rules .
 In the face of a global crisis on the order of the 1930s, the WTO dispute-settlement mechanism could easily become overwhelmed by global protectionist sentiments and policies . However, we have already seen that WTO successes in reversing illegal protectionist policies can be slow .
 Liberals, realists, and neo-Marxists would differ in their responses to the IBM spokesperson . IBM spokesperson: "IBM is not going to change the way the world is going to look at the future."
 In short, for liberals, globalization is changing the way the world works, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: For liberals, it's a good thing for liberals to see how globalization has changed the world .
 Realists would suggest that international economic relations have always been the servant rather than the master of state interests . Realists, however, say that international relations are always the servant of interests .
 Trade and globalization prevail when powerful states see them in their interests, say experts . The U.S. should not be worried about its role in the Middle East .
 For these realists, security trumps prosperity, national prosperity trumps global prosperity, and military power, still largely a state monopoly, ultimately trumps all other forms of influence . The realists believe that military power is still largely state monopoly in the world .
 For neo-Marxists, the words of the IBM spokesperson reflect the class interests of capitalists . capitalists want to eliminate political restrictions on their ability to exploit a nation’s workers and its resources for their own benefit .
 Reality incorporates a mixture of reality and reality, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "For many observers, reality incorporates a combination of these perspectives. For many observers of reality, reality is a mix of reality"
 Global economic integration and interdependence have increased in recent decades, says John Defterios . Globalization challenges but not replaced nation-states and military power, he says .
 Where observers disagree is over the trajectory of these globalizing forces in the twenty-first century . The extent to which they are permanently transforming how the world works, they say .
 Many suggest that Bretton Woods system institutionalized the liberal perspective on the global economy . Many suggest it institutionalized a liberal view of the world's economic system . The Bretton-Woods system was institutionalized in the 1950s .
 Thomas Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree, was published by Friedman in 1999 . Friedman: "Lexus and Olive Tree" was published in 1999 by Friedman .
 David Rieff, “Globalization 2.0,” Neiv York Times Magazine, March 26, 2006 . David J.Rieff: Globalization is a form of globalization .
 William Easterly, “The Utopian Nightmare,” Foreign Policy, September/October 2005,58-64. William Easterley, ‘The Uopian Nightmare’, was published in 2005 . Easterly’s book, "The UOPian
 Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, “Trade Facts,” March 2006 . Office: Trade Facts, March 2006.
 Environmental threats, refugee flows, contagious diseases, drug trafficking, terrorism, nuclear smuggling and international criminal activities defy traditional ideas of sovereignty .
 The nation-state has a keen instinct for survival and has so far adapted to new challenges, even the challenge of globalization . World politics has been about the competitive struggle among states, especially the great powers, to acquire land, people, wealth and influence .
 Security and survival were determined largely by one’s success in capturing valuable assets more effectively than other states . Security was determined by one's success in capture of valuable assets, the author says .
 Transnational challenges include environmental pollution, illegal immigration, infectious diseases, drug smuggling, and terrorism . Challenges now come not from armies of other states but from an array of transnational problems .
 As she sees it, these challenges play havoc with the idea of state sovereignty and, by implication, with the realist understanding of how the world works . She sees it as a challenge to state sovereignty, which she says undermines the idea .
 That is a view that liberals, constructivists, feminists, and neo-Marxists would tend to share . That is the view that many liberals and constructivistists tend to think .
 Realist scholar Stephen Krasner says the issues threaten the sovereignty of the state and the traditional realist understanding of the world . But he says they threaten neither the sovereignty or the traditional understanding of world .
 Global problems listed by Cusimano are not entirely unique, and states continue to have the resourcefulness to respond to them, he says . As he sees it, the global problems listed in the book aren't unique .
 Concern over national security and the state’s relative power will remain the driving force in international life, he says . It follows that as long as we continue to organize human societies within the institution of the state, concern over security will remain a driving force .
 The range of global issues over which this debate can be fought is extensive . The debate is not just about politics, but it is about the future of the world .
 For the purposes of this chapter, three issues will be addressed as representative of the debate . Three issues are to be addressed in this chapter .
 They are the global environment, global health and disease, and the flow of information over the Internet . They are also the global . environment, health and . disease . The flow of the Internet over the world is also a major concern .
 In each case, we will first describe the challenge posed and then assess how well sovereign states are dealing with the problem . We will then assess the best way sovereign states have dealt with the issue .
 This analysis will provide you with both an understanding of each issue and an appreciation of how you might view these issues within the debate over how the world works .
 Even the most dyed-in-the-wool realist would likely acknowledge the reality of global problems such as pollution, infectious disease, or international criminal organizations and would accept the need for remedial action in response . From national security to human security, the U.S. has
 The differences between realists and their critics relate to whether they believe these problems require rethinking certain fundamental assumptions about how the world works . Realists and critics differ on how they view the world's problems .
 Realist view: Main threats and challenges faced by states emanate from other states . Main threat posed by use of military power is the use of or potential use of power, he says .
 Flowever, as scholars like Cusimano argue, the new global challenges like pollution and AIDS neither emanate from other states nor are military in character . Flowever. Flowever .
 Nonstate actors' actions result from the actions of an array of nonstate actors pursuing their individual or organizational interests . They result from a range of actions by nonstate agents, including those of the U.S.
 It may be harder for a state to defend its borders from these challenges than from foreign armies . These new transnational forces pay little heed to state interests or boundaries, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The traditional realist approach to defending the national interest has been JS-Qi’eipJvfet^cWcES^E&eliit^BJttiatiijitibf fiitiiaCj) SpHwer.
 As for military power, it seems largely irrelevant to problems such as environmental degradation or infectious disease . The U.S. military is largely irrelevant in the face of environmental degradation .
 The main goals of statecraft and foreign policy have traditionally been defense of sovereignty and the promotion of national security . Third, the main goals are to defend the nation's sovereignty and promote national security, the author says .
 New transnational challenges suggest a need not only to sacrifice some national sovereignty, but also to think beyond national security to a more inclusive notion of human security . However, to critics of realism, these new transnational . challenges suggest that national security must be more inclusive, to be realistic .
 The idea of human security achieved prominence in 1994, when it emerged as the central organizing theme of that year’s U.N. Human Development Report .
 The traditional notion of security, interpreted as security of territory from external aggression or as protection of national interests in foreign policy, is too narrow, the report argues . The report argues that the traditional notion, interpreted “as security of . territory from . external aggression, or as . protection
 Skeptics have suggested that this idea of human security is too broad and vague to be useful to international relations theorists or policy-makers .
 “Human security” refers to more than a list of global problems and is intended, as suggested above, as well as as a new way to think about the essential nature of world politics . It presents a theoretical challenge to realism and a new perspective on how the world works .
 In examining the issues of the environment, disease, and the Internet in the following pages, these theoretical issues can be more clearly illustrated . View of security emphasizing protection of individuals from political, military, economic, and environmental threats; challenges the idea of ""national security"" as too state-
 Unless we try to triple the automobile mileage and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, if you all get rich in that way we won’t be breathing very well . And unless we . try to . triple the . automobile mileage, we won't be breathing . well well .
 A dense blanket of ash, soot, and other pollutants produced in part by coal burning in China, hovered over much of South Asia in 2002 . The “Asian brown cloud” was dubbed the ‘Asian Brown cloud’ in the summer of 2002 . It was
 In 2006 another Chinese pollution cloud drifted over the Korean Peninsula before making its way across the Pacific Ocean . In 2006 a similar cloud drifted across the same Pacific Ocean as another in 2006 .
 Scientists detected a rise in dangerous pollutants associated with cancer, heart disease, and respiratory ailments . Using a United States satellite to track the cloud as it made its way over U.S. territory, scientists detected the rise in pollutants .
 Fil filters deployed to measure pollution in the mountains of eastern California are “the darkest that we’ve seen” outside urban areas, scientist says . Filmmakers found that filters deployed in eastern California were ‘the darkest’ than they have ever seen .
 In 2008 concerns ran high that pollution would harm the health and performance of athletes participating in the Beijing Olympics . Concerns ran high over the health of athletes competing in the Olympics .
 Beijing's air quality during the games was the best Beijing had experienced in years . The Chinese government temporarily closed many factories and placed restrictions on automobiles in the weeks before the games .
 China, of course, is not the only contributor to the global environmental challenge . China is not only contributing to the problem, it is also contributing to climate change .
 By 2006 China’s yearly emissions were, for the first time, greater than those of the United States . However, by 2006 China's yearly emissions . China's annual emissions were greater than that of the U.S.
 Clinton: Earth’s capacity to endure and sustain human economic activity in the twenty-first century will be challenged as it never has been before . That milestone, combined with China's huge 1. billion population, its stunningly high levels of economic growth over the past three decades,
 In today’s world, the Malthusian label can be loosely attached to those who argue that we live in a world of finite resources and limits to growth . In today's world, those who say we live with finite resources are often called the "Malthusians
 This environmental challenge is exacerbated by the fact that a clean, healthy environment is what political scientists would call a public good . Clean, healthy environments are a good or service whose benefits are freely available to all without possibility of exclusion . Clean environments are an important public good, scientists say .
 You can continue to listen to your local public radio station’s news and music broadcasts . Whether or not you contribute to a local radio station's annual fund-raising campaign, you can listen .
 If some businesses and individuals expend effort and money to reduce pollution, the benefits are available to all . Even the worst polluters can benefit from reducing pollution, even the worst, the author says .
 This leads to the free rider problem whereby some benefit, without contribution, from the efforts of others, and that leads many to conclude that they should not contribute either . The free rider issue is a problem where some benefit from others' efforts without contribution .
 Ecologist Garrett Hardin terms the tragedy of the commons, in which a commonly available resource like clean air or water is abused, exploited, and overused without anyone feeling a responsibility to protect it . Hardin: The result is what ecologist Hardin says is what he calls the
 The discussion of those issues will then be followed by an examination of approaches to coping with the challenge presented . The discussion will be then followed by a discussion of the challenges faced by the NHS .
 Of all the world’s scarce resources, none is more fundamental to economic growth and human well-being than energy . Energy is fundamental to the world's economic growth, human well being .
 All aspects of human activity, including food production, manufacturing, transportation, and communications, depend on reliable sources of energy . The world's energy supply is a vital part of the economy .
 Since the beginning of the industrial age, human economic activity has heavily depended for its energy needs on fossil fuels—coal, natural gas, and petroleum . The world's energy needs depend heavily on the fossil fuels, such as fossil fuels .
 Government and industry turned increasingly to petroleum as primary energy source during the twentieth century . Coal originally was the most important of the three, but now petroleum is the main energy source .
 Compared to coal, oil was easier to transport, often cheaper, and it burned cleaner, thereby releasing fewer harmful toxins into the atmosphere . Oil was also cheaper to transport and burned cleaner than coal .
 The rise of the automobile and the internal combustion engine, which relied on gasoline derived from petroleum, rapidly increased dependence on oil . By the last decades of the twentieth century, oil had become the lifeblood of all developed economies and crucial for all others seeking to develop .
 The challenge for the twenty-first century is satisfying a rapidly increasing global thirst for energy, especially oil . The challenge is satisfying an increasing global demand for oil, especially in oil .
 One influenced by Thomas Malthus, who argued that the supply of food would not be able to keep up with the world population . Another influenced by the idea that the food supply could not keep pace with population .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries seeks to control global supply and price of oil . Organization of oil-producing states, many located in the Middle East and Persian Gulf, seek to control the global supply .
 U.S. oil consumption during that same period is expected to grow by only about one-third . By comparison, United States oil consumption in that period will grow by about a third .
 By 2025 it is estimated that 69. percent of U.S. oil consumption will have to be satisfied via imports . By 2025, China's oil consumption is expected to be met with imports from the United States .
 Real questions exist about the future supply of oil, say experts . Oil demand is increasing, but demand is also increasing, they say . The U.S. has the largest oil reserves in the world .
 In recent years, some experts have suggested that the world is approaching peak oil . Peak oil is the point when global oil production reaches its peak and then starts to decline .
 The decline in oil prices is likely to be gradual, but it will signal a turning point in the global energy economy . That may set off a speculative panic and a rise in prices .
 Some predict peak oil will occur within a matter of years . U.S. Geological Survey says peak would not occur until the middle of the century .
 Others are optimistic that new and previously untapped oil reserves might be discovered and developed . Others are even more optimistic in assuming that new . untapped . reserves might also be discovered .
 The location of many of the world’s most prolific oil fields in politically unstable, nondemocratic regions remains a complicating factor . Yet even under the more optimistic scenarios, the location of some of the biggest oil fields remains complicating factors .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century, eight states in the politically volatile Persian Gulf/North African region accounted for approximately 69 percent of the world’s proven reserves of oil .
 Over 80 percent of global oil reserves are found in places where it is not hard to imagine politically generated disruptions of supply . Add to that 7. percent of proven world reserves found in Russia and several unstable former Soviet states along the Caspian Sea .
 In fact, much recent volatility in world oil supplies and prices has been rooted in political causes . Much of the recent volatility has been caused by political causes, analysts say .
 In the mid-1970s the first of the great oil shocks to hit the global economy was due to the effectiveness of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in artificially raising the global price of oil . In the 1970s, oil prices were artificially high enough to raise the global prices of
 OPEC established production quotas for its member states that limited the amount of oil produced . It reduced the global supply of oil available for export, and thereby raised the price of oil . Composed largely of Middle Eastern and Persian Gulf oil states .
 In 1979 the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan combined with the Iranian Revolution, which replaced the U.S.-backed shah of Iran with an Islamic fundamentalist regime, led to a second politically inspired oil shock . The Soviet invasion combined with Iran's 1979 revolution led to an oil shock in 1979 .
 A barrel of Persian Gulf oil, available for a couple of dollars at the beginning of the 1970s, hovered in the $40 dollar range . By the end of the decade, a barrel of Gulf oil was available for $40 dollars .
 In the early years of the twenty-first century, a combination of economic, political, and geological factors once again focused global attention on oil supplies and prices . Oil prices have soared in recent years as a result of political, economic and geological reasons .
 The sustained growth in the Chinese thirst for oil continued to put long-term pressure on global oil supplies and prices . China's thirst for crude oil continues to put pressure on the global market .
 It depended for the bulk of its oil on the politically unstable Middle East and Persian Gulf region . Deepwater wells, like that responsible for the 2010 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, are a case in point .
 The April 2010 explosion of British Petroleum’s ultradeepwater offshore drilling rig, Deepwater Horizon, and subsequent disastrous oil spill into the Gulf of Mexico were a reminder that the era of “peak oil” will be an era of "tough oil’
 Arguably, the central global challenge related to pollution of the environment is climate change . Global climate change is a major global challenge, according to experts .
 Most scientists believe that burning fossil fuels contributes to climate change . Any solution to the energy challenge that is based on finding and using more oil, gas, or coal will exacerbate this problem .
 Climate change refers to any extended alteration in Earth’s climate produced by natural factors, human activities, or some combination of the two .
 Currently, the central climate change concern is global warming . Global warming is the increase in the average temperature of Earth’s lower atmosphere . Climate change is a major concern for the future of the planet .
 Experts disagree on the dimensions of the challenge . How much warming we might anticipate, how severe the consequences might be, and what the timeline is .
 There is widespread consensus among climate scientists on certain basic questions . However, widespread consensus exists among scientists about climate science .
 The EPA expects temperatures by the end of the twentyfirst century to reach 3 to 7.2°F above 1990 levels . The EPA says global warming will continue and accelerate .
 The major human contributions to global warming come from burning fossil fuels and deforestation . The major contribution comes from fossil fuels, deforestation and fossil deforestation, the author says .
 Burning fossil fuels in cars, homes, and businesses emits carbon dioxide, methane, and other greenhouse gases that trap heat in the atmosphere . Burning fossil fuel in cars and homes is a major source of carbon dioxide and methane emissions .
 Industrial Revolution has produced a rapid increase in the presence of such gases . Some quantity of gases is natural and, indeed, essential to keep Earth warm enough for human survival . But over the past two centuries the industrial revolution has produced rapid increase .
 This trend has been exacerbated by deforestation, which has reduced the presence of trees and other plant life that absorb carbon dioxide . This trend is further exacerbated by the reduction of trees, other plants that absorb CO2 . Deforestation has led to deforestation in parts of the world .
 Third, there is concern that global warming, if unabated, will have costly effects on human health and life . There is also concern that the effects of global warming will be costly to human health .
 Warming is already melting glaciers and polar ice caps, which in turn leads to rising sea levels . Rising sea levels could lead to flooding and permanent submersion of coastal territories .
 Global warming could also shift patterns of human agriculture, bringing longer growing seasons to some locations but excessive heat and drought to others . Global warming also could shift patterns to some areas .
 Warming can also impact the spread of climate-sensitive diseases, especially those spread via insects . It can extend the geographic range of disease transmission as well as the duration of transmission seasons . Climate-sensitive disease transmission can also extend geographic range and duration of transmissions .
 Almost all scientific observers believe that significant potential exists for harmful effects if global warming is left unchecked . Some see these effects as potentially catastrophic, while others caution against exaggeration and hysteria .
 This climate change consensus came under attack in late 2009 when hundreds of private e-mail messages and scientific documents were unearthed by computer hackers .
 The e-mails discussed tactics for combating climate change skeptics, derisive comments about those critics . Discussion of how to engage in statistical "tricks" to hide some recent evidence of a decline in temperatures .
 Some have argued that the e-mails provide cause to seriously undermine the prevailing climate change orthodoxy . Others argue that notwithstanding questionable behavior of a few scientists, the evidence remains overwhelming that the climate change threat is serious .
 Oil shortages and climate change are perhaps the most dramatic and widely discussed resource and environmental threats facing Earth and its human inhabitants . But they are not the only such challenges we face, says the author of the book .
 Most important, what all these environmental challenges share is a disregard for sovereign borders . Most important is that all these challenges share a disregard of sovereign borders, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Pollution from factories in Detroit produces acid rain across the border in Canada . Increased energy consumption in India raises the price of oil in the United States . New coal-fired plants being built in China will increase the emissions of greenhouse gases .
 Experts have proposed a wide range of possible responses to the myriad and often interlinked global environmental challenges of the twenty-first century . Responses to the Challenge are proposed by experts .
 Many observers might prefer one of these approaches to the others, but they are not necessarily mutually exclusive .
 As previously discussed, Malthusians argue that increasingly intense exploitation of the world’s finite resources is putting unsustainable stress on the environment . The world's finite resources are under increasing pressure on the Earth's environment .
 Critics say Malthusian pessimism has been proven wrong because it underestimates the combined power of markets and technological innovation . Critics, however, note that this pessimism is frequently proven wrong .
 The argument is that when a resource becomes scarce, its price rises, thereby providing an incentive for investors to find new supplies or substitutes for that resource . Put simply, the argument is: When a resource is scarce, it increases its price .
 The green revolution of the post-World War II era relied on a mix of private and public funding to discover and introduce new strains of high-yielding rice, wheat, and other crops . It was stimulated by concerns about global food shortages .
 Oil companies have developed technologies to extract large supplies of oil that they once left behind because the cost of extraction would have been higher than the market price for that oil . The technology was developed in the post-9/11 era .
 A 2000 U.S. government study estimated that the world held about 3. trillion recoverable barrels of oil . A more recent study by a private research firm revised that estimate upward to 4 trillion barrels .
 Much of the focus today is on technological innovation that would limit our dependence on petroleum, thereby cutting down on greenhouse gas emissions . Aside from looking for new supplies of oil, the focus is on cutting emissions .
 In the United States, transportation is by far the biggest user of petroleum . 40 percent of all petroleum used by Americans goes to fuel our cars, SUVs, vans, and pick-ups .
 New technologies already in use that reduce oil consumption include hybrid vehicles . Hybrid vehicles run on a combination of gasoline and corn, soybeans like corn and soybeans .
 Half of all cars can run fully on ethanol, mainly produced in Brazil from sugar cane . Biofuels have replaced more than a third of gasoline consumption in Brazil .
 A more radical new technology for the future may be hydrogen fuel cells . Hydrogen fuel cells could be used to power a hydrogen-powered car .
 Industry and agriculture along with the energy needs of homes, businesses, and government offices for heat and electricity make up the bulk of our overall energy consumption . Industry, agriculture and agriculture are the main sources of energy .
 U.S. President Barack Obama made the development of ‘green technology’ one of his early priorities as well . The development of green technology is also a major source of twenty-first century industry and jobs .
 Hydrogen fuel cells remain a very expensive and, at this point, largely theoretical replacement for the internal combustion engine . There is no assurance that they will ever be feasible for mass use .
 Expansion of biofuel usage on a global scale increases the demand for crops such as corn and soy . It leads to higher prices for food that hurt the poor especially hard, especially hard .
 Expanding agricultural production raises land use and deforestation problems, with their own severe environmental effects . At the same time, expanded agricultural production is raising land use, deforestation problems .
 Market-oriented optimists suggest that while we don't yet have the specific technological solutions to the climate change challenge, the historical record provides reason to believe that human ingenuity combined with the right incentives may provide a solution that no one can fully envision .
 Government regulation at both the state and global levels is required to meet the environmental challenge . While some place their faith in market-driven technological innovation, others suggest government regulation .
 Such regulation at the nation-state level is a response to the free rider problem and the resulting tragedy of the commons . Such regulation is needed at the national level, says the author .
 Many argue, however, that regulation at the nation-state level is not enough . Many argue that regulation is needed at the national level .
 If, hypothetically, Brazil has strict air pollution standards but Argentina does not, then Argentina benefits from Brazil’s high standards, while Brazilians are negatively impacted by Argentinean pollution . Brazilians would be negatively affected by Argentine pollution .
 In 1985 the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer was adopted and provided the framework for the 1987 Montreal Protocol . The Montreal Protocol aimed to phase out use of substances that were depleting the atmosphere's ozone layer .
 Ozone is crucial to protect Earth from the sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays . Ozone protects Earth from UV rays from harmful UV rays, scientists say .
 By 2009 all countries in the United Nations were party to the protocol . By 2009 the protocol had been implemented .
 The original 1987 treaty together with its five subsequent revisions have significantly reduced the arBiuhYW (t:hlornflufi(Na£Bd) in the atmosphere .
 HFCs are one of six greenhouse gases targeted for reduced use by another global agreement, the Kyoto Protocol . The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in 1997, and it was adopted by the United Nations .
 Kyoto is an update of the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change negotiated at the Earth Summit held that year in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil . Kyoto is a new update to the 1992 U.N. Convention on climate change .
 Kyoto set national targets for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions . It went into force in 2005, when the requisite 55 countries ratified the agreement .
 National caps are set on the allowed levels of greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. National caps on the levels of emissions are set .
 Countries and firms whose emissions are below the cap can sell unused emissions credits to other countries and firms having difficulty meeting their established caps .
 The rationale is that climate change is a global problem, and it does not matter where in the world emissions are reduced as long as total global emissions decline . Climate change is global problem and emissions decline should be reduced globally .
 U.S. reluctance to embrace Kyoto predated the Bush administration . United States has long been reluctant to embrace the Kyoto Protocol .
 President Clinton never sent the treaty to the United States Senate for ratification . Concerned with both the substance and domestic politics of the Protocol, he never sent it to the U.S. Senate .
 From the beginning of the summit, the summit was marked by acrimony . Developed and developing countries disagreed over who should bear the burden for combating climate change . Developing countries disagreed on who should burden the burden .
 The Obama administration pledged to work with other developed countries to raise $100 billion to help developing countries adjust to stricter climate standards . Obama himself made an eleventh hour trip to Copenhagen to help negotiate a deal .
 Those who had hoped for a tough, legally binding agreement were disappointed . Despite such efforts, those who hoped for such efforts were disappointed.
 The final Copenhagen Accord was less ambitious in setting goals for reducing emissions and future global temperature increases than many environmentalists thought . Many environmentalists thought the Accord was more ambitious than they thought .
 Kyoto Protocol is the 1997 agreement updating the 1992 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change . The Kyoto Protocol was updated to update the UNFCCC .
 The 1992 meeting in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 adopted global standards and approaches to address matters of the environment and climate change . The Earth Summit was held in 1992 .
 Kyoto Protocol was a result of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change . Countries whose greenhouse gas emissions are below the cap set by Kyoto Protocol can sell unused emissions credits to other countries .
 While liberals and constructivists see global problems like the environment pushing states toward cooperation and global solutions, U.S. nonparticipation in Kyoto Protocol and disappointing outcome at Copenhagen reinforce realist skepticism .
 Realists see environmental problems as yet another potential source of international conflict . Realists say environmental problems could be a source of conflict with each other .
 The most immediate source of that conflict is likely to be competition for scarce resources . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's largest oil and natural resources .
 Japan’s surprise attack on the United States fleet at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, was intended to preempt a United States naval response to seizure of oil fields in Southeast Asia .
 RdjfcMvJbt aimed,N.daH56£ over the rich Kuwaiti oil fields and the re ( t|enue§ ^y generate. RdjFCMvVJbt) aimed, N.da .£over the rich . Kuwaiti
 The Global that evicted Iraqi forces from Kuwait in the 1991 Persian Gulf War sought to ensure that Saddam Hussein did not seize control of Persian Gulf oil . The Global forces evicted Saddam Hussein from Kuwait wanted to ensure the oil was not seized .
 The United States is not the only outside power with a vital stake in access to global oil supplies . The U.S. is not only outside of the U.K. with a stake in global oil supply .
 Japan, European Union, Russia, and increasingly, China have interests in this area . Japan, the European Union and Russia, among others, are interested in the area .
 By 2025 approximately 75 percent of China's thirst for oil will have to be met via imports . China has actively forged political ties with oil-producing states . The country is expected to have to rely heavily on oil imports .
 State-owned firms have been heavily investing in foreign oil fields from Africa to Latin America . Meanwhile, its state-owned companies have secured long-term contracts for oil deliveries .
 China is going head to head with the United States both economically and politically . In Sudan, China has sought to buffer a genocidal regime from foreign sanctions, and in oil-rich Venezuela, where it signed energy deals with anti-American leader Hugo Chavez .
 pessimistic observers see the U.S. and China on an oil-slicked collision course . Short of a major breakthrough in alternative energy supplies, pessimistic observers say the United States and China are likely to clash .
 In 2004 a report released by the U.S. Department of Defense’s internal think tank, the Office of Net Assessments, caused a stir with its scenario for abrupt climate change early in the twenty-first century .
 The report envisions dramatic annual temperature increases of 4°F in much of the Southern Hemisphere . It also envisions even greater drops in temperature in Northern Hemisphere, including Europe and the United States .
 The authors of the report stress that they were painting a worst-case scenario, not necessarily predicting that this scenario would occur . The authors stress that the report was painted in light of the fact that it was not predicting what would happen .
 As famine, disease, and weather-related disasters strike due to climate change, many countries’ needs will exceed their carrying capacity . Climate change is causing many countries' needs to exceed their capacity .
 This will create a sense of desperation, which will lead to offensive aggression in order to reclaim balance . This will be likely to lead to an offensive aggression, which is likely to be counter-balanced .
 Eastern European countries struggling to feed their populations with a falling supply of food, water, and energy, eyeing Russia for access to its grain, minerals and energy supply . Russia's population is already in decline, and its population is in decline .
 Japan is eyeing Russia’s Sakhalin Island oil and gas reserves as an energy source to power desalination plants . Or, picture Japan, suffering from flooding along its coastal cities and contamination of its fresh water supply .
 Envision Pakistan, India, and China all armed with nuclear weapons fighting over refugees, access to shared rivers and arable land .
 Spanish and Portuguese fishermen might fight over fishing rights . This could lead to conflicts at sea, leading to conflict at sea .
 The report envisions the U.S. managing the challenges of abrupt climate change better than many other countries . The report suggests that in itself, that will pose a security challenge, as it will invite a surge in both refugees and resentment from the rest of the world .
 Darfur conflict has raged in the Darfur region of Sudan since 2003 . The conflict has taken hundreds of thousands of lives and has displaced millions more .
 It is most often interpreted as yet another case of unfathomable ethnic or racial hatred pitting Arabs against black Africans . The incident has been interpreted as a case of racial hatred .
 Stephan Faris says the roots of the Syrian conflict might be traceable to global warming . Faris: The root of the conflict, and the genocidal results it has produced, might be due to climate change . The Syrian conflict has been the source of many of the world's
 According to this interpretation, the black African farmers and the nomadic Arabs on their horses and camels once lived in peace with one another . This interpretation is based on the fact that the two tribes once lived together .
 The latter grazed their animals on the hillsides between the farmers' crops, generally without conflict . The farmers often shared water from the wells, often sharing water from wells .
 As drought descended on the region in the 1980s, farmers began to fence off their land, making it difficult for the Arabs to graze their animals . However, as drought descended in the region, farmers started to fence their land .
 By the late 1980s the language of racial superiority was being used to justify such actions . Around this time, the Janjaweed—the Arab militias responsible for much of the killing— was born .
 The drought that sparked this conflict was once thought to be a result of poor farming techniques and land use by the region's inhabitants . The drought is thought to have been caused by poor land use and farming techniques .
 Faris cites expert studies pointing out that most of the deteriorating conditions can be attributed to changes in ocean temperatures out of the control of the people and the state of Sudan .
 The Darfur crisis illustrates the limitations and continued persistence of a statecentric approach to understanding world politics . Darfur is the latest example of the statecentric view of world politics, writes Peter Bergen .
 The original cause of the crisis was climate change, no single state can control, the author says . Climate change is a global trend that no state can stop, he says . No single state cannot control climate change .
 This challenges realist emphasis on continued power and centrality of the sovereign state . This challenges the realist focus on the continued power .
 Sudanese government effectively blocked international response to the bloodshed in Darfur . Sudanese claim sovereign control over events happening in its territory . At the same time, at many turns, the Sudan government blocked the international response .
 Realists might cite Darfur case as evidence that states and the international community still take sovereignty seriously . So realists may cite the case as proof that states are taking sovereignty seriously seriously .
 If the Pentagon report is any indication of how states will behave in the face of an acute environmental crisis, then the future looks bleak . The Pentagon report was published by the U.S. Department of Energy .
 Global cooperation now, while we still have time, is essential, environmental activists say . For environmental activists, global cooperation now is essential .
 Domestic health-care policies, including sound nutrition, vaccinations, early detection, and pharmacological treatments, can limit the impact and spread of many diseases . Such policies cannot completely insulate even the most advanced countries from health threats outside their borders .
 Traditional instruments of national security, including soldiers, guns, and tanks, provide little protection . Traditional weapons, including troops, tanks, and soldiers, have little protection, experts say .
 In the globalization era, the increasing interconnectedness of the world has magnified the challenge of global disease . The challenge is being magnified by global disease, says the World Health Organization .
 The transnational movement of birds, animals, soldiers, and travelers has always facilitated the migration of disease . The Reemergence of Infectious Disease has always been the focus of disease's migration .
 The bubonic plague, or “black death,” swept Europe in the fourteenth century killed an estimated 25 million people . It was transmitted from rats to fleas to people without concern for national borders .
 The influenza pandemic that swept the world from 1918 to 1920 killed approximately 50 million, more than twice the estimates of military and civilian deaths produced by World War I . In the post-World War II era, infectious diseases were thought to be a thing of the past .
 In the most developed countries, antibiotics and immunizations, combined with improvements in health care, hygiene, and nutrition, all but eliminated the fear of such diseases as tuberculosis and polio . The most developed nations, antibiotics, immunizations and improved health care have eliminated such diseases .
 The use of insecticides to combat disease-carrying mosquitoes seemed to promise an end to ‘poor people’s diseases’ like cholera and malaria . Meanwhile, in the developing world, insecticides were being used to combat mosquitoes . The World Health Organization is working
 According to the WHO, approximately 1. million people died from TB in 2004, with the global per capita incidence of the disease rising at a rate of 0.0 percent . The WHO says Africa has the highest incidence of TB, largely due to trends in Africa .
 Most worrisome has been the emergence of drug-resistant varieties of the TB bacterium . Drug-resistant strains of the bacterium have been found to be resistant to drugs .
 Antibiotics promised to do for tuberculosis eradication, DDT and other insecticides did for the fight against malaria . DDT, antibiotics and insecticides have been promised to help eradicate malaria and tuberculosis .
 By the 1980s, the goal of worldwide eradication was abandoned and replaced by the more modest objectives of control and treatment . The goal was to eradicate the disease by eradicating it worldwide .
 As many as 2. million die from malaria each year, the majority in sub-Saharan Africa . According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2 million die each year .
 In developed countries like the United States, malaria is uncommon . Local outbreaks do occur as infected travelers return home and are bitten by mosquitoes that can transmit the disease .
 In the early 1960s an outbreak of cholera began in Southeast Asia; then spread to rest of Asia, Africa, and Europe; and eventually reached Latin America in the 1990s . The outbreak began in the 1960s and spread to the rest of the world .
 Latin America, which had been cholera-free for a century, repEj)feH' 4, /AaQHntl 4 Jot© MathbRG §SN a©tireL |2 ' In 2010, Haiti was the worst-ever
 Failure to eradicate old diseases has been a source of concern for many . But perhaps even more alarming has been the emergence of new infectious diseases .
 According to scientists, new, deadly disease-causing pathogens are being identified at an unprecedented rate of one per year . New pathogens are identified at a rate of 1 per year, according to scientists .
 The primary concern is that some of those diseases could develop into pandemics . Because the pathogen is new, they lack any natural immunity, they could spread to humans worldwide .
 The hardest hit region is sub-Saharan Africa, which accounts for twothirds of the world population currently infected by the virus . The virus is believed to be the world's most deadly form of disease .
 Adult HIV Prevalence % HI <0.1% EJ 0.5- <1.0% HI 5.0-<15.0%. HI 5- <5.0.0 HI 5-<6.0 . HI 5 .0- <
 Severe acute respiratory syndrome is a viral illness first detected in 2003 . It was first diagnosed in the United States in 2003 and is now being treated in Australia .
 Despite fears of a possible pandemic, as of 2010, that had not occurred . Despite fears, there had not been a pandemic in 2010 .
 The emergence of the previously unknown disease demonstrates that optimistic expectations of complete victory over infectious diseases are premature . Still, the emergence of this new disease shows that optimism is still needed to be optimistic .
 A new subtype of avian influenza, or “bird flu,” known as H5N1, emerged in Asia in 2003 . The new sub-type of bird flu, or "bird flu," is a new sub type of flu .
 In 2005 one well-known expert speculated that a global H5N1 pandemic could be more deadly than the 1918 Spanish flu outbreak . Expert: As many as 16 million deaths in the U.S. alone could be caused by the outbreak .
 The World Health Organization utilizes a series of six pandemic alert phases to keep the world informed about the progression of possible pandemic flu outbreaks and to guide how to respond .
 The first outbreaks of HI N1 influenza occurred in Mexico in late March 2009 . From there quickly spread to the United States. The first outbreak was in Mexico and spread quickly .
 By the end of April, dozens of cases were reported in the United States along with indications that the disease had already spread to Canada, Europe, and New Zealand .
 On June 11, the WHO raised the alert to Phase 6, the highest alert level, officially signifying that a global influenza pandemic, the first in 41 years, was now under way . The WHO says a global pandemic is under way, with a global flu pandemic under
 Some have criticized WHO for overreacting, noting that this is less than the number of deaths produced by annual seasonal influenza in the U.S. alone . But some have criticized the WHO .
 WHO defenders say HI N1 deaths would have been much higher but for quick response of WHO and governments of its member nations in taking measures to minimize the effect of the disease .
 History has always involved a struggle between new, frequently mutating, disease-causing microbes and their human hosts . History has also involved the struggle between humans and microbes .
 What makes infectious diseases today potentially more challenging is the new context of globalization in which they emerge, experts say . Infectious diseases today may be more challenging than ever before, they say .
 The policies and technologies that have facilitated the trade, investment, travel, and cultural interaction characteristic of globalization also provide a perfect environment for the emergence of global pandemics . Globalization and Disease: Globalization is a perfect place for pandemic disease to thrive .
 As people crisscross the globe, they can, along with their luggage and briefcases, carry microbes that spread disease . People can carry microbes in their luggage, briefcases and luggage along with them .
 In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, it took about a year for an infectious disease like smallpox to spread around the world . Today, air travel allows an infection to move from one spot to any other on the planet in 36 hours or less .
 An infected traveler can hop on a plane and travel across the globe without realizing that he or she is sick . The incubation period is the period between infection and symptoms .
 A recent study found that during the 1997-1998 flu season, it took 26 days for influenza to spread from abroad to the United States . With increased air travel, during the 2000-2001 season, that time period fell to 11 days .
 In 2001-2002 air traffic volume to the United States declined significantly due to post 9/11 fears and restrictions . As a result, the time it took for influenza to spread to the U.S. crept up a bit, to 16 days .
 In France, where such restrictions were not imposed, the spread of influenza did not slow . The spread of flu in France was not slow, but in France, it continued .
 Increased air travel is not the only way in which globalization facilitates the transnational spread of disease . Globalization is not only a factor in the spread of transnational disease, it's also a way to spread disease .
 The globalization era has also witnessed a massive increase in food trade . While consumers can eat nectarines and peaches year-round, this convenience comes with risks .
 Human affliction has been concentrated in the United Kingdom, but cases elsewhere have been reported . The affliction is concentrated in Britain, but has been reported elsewhere .
 It is spread mainly via beef consumption but sometimes through lettuce, alia ft spouts, aidhsr foods . It's spread mainly through beef consumption .
 Outbreaks of hate occurred in Australia, Cptp^daglapan, th|j.UnjUnj.|gd ^afe&j-jhp EU, and South Africa . Outbreaks also occurred in South Africa, Australia and Australia .
 In 1996-1997 a large outbreak of cyclosporiasis occurred in North America . Global Health and Disease: Cypsporiasis is a form of disease .
 The source was traced to contaminated raspberries imported from South America . The source of the contamination was traced back to contaminated berries imported from the region .
 Globalization provides opportunities for globalized responses to, perhaps eradication of, diseases . Of course, while globalization can contribute to the extent and speed of disease transmission, it also provides opportunities .
 Especially for poor countries without sufficient resources, this global response can be crucial, especially for poor nations . The global response is crucial for the world's poorest, especially in poor countries .
 Attention and resources devoted to fighting infectious disease have surged . The good news is that in recent years, attention has surged to fighting disease .
 In no small part, this trend has been driven by a sense of moral obligation . 24-hour cable news channels and broadband Internet connections deliver reports and photos of human suffering around the world to the homes of wealthy countries .
 Air travel and food imports put all of us at some risk when infectious disease in faraway places goes unchecked . At the same time, those in the wealthiest countries .
 The combination of moral obligation and self-interest has given new prominence to the global fight against infectious disease . Thus, this combination of . moral obligation . and self interest has given . new prominence .
 Evidence of this trend is seen in the behavior of IOs, national governments, and NGOs, according to the report .
 Of the eight Millennium Development Goals adopted by the U.N. in 2000, one explicitly targets infectious disease . One of the goals was to tackle the problem of infectious disease in 2000 .
 The targets for 2015 are to halt and begin to reverse the spread of these and other major diseases . 2015 is to halt, begin and reverse spread of major diseases such as HIV, AIDS and other diseases .
 Health and disease has been marshaled by global institutions like the WHO and the World Bank . The WHO for most of its existence saw health and disease as external to its central mission of fostering economic development .
 The World Bank spent $3.3 billion on health programs in 2003 . The WHO is the world’s largest spending on AIDS programs .
 The plan called on the United States Congress to allocate $15 billion for international AIDS care, treatment, and prevention . Most of the effort was directed at 14 focus countries in Africa and the Caribbean .
 The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation devotes approximately 60 percent of its yearly expenditures to global health . Much of that is focused on what Bill Gates calls the “big three” diseases of AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis .
 Average life expectancy fell from 65 years from 1990 to 1995 to less than 40 years from 2000 to 2005 . As a result, average life expectancy in the U.S. fell between 65 and 40 years .
 The dramatic nature of the AIDS threat in Botswana attracted international attention and money . Botswana has been hit hard by HIV-AIDS in the past .
 Gates Foundation and Merck pharmaceutical company have been involved in response to the problem . The Gates Foundation has a partnership with Merck, a pharmaceutical company, to respond to the issue .
 Merck also donated its expensive anti-HIV drugs, which had demonstrated considerable success in treating and extending the lives of AIDS patients in Western countries . Each pledged $50 billion, and Merck donated $50 million .
 Critics have argued that much spending on global health challenges has been misdirected toward a few “celebrity diseases” rather than the diseases and programs that can have the greatest impact .
 An estimated 10 percent of global health research resources are spent on conditions accounting for 90 percent of disease . This results in what has been called “the 10/90 problem,” where 10 percent is spent on disease-causing conditions that account for 10 percent .
 In 1990 AIDS was already clearly a growing world problem, yet measured in terms of number of years of healthy life lost, it was only the twenty-sixth leading cause, contributing 0.84 percent of the total disease burden . AIDS is now the world's leading cause of death,
 AIDS is estimated to be the tenth leading disease burden for developing countries by 2020 . AIDS epidemic has become a larger share of the problem in developing countries . It is estimated that by 2020 it will be the 10th-leading disease burden .
 Still, it will lag behind other less visible, and less well-funded, diseases, including pneumonia and dysentery .
 Most money spent on AIDS in the developing world is directed toward treatment programs, including expensive ‘cocktails’ of antiretroviral drugs . Most money is spent on treatment programs in developing countries .
 WHO estimates the cost of extending the life of one AIDS patient for one year is approximately $1,500 . The WHO estimates that even with the use of the least expensive generic forms of the drugs, the cost is about $500 .
 Only 20 percent of the United States PEPFAR program is directed at AIDS prevention . Only 20 per cent of the U.S. PEPfAR program funds AIDS prevention.
 Even in countries with measurable success in treating AIDS patients, new infections continue at an unacceptably high rate . The result is that even in countries where there is measurable success, the rate of new infections continues .
 In some countries, backsliding has occurred on other indicators of public health, such as public health .
 The political reality is that resources will always be limited, and difficult choices will have to be made about how best to allocate them . While one might argue that the solution is more money spent on all areas of global health .
 It might appear odd to include discussion of the Internet in a chapter that considers global challenges like environmental degradation and disease . The Internet is considered a key part of the chapter .
 While pollution and disease die LlQffylJfifeifi'^Qliiltirnetds generally ten as a positive developmeptj^^^gl^^j^^i^njt^iiga^iSf .
 In that sense, the Internet is yet one more transnational challenge to the state system . The Internet is one of the Internet's most transnational challenges to state systems, says the author of the book .
 The early development of the Internet was promoted and, to a large extent, made possible by the U.S. government . The Internet was also promoted by the government .
 The network of interlinked computers we today use for both serious work and research was originally stimulated by a U.S. government research program . We today use our computers for communication, research, and for communicating with friends .
 Back in the 1960s and early 1970s the thinking was that creating such a network would stimulate and promote scientific research to help the United States keep and expand its technological edge over the Soviet Union and other competitors .
 Experts were concerned that in case of a war with the USSR, a high probability of going nuclear, traditional centralized means of government communication and military command and control could be jeopardized .
 U.S. government funded work on decentralized computer network project at universities and corporations . Defense Department’s Advanced Research Products Agency or ARPA .
 This early history of the Internet fits very well within the realist framework. It's a good example of a realist approach to the Internet. This is a great example of the early Internet history.
 In classic “self-help’ fashion, the U.S. government funded a program to strengthen its military preparedness . The program was motivated by national security concerns, the author says .
 ARPA was created in response to the 1957 Soviet launch of Sputnik, the first satellite to orbit Earth . ARPA is a direct product of the Cold War, created after the launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite .
 The military applications of satellite technology were well known, so the Sputnik success alarmed the U.S. government . ARPA and many other programs were designed to meet this new Soviet technological challenge . The military used satellite technology well known .
 Government authority typically implies control over a particular chunk of the world’s real estate . The challenge to state authority is a challenge to that kind of authority . Governmental authority implies control of a chunk of real estate.
 In international law, formal recognition of a state assumes state control over a defined geographic territory . State control is state control of a defined territory, according to international law .
 When we talk about Internet communications taking place in cyberspace, it implies a release from geography . In contrast, when we talk . Internet communications take place . It implies that Internet communications are taking . cyberspaced .
 The words, ideas, and pictures we create with them float above and beyond the location where they were first created . While computers at which we work and play are obviously rooted in time and place .
 Information on the Internet, once created, is simultaneously everywhere . Unlike other products, from automobiles to clothing, which are always located somewhere, the Internet is everywhere . The Internet is a digital world of information .
 This situation challenges the authority of sovereign states in three interrelated ways . This is in the form of a situation that challenges sovereign states' authority in three ways .
 An example is the spread of popular revolutions produced by observing successful revolutions in other countries . An example of this is shown by observing success of successful revolutions abroad .
 The Communist regime in the former Soviet Union is a good case in point . It was a good example in the Soviet Union, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 During the Soviet period, the state owned and managed all means of mass communication, including newspapers, magazines, television, radio, and book publishers . The state owned all media, including magazines, TV, radio .
 By the end of the twentieth century new information technologies made the job tougher for state censors . New information technologies also made it harder for censors to censor content .
 In 1989, Chinese students were demonstrating against corruption and repression in Tiananmen Square in Beijing . Chinese students studying abroad used fax machines to keep the demonstrators back home up to date on world reaction .
 Russian hard-liners launched a coup in August 1991 to topple the reformist leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev . CNN satellite TV broadcast images from the streets of Moscow to viewers around the world .
 The reluctance of the coup plotters to go all the way and smash resistance with overwhelming force may have had something to do with the fact that the world was watching them . It may have been the world watching .
 For authoritarian regimes bent on maintaining their information monopoly, the Internet represents the worst of two worlds . The Internet is the Internet for authoritarian regimes, but it is also the Internet itself .
 On the one hand, it is, like television or radio, a medium for the mass broadcast of information . On the other hand, the media is a medium of mass broadcast, like TV or radio . It is also a medium to broadcast information, but it can be used to broadcast
 Unlike TV or radio, no one needs an expensive TV studio or transmission tower to distribute information via the Internet . On the other hand, unlike TV, radio, there is no need for expensive studios or transmission towers .
 One individual with a home computer and an e-mail account can mass-mail information to thousands in a matter of seconds . The information can be sent to thousands of people in just seconds .
 Someone with access to a server can make that information available via the World Wide Web . The information can be made public via the Web .
 The Internet combines the mass audience of TV or radio with the ease of access and relatively low cost of mail or telephone communication . Thus, the Internet combines TV and radio audiences with the low cost and ease of Internet access . The Internet is the equivalent of a television or radio audience .
 Many Western observers have anticipated the end of authoritarian regimes and ushering in of a new era of global democracy . Given this new technology, many Western observers predict the end to authoritarian regimes . The technology has enabled the rise of democracy in the world .
 Some observers have suggested that it is not only authoritarian states that are challenged by the Internet . At the same time, some observers say it is also possible to challenge authoritarian states with the internet .
 Even the most democratic regimes may seek to control access to certain kinds of information or images . While those regimes face special challenges in controlling political news, even democratic regimes face challenges .
 The most obvious example here is pornography . SD@AiMiMi^3b^DfiE invidvey thiafotiso ESibhdien .
 A similar challenge is faced by states that want to regulate or prohibit online gambling run from servers in extraterritorial locations . The challenge is similar to that faced by other states seeking to regulate online gambling .
 In 2010 the Internet challenge to state control of information was illustrated by the publication via “WikiLeaks” of more than 90,000 classified documents related to the United States war effort in Afghanistan .
 Another challenge posed by the Internet to state sovereignty is its contribution to the empowerment of nonstate actors, including individuals and NGOs . The Internet is an important part of the Internet's role in the development of non-state actors .
 Estimates suggest tens of thousands of NGOs are active across national borders . Most estimates suggest that tens of thousand of NGOs operate across borders .
 The telecommunications revolution of the late twentieth century has greatly empowered these organizations . From Amnesty International to alQaeda, the telecommunications revolution has greatly enabled these organizations to flourish .
 Nonstate actors are in a better position to challenge official state interpretations and positions on important issues . The Internet has diversified and democratized the dissemination of information, says Julian Zelizer .
 The weakening of what was once a near state monopoly on information readjusts the balance of power between states and nonstate actors . To the extent that “information is power,” “Information is power” readjusted by the weakening of the state monopoly, says
 Use of the Internet allows both al-Qaeda and Amnesty International to diffuse information around the world . The Internet allows the two groups to use the Internet quickly and efficiently to spread information .
 The Internet creates a sense of community that extends across national borders . Second, the Internet creates an opportunity to connect with people around the world, the author says .
 It brings together human rights activists or environmentalists or anti-U.S. terrorists in a way that can make transnational associations more significant to them than their national identities .
 A 1980 treaty dealing with a range of matters that affect the safety of noncombatants in warfare . Millions of landmines were killing and injuring thousands of civilians on a yearly basis . The treaty was a result of the 1980 treaty .
 ICBL was founded in 1992 as a network linking over a thousand NGOs in dozens of countries that wanted to push for an immediate and comprehensive ban on antipersonnel landmines . The ICBL is now a network of over 1,000 NGOs around the world .
 ICBL worked closely with the Canadian government to jump-start a new and separate Mine Ban Treaty . The ICBL broke with the slower and less comprehensive CCW approach . At a 1996 conference in Ottawa, Canada, the ICBL and Canadian government worked closely .
 The ICBL orchestrated a campaign via e-mail and the World Wide Web to link supporters around the world and to arm them with data, talking points, and other useful tactical tips . In the period leading up to the Ottawa conference, the ICBL organized a campaign to arm supporters around
 ICBL used this technology to appeal directly to governments and their citizens with information and images designed to illustrate the harm done by landmines . At the same time, the ICBL appealed directly to . governments and citizens .
 Success of ICBL suggests that ‘NGOs can no longer be relegated to simple advisory or advocacy roles,’ says Canadian foreign minister . ICBL was founded in 1997, and is now based in Toronto .
 Some argue that the marriage of global NGOs and modern telecommunications technology is undermining the ability of states to do what is necessary to protect vital national interests .
 In recent years, concern has risen that terrorists might take advantage of cyberspace to advance political agendas .
 Cyberterrorists can hack into and take control of computer systems regulating anything from air traffic control, to dams, to electricity grids with the intention of threatening basic infrastructure and human life . Even more alarming is the fear that cyberterrorists may be able to hack into or hack into air traffic
 The distinction between cyberterrorism and ordinary computer crime is the presence or absence of political motive . As is true of terrorism in general , cyberterrorism is a form of terrorism . Cyberterrorism is an act of terrorism, but it is not terrorism .
 By far, most viruses, spam, and hacking into computer networks are done for reasons of personal economic gain or merely for “sport” and would not qualify as terrorism . Most viruses and spam is done for . reasons of . personal . economic gain .
 Some observers have suggested that the threat of cyberterrorism has been greatly exaggerated . In fact, some observers say the threat has been exaggerated .
 Governments, however, take the threat seriously . Governments cite some significant examples of suspected cyberterrorism .
 The Internet and Global Communications memorial from the capital city of this former Soviet republic is located in Moscow . The memorial is a memorial to the former Soviet Republic of Moscow .
 The Russian government has denied responsibility for the attacks . The political motives behind the attacks led some to suggest that, whoever was responsible, it was an unambiguous example of a cyberattack .
 Estonian leaders were unable to control or punish those who were responsible . The fact that it could be carried out presumably from computers located outside the borders of Estonia made it difficult for Estonians to control .
 The cyber attack on Estonia was limited to disruption of cyber communications . Stuxnet worm, which surfaced in 2010, raised the ante even higher as it was aimed at producing physical damage in real world .
 Much of the Stuxnet attack was aimed at Iranian nuclear facilities, leading many to speculate that it was an attack hatched in the U.S. or Israel .
 The Internet presents a new kind of challenge to the sovereign state . The State Strikes Back . The Internet challenges the sovereignty of the United States .
 At the same time, states are not completely helpless in the face of this challenge, says CNN.com.com . The state of India is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Real people may be making use of real hardware found in real countries associated with all the information created, created, and consumed on the Internet’s superhighhighway .
 For a subversive political tract, a pornographic image, or a gambling site to be available online, someone sitting in front of a computer has to upload the document . For a subverted political tract or pornographic image to be posted online, a computer user uploads it to a computer .
 If the government of the state where that individual is located wants to stop such uploading, it can track and find the server and even the computer from which the document emanated . The government can also track down the server of the person who uploads the document .
 Illegal child pornography or Internet gambling sites who want to reach the United States market operate outside the U.S. That is exactly why purveyors of illegal child pornography operate outside of the United. The United States.
 If they operated inside the United States, where such activities are illegal, they would be arrested and their hardware confiscated . If they operate in the U.S., they would also be arrested .
 These offshore illegal activities may be out of reach of local authorities . But those who consume these illegal activities in countries where they are banned remain vulnerable .
 U.S. authorities cannot prosecute someone in Russia who uploads child porn . They can prosecute Americans who download those images in the United States .
 At the same time, states can regulate what goes on in cyberspace by focusing on the intermediate actors who provide the essential links between the original source and ultimate consumer of Internet documents . States can also focus on the intermediaries who provide links between source and consumer of documents .
 Anyone who uses the Internet is familiar with the Internet's crucial intermediaries, such as the Internet .
 Cable compwj££$J|ike Gp.mcast and phone companies like Verizon provide both the hardware and software without the hardware .
 Without Google or Yahoo to help us find our way through the billions of webpages that have been created, the World Wide Web would be an unusable jungle of information . Without Google and Yahoo, the world wide web would be a useless jungle of info .
 Anytime a fee is charged, someone has to record the transaction, and collect and transfer the appropriate funds . Anyone charged with a fee must record and transfer funds to the appropriate amount .
 This is most often a credit card company or a specialized Internet payment service such as PayPal . Credit card companies are most often responsible for payments .
 All these intermediaries represent points where governments can limit what end users access on their computers . Governments can use these points to limit what users can access on computers .
 Chinese state has demonstrated considerable resilience in taming the Internet . Despite hopes and expectations that the Internet would undercut the authoritarian Chinese state, the Internet has proved resilient .
 An estimated army of 30,000 people patrols the Chinese Web on behalf of the government . They look for sites on politically sensitive topics, looking for sites .
 Chinese government has effectively pressured search engines like Google to screen results of Internet searches for information and topics deemed a threat to Chinese authorities . Similarly, the Chinese government also has pressured search engine companies to screen the results of searches .
 Google’s relationship to China began to receive a great deal of attention in 2006 . The search engine agreed to censor the results of searches conducted by individuals in China .
 Google made this announcement in January 2006, shortly after it indicated that it would resist a call from the Bush administration to turn over Internet search records as part of a U.S. government effort to crack down on Internet pornography .
 Google: Filtering search results "clearly compromises our mission" "Filtering our search results clearly compromised our mission," a senior counsel says .
 Google announced in March 2010 that it was ending its policy of censoring searches on its Chinese search engine . The Chinese government's persistent blocking of social networking sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube .
 Chinese government continues efforts to filter results mainland users could see from Hong Kong-based searches . Chinese government also threatened to cancel plans to place Google on mobile Internet homepage of China's biggest cellular communications company .
 The Chinese case suggests that, contrary to conventional wisdom, the threat to state sovereignty posed by the Internet may be greater in democracies than in authoritarian regimes like China . China's case suggests the threat of the Internet is greater in democratic democracies than authoritarian regimes .
 State control of the Internet and its content is less a question of technical ability than political will . That is because to a considerable extent, state control of Internet is less of a technical ability . State control is more of a matter of political will than technical ability, says Julian Zelizer .
 In a democratic regime, marshalling the political and legal consensus to censor the Internet will be difficult . In the UK, the government has a tradition of the free flow of information, with its tradition of free flow .
 Bush administration sought in the years following 9/11 to require Internet service providers and search engines to keep records of customers’ online activities . The Bush administration faced resistance from Google and an outcry from civil libertarians .
 In an authoritarian regime like China, Web censorship is simply one more in a long list of government controls over information deemed harmful to the state . Web censorship in China is one example of a state-sanctioned state censorship .
 China case suggests that determined governments can have their cake and eat it too . Indeed, the China case seems to be a good example of the Chinese government .
 Transnational Challenges challenges include international crime, drug smuggling, refugee and migration flows . The details would have been different but the larger story would be essentially the same .
 In all these cases, the overriding story is the tension between the system of sovereign states that has defined world politics since the 1648 Peace of Westphalia . New, transsovereign forces and actors seem to challenge that state system .
 Political scientist James Rosenau has suggested tensions are leading to what he calls the “bifurcation” of world politics . Political scientist has suggested that tensions in world politics could be to blame for the rise in tensions .
 On the one hand, there is the sphere of high politics and military security, which remains essentially statecentric . On the other hand, the sphere is essentially state-centric, and on the other side is state-centered .
 In this sphere, the world still looks and operates much as it has since 1648 . The world is still looking and operating much like it did in 1648. In 1648, it was the first time it had been seen in this sphere .
 In this world, states play a role, but they do not dominate, and their sovereignty is continually challenged . States play a part in the world, but not dominate it, and they are constantly challenged .
 Both realists and critics recognize the distinction between the two worlds, but they see their relationship playing out in different ways .
 World politics is played for the highest stakes, life and death, and with the most potent instruments, guns and bombs . First, they would argue that the state-centric realm matters most, for it is that world where it is played .
 Issues such as global warming, resource scarcity, or infectious disease are perceived as having high stakes . State-centric states will pay greater attention to these issues, especially if they are perceived to have high stakes themselves . States will incorporate these issues into their state-centric world, especially in the
 Realists argue that if and when states decide to exercise control over transsovereign forces, they have a good chance of succeeding . As illustrated by the Chinese relationship to the Internet, realists would argue that . China's relationship with the Internet is a good example .
 First, they question the hierarchy of importance that realists assign to global problems . Realists question the importance of global problems in the world's most important issues .
 Climate change and disease are at least as great a threat to humankind as are military weapons in a neighboring state’s arsenal, critics say . From the perspective of some critics, such critics, climate change is at least more of a threat .
 Critics are less confident than are realists that the instruments at the disposal of sovereign states are adequate for dealing with these new transsovereign challenges . Second, the critics are much less confident .
 Despite all their military might, states are ill equipped on their own to respond adequately to a global problem such as pandemic flu or ocean warming, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In short, one might imagine three alternative paths for world politics in the twenty-first century . One of them is the idea of three alternative world politics .
 One is the continued expansion of Rosenau’s ‘multicentric’ world and a clearer movement into a post-Westphalian era . Another is the expansion of the world of the Westphalian world, with Rosenau .
 A second scenario, anticipated in the quote from Stephen Krasner at the beginning of this chapter, is that states adapt to the new challenges and incorporate them into their statecentric world . A third scenario is that the state adapts to the challenges of statecentric states .
 Both these scenarios assume that Rosenau’s bifurcated world is a temporary characteristic of a world in transition . Rosenau's world is in transition, but it's not a permanent characteristic of this transition, it's just temporary .
 A third possibility is that this messier, bifurcated world will remain for the indefinite future . A third is that the world will continue to be a messier and biferated world .
 In this world, states are neither powerful enough enough to exercise hegemony over world politics nor challenged enough to lose their position as first among equals . States are not powerful enough to exert influence in world politics or challenge them .
 This chapter provides fc’dd8ii<e BbEtnWrr i os fid BNa^wtRfito . How the world of the ftp^i^gg likely tp vg^-k. This chapter is a look at the world
 Learn the key terms in this chapter; you can test yourself by term or definition . Use these flashcards to help you understand the meaning of this chapter .
 The eighteenth century saw the first proclamations of universal human rights . The 17th century saw a number of human rights declarations . Human rights were first made in France in 17th Century .
 The 20th century's conquest of space made it possible for a human being to look at our planet from a point not on it, and to see it, literally, as one world .
 The twenty-first century faces the task of developing a suitable form of government for that single world . Now the 20-20th century must solve the problem of the single world, says David Cameron .
 It is a daunting moral and intellectual challenge, but one we cannot refuse to take up. It is one of the world's greatest challenges, says David Cameron . It is not only a challenge, it is also a challenge for the world, says Cameron .
 While that person slept, the Berlin Wall fell, the Soviet Union collapsed, Germany reunified, foreign terrorists carried out a major attack in the United States, and United States armed forces were engaged i(D<©Wi'6Jln©AGffl®f;p'
 If asked to identify America’s major trade rival, this person would likely say Japan rather than China . He or she would have little clue about the debate over outsourcing .
 Kosovo, Rwanda, Darfur, Rwanda and Darfur are some of the world's most notorious places . If you suggested “googling” those places, you would likely get a blank stare .
 The world is always in flux, and change, as the old adage teaches us, is the only constant . Change is always a constant in the world, and that's what the adage says .
 Many observers of the past couple of decades believe that the world is changing in a way that is more fundamental than usual . However, many observers say that the changes are more fundamental .
 The end of the bipolar Cold War era, the deepening of economic globalization, the emergence of several Asian economic powers, the rise of new nonstate actors, and revolutionary changes in information technology all suggest a watershed era in world politics .
 That these changes just happened to coincide with the end of a millennium probably contributed to the perception, if not the reality, that we were entering a new era . The changes were likely to have occurred at the beginning of the millennium .
 These developments have spawned a number of efforts to anticipate where the major trends are leading, including where the future is leading .
 Scholars have produced ‘big books’ with provocative and competing images of our global future . They include provocative images of the world's future .
 Many of their ideas are rooted in the basic perspectives on world politics laid out in Chapter 1 of this text . Many of the ideas are based on the ideas of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Nonrealist perspectives on the global future differ among themselves . They all share the sense that change is trumping continuity in world politics .
 Realists would tend to agree with the quote from Stanley Michalak that the more things appear to change, the more they remain the same . Realists, in contrast, tend to think that the most things seem to be changing, they are the same.
 This chapter will compare and contrast a number of competing visions of the world's future . This chapter begins with the opening of a new book about the future of science .
 It will do so by constructing a series of short, hypothetical histories as if they were written from the perspective of historians looking back from the end of the twenty-first century . It will be constructed as if the history of the 20th century has been written by historians .
 Each of those visions of our future will be followed by a critique that raises questions about the likelihood of events unfolding as described .
 In different ways, these visions of our future will draw on and sometimes combine elements of the paradigms discussed in Chapter 1 . These visions will show various ways to understand how the world works today and how it might work in the future .
 The era of relative peace we enjoy at the end of the twenty-first century can be traced most directly to the third wave of democratization that emerged in the 1970s . The vision is that the era of peace and stability we enjoy in the world's first twenty-century can be
 By the 1990s both the percentage of the world’s countries and the percentage . of the population living under democratic rule were higher than they had ever been in human history . By the . 1990s, both the . percentage of . the world . and percentage of countries . and
 The assumption of democratic peace theorists that democratic states would not fight wars with one another has held . Despite the geographic and cultural diversity of the world’s democracies, the assumption of peace theorists has held.
 Worries expressed by some that the end of the ‘Soviet threat’ would deprive the Western democracies of a common enemy and restart old rivalries proved groundless . Major democratic states did not return to an era of selecting the military option for resolving disputes among themselves .
 Relations between post-Communist Russia and West seem to be in line with what democratic peace theory predicted . Developing relations between Russia and the West seems to be a sign of democratic peace, author says .
 Russia's relations with the United States and Western Europe improved in the early 1990s . Relations with the U.S. and Europe improved to the point where both sides could think of themselves as partners rather than adversaries .
 The Cold War rivalry was ended not by military victory but by a change in the character of domestic politics within Russia . Contrary to what realists might have expected, the Cold War was ended in a change of character in domestic politics .
 As Fukuyama saw it, the end of the Soviet Communist system was part of a larger global trend toward accepting the idea that democracy and market capitalism were the only viable alternatives .
 The Islamic countries of the Middle East remained largely untouched by the democratic wave, as war, outside intervention, the rise of fundamentalist terrorist groups, and the corrupting influence of oil wealth delayed those countries in their exit from history .
 The fourth wave of democratization swept the region in the years following the American withdrawal from Iraq and Afghanistan . Those who argued that democracy and Islamic culture were incompatible, however, were proven wrong .
 People's Republic of China offered perhaps the ultimate test of the end-of-history thesis . Meanwhile, with one-quarter of the world’s population living within its borders, the country offered a test of its history .
 Chinese embraced market capitalism beginning in the 1970s . The PRC continued for decades thereafter to remain a one-party, authoritarian state .
 Chinese Communist leaders hoped that the more than 30-year economic miracle of the post-Mao era would solidify oneparty rule . Many political scientists were not so sure .
 A more educated, middle-class population emerges and demands the opportunity for democratic participation in the political process . Employing the concept of modernization theory, they argued that wherever economic development occurs, a more educated population emerges . They said wherever economic growth occurs, the population demands democratic participation .
 Ambitious Autocracies, Hesitant Democracies,"" Weekly Standard, August 25, 2008, l 1 8-23. Ambitious autocracies and Hesitant Democratic Democracies."
 This liberal internationalist vision of democratic peace may have been understandable in the optimistic context of the immediate post-Cold War years . But it is not understandable now, as it was the Cold War era of the 1980s .
 Three trends have emerged in the early twenty-first century to sober things up . Three trends, including three trends, have emerged from the early 20th century .
 Some scholars have argued that the transition from authoritarianism to democracy can increase the propensity for war . Some scholars say that stable democracies do not fight wars with one another .
 Those in power sometimes need to rally divided societies around the regime . This tendency occurs because, during these transitions, those in power need to unite divided societies . This tends to occur during transitions to power .
 Identification of, and perhaps even conflict with, an external enemy can sometimes serve as a unifying purpose . Identification of an outside enemy can often serve as this unifies purpose. Identification of and perhaps conflict with the external enemy often serves this unifier purpose .
 Some see evidence that third wave of democratization that began in 1970s may have ended with much of the world still not on board . China, most of the Middle East, and large swaths of sub-Saharan Africa and Asia may still not share the democratic revolution .
 The assumption in the hypothetical history above is that China and the Middle East will be part of a fourth wave of democratization . The assumption may not hold, however, and China may not have been part of the fourth wave .
 Just as some countries slid back into authoritarian habits following the first and second waves of democratization, others may do so today . Furthermore, some countries may have slid back to authoritarian habits today .
 Most significant has been the authoritarian backsliding in Russia under Vladimir Putin . Putin has been accused of being authoritarian in the past .
 New evidence may undercut the notion that democracies will not fight one another . New evidence contradicts the core of democratic peace theory, says David Frum .
 Democratization of politics in Lebanon and in the Palestinian Territories has empowered the militantly anti-Israel Hezbollah and Hamas movements . It has arguably made peace in the Middle East less rather than more likely, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Many Muslims in the Middle East associate the concept of democracy with what they view as an unjust U.S. occupation in Iraq . Many Muslims see war with Israel as the only solution to their problems, writes Peter Bergen .
 Two decades after the Berlin Wall fell, the mood surrounding discussions of democratic peace theory has turned more cautious . Fukuyama’s celebratory ‘end of history’ article was published .
 The stalling of the third wave of democratization, the authoritarianism of great powers such as Russia and China, the relative decline of America’s global influence, and the tarnishing of the idea of democracy in the eyes of many around the world, have all raised doubts .
 Many democrats in both Russia and the West hoped that Russia was on the path to liberal democracy . The Soviet Union collapsed at the end of 1991 and Boris Yeltsin became the president .
 In many ways, Russia in the 1990s was a more open and democratic society than it had been under Communist rule . Russia in Russia in many ways was more open than it was under communist rule . The country was more democratic in the 90s than in the 1980s .
 Competitive multiparty elections replaced the single-candidate electoral charade that had passed as ""socialist democracy"" during the Soviet period . A diverse media culture representing a wide range of perspectives replaced the state-controlled media of the Communist era .
 Corruption and economic turmoil also characterized Yeltsin's Russia . However, corruption and economic problems were also prevalent in the country .
 By the end of the decade, Yeltsin's health and popularity were in steep decline . Russian citizens longed for security, order, and economic prosperity . Yeltsins' popularity was in decline, and Russian citizens wanted security .
 Yeltsin resigned on December 31, 1999, and his successor according to the Russian constitution would be his prime minister, Vladimir Putin . Vladimir Putin is the current prime minister of Russia, according to Russian constitution .
 Under Putin, the Russian economy stabilized (helped in large part by the rising price of oil, which is plentiful in Russia), and political stability increased . Putin's rise in oil prices has helped Russia's political stability .
 Putin has retreated on democracy and civil liberties, critics say . Critics say the price has been a retreat on democracy, civil liberties . Putin has been accused of a crackdown on dissent .
 The media, especially television, has once again come under close state control . The media is once again under close control of the government .
 Putin opponents of Putin have been prosecuted and harassed by state authorities . Opponents of the Putin government have been harassed by the Russian government .
 The Russian constitution limits the president to two terms in office . Putin could not run again in the March 2008 election in March 2008 .
 Putin continued to be the center of power in Russia . However, his successor, Dmitry Medvedev, appointed Putin to the post of prime minister .
 In the early years of the twenty-first century post-Cold War euphoria about the ‘end of history’ and the “democratic peace” began to fade . One World The Vision: In the future, the future of the U.S. and the world
 China defied predictions that economic development would lead to political liberalization . Russia continued its authoritarian backsliding that began during the reign of Vladimir Putin . Middle East and South Asia dashed hopes for democratic peace and stability in that region .
 Optimism turned to pessimism, and observers even began to worry again about the prospects of war among the great powers . The war was the first major conflict between the two world powers since the Second World War .
 The global economy has become essentially one world, in which production, trade, and commerce no longer have much relationship to geography or culture . Facilitated by the revolution in information technology that made distance and geography largely irrelevant to business and commerce .
 Nationalism and patriotism have been replaced by allegiances and interests that cut across the formal boundaries of states . In this new world, nationalism and patriotism has been replaced with allegiances, interests .
 The global financial and economic crisis that began in 2008 led some to predict that the era of globalization was coming to an end . In the long run, the forces of global economic integration prevailed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Some observers anticipated the political consequences of economic globalization earlier than others . Others anticipated the consequences of globalization earlier than some others .
 Around the turn of the twenty-first century, Thomas Friedman popularized the notion that globalization was rendering war and geopolitics obsolete, first with his “Golden Arches Theory” and “Dell Theory’
 Of course, not everyone was pleased by the emergence of this one world . The world is now one of the largest economies in the world .
 Globalization did then and continues now create both winners and losers . Globalization has created both winners, losers in the past and now, it has also created winners, winners .
 Humanity has benefited enormously from the global efficiencies and prosperity produced by globalization . However, in a grand sense, humanity has also benefited greatly from the peace to which it has undeniably contributed . The world's peace has been undeniably contributed to the global peace, he says .
 The reunification of China and Taiwan in 2023 occurred not through war but through peaceful agreement modeled on the similarly peaceful transition of Hong Kong from the control of Great Britain to the PRC in 1997 .
 Fears of a new cold war between Russia and the West never quite unfolded as the pessimists had feared . Likewise, fears of a cold war with Russia also never unfolded as pessimists feared .
 In each case, the worst was averted in large part because rational people understood that war would be bad for business . War would undercut global prosperity and undercut global economic prosperity .
 In the end, economic interdependence trumped outmoded notions of geopolitics . "In the end of the day, the world's economy trumped geopolitics," says President Barack Obama . The world's most powerful nations are now dependent on each other .
 As noted in Chapter 7, the liberal commercialist argument that economic interdependence makes war unthinkable is not new to the early twentyfirst century . The liberal commercialists argue that inter-economic inter-inter-reliance makes war impossible .
 Similar arguments were made in response to the first wave of globalization . At the beginning of the twentieth century similar arguments were .
 The most famous proponent of this view was journalist and eventual Nobel Peace Prize winner Norman Angell . Angell was a proponent of the view in the 1960s .
 In 1910, Angell took issue with the argument that war could be good for the economy . Angell's 1910 book The Great Illusion was published by The New York Times in 1910 .
 Angell argued that war would be extremely costly, and the economies of Europe were integrated enough that no reasonable person could consider war a realistic option any longer . War would be very costly, Angell said .
 The publication of Angell’s book was followed a few years later by the most destructive war that the Europeans had ever known . Of course, the publication of the book was shortly after the war .
 The flaw in his argument, and its twenty-first-century variants, is threefold . The flaw is that the argument is not true, but it's true .
 First, it assumes that continued global economic integration is a given . Second, it assumed that continued economic integration was a given. Third and fourth assumes that the global economy will continue .
 The ‘great recession’ that began in 2008 has led many to consider the possibility that countries could turn inward, retreat from their commitment to globalization, and return to protectionist policies . However, the ‘Great Recession’ has led some to consider turning inward .
 This is exactly what happened in the 1930s, and many fear it could happen again . This is precisely what happened . Many fear it will happen again. This is the first time since the war.
 Individuals are limited in their capacity to rationally identify and link ends and means, but single individuals rarely control foreign policy decision-making . Single individuals often fail to understand foreign policy decisions .
 Policy is often formulated via a pulling and hauling among a wide variety of individual, bureaucratic, and societal interests . Instead of policy, policy is often shaped up by pulling, hauling, pulling among a variety of different interests .
 Decision-making takes place in an environment of limited knowledge, where miscalculation is possible . Decision taking place in such an environment, it is always possible to miscalculate .
 Many view World War I as a war into which the states of Europe stumbled into . Europe stumbled almost against their will . Many view the war as an example of how the states stumbled into it .
 Angell’s argument assumes that humans are motivated first and foremost by well-being and prosperity . Angell: “Humanity is motivated by well being and prosperity,” he says .
 People often sacrifice economic comfort to fight for liberty, democracy, sovereignty, national pride, honor, or religious values . Plenty of evidence indicates that this view of humanity is too limited, as people often sacrifice money .
 Global Futures using military force to reunite the island of Taiwan with the mainland . The island is currently located on the mainland of Taiwan .
 Taiwan is an important market for mainland Chinese goods . Taiwan is a rich source of investment funds for mainland industries . It is also a crucial provider of high-tech inputs in the supply chain feeding mainland industries.
 Any attack on Taiwan could compromise Chinese economic relations with the U.S., Europe, and Japan, who might respond with economic sanctions or perhaps even military force . The attack could compromise China's economic relations .
 Beijing may at some point have leadership that values national unity over economic prosperity . Beijing may calculate that the world will accept the Chinese action out of a fear that war with China would negatively impact their own prosperity .
 World War I proved to be extremely destructive economically to all the European powers caught in its grip . Angell anticipated that the war would be very destructive economically .
 In the twenty-first century, given the kinds of weapons available and the integration of the global economy, the costs of a global war would be unprecedented, and hard to limit to the losing side . In the 21st century, it is impossible to limit the cost of a war,
 In an increasingly integrated global economy, notions of national economies and national economic policies are becoming obsolete . Likewise, in the increasingly integrated . economic policies were becoming obsolete, according to the IMF .
 Problems and trends directly challenged the notion of state sovereignty, says Julian Zelizer . They challenge the limited ability of states to control events on their own territory .
 For some scholars, this challenge to state sovereignty was seen as leading to a new medievalism in which a wide array of substate and nonstate actors would share power with diminished states . Some scholars believe this could lead to a 'new medievalism'
 States would co-exist and compete for influence with multinational corporations, terrorist groups, transnational religious organizations, and a host of other nongovernmental and international organizations . States would compete with corporations, terrorists, and other organizations .
 The diminishment of state power was seen as leading to a new pluralism of actors in which states had been reduced to simply one of many actors . State power was replaced with a single type of organization, rather than an organization .
 The new global problems and trends required new institutions at the supranational level with authority beyond that of the sovereign state . However, what needed was not merely a diminishment of state authority but the creation of new institutions, it needed to be created .
 Already in the late twentieth century international institutions existed that were aiming at global governance . International institutions existed in the early 20th century that aimed at international governance .
 At th j regional SM,lirlfitiiEN itibRis the European Union had bcert,crfg^t ^t^t^q ^d|^]gssT^s^s on a supranational level . The European Union has b
 The state’s monopoly on the use of violence in world politics was left essentially unchanged . Thus, the state's monopoly on using violence in politics remained unchanged .
 A few especially prescient observers anticipated that this situation would have to change . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of leadership in Washington .
 This is the Hobbesian world, based on state sovereignty, characteristic of the Westphalian era . This is a Hobbes-style world, with state sovereignty and state sovereignty . It is the world of Hobbes and the state of state sovereignty in Hobbes' world .
 This is essentially still a system of sovereign states but with rules and international law regulating interstate relations . It's essentially still still an international system of sovereignty, but with international law .
 Grotian-type system had been attempted, with limited success, over much of the twentieth century . Grotians had also been attempted to use Grotia-type systems .
 This is essentially a world security community in which states, on their own, rule out violence as a way of resolving problems with one another . The United States is the only nation not to engage in violence in its own way of solving problems with each other .
 Such a security community was first created among the states of North America, Western Europe, and Japan in the late twentieth century . It spread on a more global basis by the middle of the twenty-first century, spreading on a global basis .
 It was still a system of state sovereignty, however, insofar as it had no organization to enforce the norms of the security community on a supranational level . The United States was still in charge of its own security forces in the 1980s .
 At this stage, states not only agree to forgo the use of force in resolving disputes but also accept the duty to defend others should a rogue state violate the norms of the security community .
 Primitive precursors of this collective security community emerged by the mid-twentieth century . Primitive preventors emerged by the mid-'50s .
 The post-World War II NATO alliance and the flawed U.N. system were post-WWII NATO and, on a more global scale, the flawed United Nations system . They were NATO and the United Nations, which is flawed in many ways .
 Wendt’s only mistake was to overestimate the time it would take . Wendt overestimated the amount of time the world state would take to reach the end of the first world state .
 The federal nature of the world state that now exists still allows for local decisions on a range of issues . The state's federal nature allows for the local decisions to be made on issues such as health and education .
 The transfer of exclusive authority for the use of violence to the world state has definitively ended the Westphalian era and the system of state sovereignty that defined that period . However, the transfer of . exclusive authority to the . use of . violence to world state is definitively ended .
 The idea that solving global problems and ensuring global peace depends on power evolving in the direction of supranational institutions is hardly new . The idea is that the solution to global problems depends on the power of the nation .
 As discussed in various chapters of this text, those institutions have managed varying degrees of success . Those institutions have tried to take advantage of the U.S.
 The idea of a world state takes this liberal institutionalist argument to its logical and extreme conclusion . The exercise of supranational authority on issues like trade, the environment, and human rights depends, in the final analysis, on overriding the sovereign state’s monopoly on the use
 The question is whether a world state is, in fact, an idea whose time has come or a utopian fantasy . A world state could be a world of ideas, but it's not an idea that's come to fruition .
 Critiques of the world state idea involve questions of both desirability and feasibility . Critique of the idea involves the possibility of a world state of its own .
 A global entity with the exclusive right to exercise force in world politics would arguably threaten local norms, traditions, and cultures . A global organisation with the . exclusive right . to exercise power would arguably . threaten local . norms and cultures, says David Cameron .
 It also raises questions about the practices and institutions of democracy, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The transfer of power and authority to the EU bureaucracy in Brussels has far outpaced the transfer of democratic oversight to an effective European Parliament . The experience of the European Union in this regard is instructive .
 If the same were to occur with a world state, the resulting ‘democratic deficit’ would likely be even more noticeable, because of the even greater scale and diversity of the world as a whole .
 These issues of desirability are directly related to the issue of feasibility . These issues are the issues of the feasibility of a large-scale project .
 The experience of the European Union may be instructive, as residual feelings of nationalism combined with the challenges of the post-2008 economic crisis highlight the limits of European political integration . The challenges have raised concerns about the future of European monetary and economic integration .
 Elsewhere in the world, national and tribal allegiances are arguably stronger still . Elsewhere, national allegiances have been stronger still, according to CNN.com .
 From the Balkans to Iraq to Palestine, one can see violent evidence of the continuing pull of these national identities . The Balkans, Iraq and Palestine are examples of the ongoing pull of national identities, writes Peter Bergen .
 Short of a major global crisis, such as a devastating war, it is difficult to imagine the abandonment of nationalism and sovereignty that the creation of a world state would entail, says David Cameron .
 The increasing number of civil wars taking place today raises the question of whether a world state would be in a perpetual state of civil war .
 The difficulty that states today have in finding and smashing small terrorist cells hidden in caves along the Afghan-Pakistani border is an indication of the kinds of challenges that revolutionaries or freedom fighters or terrorists might pose in asymmetrical wars they might wage against the world state .
 The creation of a world state, rather than solving the problem of war and violence in world politics, may simply change the character of warfare . Thus, the creation of the world state may just change the nature of warfare, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Vision: In the late twentieth century international relations scholars working within the liberal tradition anticipated a decline in the frequency of war . Great power war, in particular, might become a thing of the past, they say .
 The path to global peace began with structural changes in world politics, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says liberals shared an assumption that the path to world peace was structural changes to world politics .
 Global peace, it was assumed, could only be assured on the basis of change in one or the other of these elements of the Kantian triangle . Global peace was assumed to be assured only if change was made in one way .
 The peace among nations that we have in the late twentyfirst century does not depend on any of those structural factors, he says . In fact, however, the peace is not dependent on structural factors such as climate change, he adds .
 It is rooted in the prevailing global consensus that war is an idea whose time has passed . It is, instead, rooted in a belief that war has passed and war is a waste of time . War is not war, but war is, in fact, a global consensus says war is
 Political scientist John Mueller anticipated this day in the late 20th century . He predicted this day .
 He noted that other practices once considered acceptable, such as dueling and slavery, long ago had gone out of fashion .
 By the end of the twentieth century anyone who challenged another to pistols at 30 paces would become the object of ridicule .
 For the vast majority of people, the idea of owning slaves had become unthinkable, not just because it was illegal but because the very idea of slavery had become reprehensible . Likewise, for many people, owning slaves was unthinkable .
 In part, this was due to its ever-increasing physical and psychological costs . The cost of living in the U.S. has increased dramatically in recent years .
 Already by World War I, the technologies of the Industrial Revolution had brought destruction and killing to a scale and pace that no one could have anticipated . Already by the time of World War 1918, the technology of the industrial revolution had brought death and destruction to a huge scale .
 Clausewitz’s dictum about war being merely “the continuation of policy” was fast becoming obsolete, he says . With the development of nuclear weapons and other “weapons of mass destruction,” Clausewitz's dictum became obsolete, the author says .
 It was, instead, facilitated by the work of multiple individuals, nongovernmental organizations, and transnational advocacy networks that challenged the idea of war as an acceptable policy instrument . It was instead, instead of a war, it was a challenge to the idea that war was an acceptable
 Dismissed originally as naive and unsophisticated about how the world works, their views gradually became more widely embraced . Dismissal of the 'naïve' view of the world has gradually become more widely accepted .
 The “norm” of peace that they promoted has become nearly universal for relations among states . The ‘norm’ of peace is now a nearly universal norm among states, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The success of these efforts is manifested concretely in the ‘long peace” that has characterized relations between the great powers beginning in 1945 . The peace has been maintained for what is now well over a century .
 Great power war avoided due to the global consensus that it is no longer a realistic option . Despite unresolved differences among states, and in a world where international institutions remain weak and state sovereignty persists, great power war has been avoided . The U.S. and Russia are the only two countries
 Small wars persisted well into the twenty-first century and cannot be ruled out even today . So many states have joined the consensus against war that, even if wars do break out, they will likely remain geographically well contained .
 In short, the idea of war to that of slavery, dueling, and other long and universally discredited practices, has resulted in the unprecedented ‘long peace” that has resulted, affiriH3hAifl4tg©^l2dnlB'tf
 For most realist and liberal scholars, the argument that war could become unthinkable, especially without prior change in the structure of the international system or the character of individual states, remains unpersuasive . Most realist or liberal scholars believe that war can become unthinkable without prior changes in the
 Even in a world where the vast majority of people and governments find war unacceptable, it only takes a single state and its leadership to disrupt the peace .
 Second, the argument that war has become unthinkable rests on an assumption of rationality . The argument rests on the assumption of a belief in rationality, the author says .
 It assumes that states will see that the cost-benefit calculation balances against the use of the military and that leaders will behave accordingly . The cost of using the military should be clearly balanced against the cost of living, it says .
 The history of warfare and international relations suggests that states do not always behave rationally; they often miscalculate, misperceive, and blunder their way into circumstances that they, in retrospect, wish they had avoided . Yet, the history of international relations and warfare suggests that
 If this were not the case, then no country that ever started a war would end up on the losing side . No country that started war would be on the winning side, he says . If not, no country would have ended up on losing side.
 Modern warfare may actually increase the likelihood of global devastation by accident or miscalculation . The nature of modern warfare, and the speed with which its destruction can occur, can increase the risk of miscalculculations by accident .
 A missile launched from a silo cannot be called back at the last minute . Unlike a traditional army sent into battle, a missile can be launched from the silo . Unlike traditional armies, the missile launch is not called back .
 There is less chance to correct a potentially devastating military miscalculation . Thus, there is a less chance of correcting a potential miscalculculation .
 The assumption that human beings are coming to a universal consensus against war because of its psychological and physical costs is belied by recent evidence . Finally, the assumption that . human beings . coming to an . universal consensus about war because . of its physical and psychological costs is not true, says
 We live in a world where individuals will take their own lives by flying planes into buildings or by exploding bombs strapped to their waists . We live a world of individuals who take their lives by taking their own and countless innocent lives .
 When such actions are attached to extremist religious beliefs about rewards in the afterlife, the assumption that no rational human being can find the cost-benefit calculation to favor war has to be reassessed .
 While some parts of the world may have concluded that war is no longer acceptable, this antiwar consensus has not spread on a global scale . Antiwar consensus hasn't spread on the global scale, says John Defterios .
 The horrors of modern war were made clear by the horrors of World War I . World War II was a two-decade-long period of war that saw many countries engaged in the even more horrific war .
 For centuries, men experimented with ways to make the world of international relations more peaceful .
 Arms control, international law, collective security, and democracy promotion represented just a few of the many attempts to change the way the world works . Arms control and international law are among the key issues discussed in the U.S.
 Realist assumptions regarding the need of states to acquire and balance power now seem to be the antiquated beliefs of a primitive society . The role of ethics and justice in international relations now seems to be an antiquated belief, writes David Frum .
 During the twentieth century women made considerable progress in many areas of life . During the 20th century women were able to achieve more in many ways .
 Women have emerged as leaders in business and society . Especially in the most developed nations, women have been leaders in society .
 Where they had not made much progress was in government, and foreign policy, especially foreign policy-making, the government said .
 A 2007 study noted that, worldwide, women occupied only 17 percent of parliamentary seats and 14 percent of ministerial positions . Most of the latter are limited to “women’s concerns” such as family, education, and health .
 Margaret Thatcher, Condoleezza Rice and Hillary Clinton had to operate within a man’s world . Where women did reach the pinnacle of foreign policy-making authority, they were the exception rather than the rule .
 Over the twenty-first century a critical mass of women gained positions of government authority at the highest levels . Over the last few decades, women have taken on leadership positions in government .
 Research had long demonstrated the benefits that come with the political empowerment of women . Research has long demonstrated that the benefits of women's political empowerment .
 According to some research, women leaders were less prone to corruption and more inclined to peaceful, negotiated solutions than their male counterparts . Women leaders are also less inclined to corruption than men, research shows .
 Their presence in positions of power correlated with an increase in trust in government that paid dividends both domestically and internationally . Their presence was correlated with increased trust in the government, experts say .
 The ‘feminization’ of politics in democratic states was the key to peace theory . The theory was key to democratic peace theory, says Julian Zelizer . He says it was the “feminization of politics’s key to the theory .
 The world today, in the late twenty-first century, still faces its share of problems and challenges . The odds have improved that differences of interest among states will be resolved with words, rather than guns .
 In retrospect, this evolution reveals that once dominant perspectives such as ‘realism’ were gendered perspectives . The evolution of "realism" has evolved into "realistic" and "realist" perspectives .
 The world of international relations, both in government and academia, was overwhelmingly male . As such, they reflected the fact that the world was dominated by male people .
 Critics of the feminist approach agree with feminists that women are underrepresented in government and foreign policy-making . An enlarged role for women in this area is desirable .
 Critics dispute assumption that gender makes a difference in the conduct of world affairs .
 The critique is based on both the empirical record of women in power and differing assessments of the sources of foreign policy behavior . It's based on an empirical record, and differing assessment of the reasons for foreign policy .
 As many have noted, when women have risen to positions where they can directly shape foreign policy, they have often demonstrated a willingness to rely on military power as readily as men .
 Indira Gandhi presided over the early development of India’s nuclear weapons program . She led the country in its 1971 war with Pakistan . Indira led India in the 1971 war .
 Condoleezza Rice provided steadfast support of the 2003 United States war in Iraq . Rice was the first female U.S. national security advisor and later the second woman to hold the position of United States secretary of state .
 Hillary Clinton has been a stalwart supporter of Obama’s war efforts in Afghanistan . Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is a staunch supporter of the war effort .
 In such examples, we see little evidence of the impact of gender on foreign policy . In such cases, there is little evidence that gender is an important role in foreign policy, experts say .
 Many would argue that those women rose to positions of power within a maledominated world, where men, overall, had established the rules . Women rose to power in maledomined world, but men still had to set rules .
 Archeological evidence indicates that ancient societies dominated by women were no more war-averse than those in which men prevailed, and that women often played a direct role in combat . However, as some observers have noted, some observers noted, that archeological evidence .
 Katha Pollitt suggests that women’s involvement in the pacifist movement (a movement that includes many men as well) is relatively recent . Pollitt argues against the notion that women have anything inherent in their outlook that makes them less warlike .
 Those who critique the feminist perspective argue that the international system and the roles of leaders are the factors that define leaders’ behavior, not their gender . Those who criticize the feminist view argue that gender is not a factor in leaders' behavior .
 Margaret Thatcher behaved “like a man’s” in a world of anarchy and insecurity, says Julian Zelizer . Thatcher is a typical prime minister who is responsible for the country's safety and security, he says .
 Condoleezza Rice's actions were less about trying to fit into a man’s world than they were about a secretary of state trying to please her boss, the president . Rice's support for the Iraq War with an approach to foreign policy that often emphasized diplomacy and negotiation .
 Samuel Huntington first published his clash-of-civilizations thesis in 1993 . Samuel Huntington's clash of civilizations thesis caused quite a stir . Huntington: "A clash of Civilizations" was published in 1993.
 In arguing that future world politics would be characterized by conflict among the world’s great civilizations, he struck a pessimistic chord that was at odds with the prevailing optimism generated by the decline of Soviet Communism and the end of the Cold War .
 Huntington’s thesis focused on the political consequences of deepening cultural differences . Huntington's thesis was that cultural homogenization of culture produced by the march of economic globalization is to blame .
 September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S. began to change with the 9/11 attacks . The West and the Islamic world have been at odds for decades . The Islamic world and the West are at odds with each other since the attacks .
 In the twenty-first century, world politics underwent a reordering that closely matches what Huntington anticipated . Huntington predicted that world politics would undergo a reorder in the 20th century .
 Samuel Huntington is the author of The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the World Order by Samuel P Huntington . Huntington's book is published by Simon & Schuster .
 The twenty-first century has been marked by the cultural boundaries between great civilizations . Unlike the Cold War era, where the major global dividing line was ideological .
 This growth of cultural and civilizational identity was, part of a backlash against the challenge to local cultures and traditions posed by economic globalization . This growth was, in part, a backlash to the challenge of economic globalization posed by globalization .
 The twenty-first century has been bloody, with most conflicts along civilizational fault lines, Huntington says . Huntington also anticipated, and contrary to the ‘one-worlders’ who thought that globalization would render war and military conflict obsolete .
 The half-century-long battle between Islam and the West dominated the era, though the great mid-century clashes between Islamic and Hindu civilizations in Kashmir and between Chinese and Orthodox civilizations in the Far East also fit into Huntington’s mold .
 Danish newspaper published a series of 12 editorial cartoons depicting the Islamic prophet Mohammed in 2005 . Cartoon crisis began September 30, 2005 .
 Some argued that any depiction of Mohammed was unacceptable, but especially offensive were cartoons that appeared to link Mohammed to violence and terrorism . The cartoons appeared to tie Mohammed to terrorism and violence .
 One depicted him holding a sword; another had him wearing a bomb in his turban . A third showed him on a cloud saying, ""Stop, we have run out of virgins"" to suicide bombers trying to enter heaven .
 Ambassadors from Islamic countries demanded meetings with the Danish prime minister . Muslim clerics called for an apology and for punishment of the Danish newspaper . A Pakistani cleric put a bounty on the heads of the offending cartoonists .
 Many in the West defended the right of the newspaper to publish the cartoons, based on the principles of a free press and free expression . The West has defended the newspaper's right of publishing the cartoons .
 News outlets in Europe and the U.S. refused to reproduce the depictions, partly to avoid offending Muslims but also, in some cases, out of fear of violent retribution . Many news outlets in the United States refused to publish the images .
 A major U.S. bookstore chain pulled from its shelves all copies of a magazine that reproduced some of the cartoons . The magazine was published in the magazine's first edition of the magazine .
 In the eyes of many, this crisis was another indication of a clash of civilizations as predicted by Huntington . Huntington predicted that the collapse of civilizations would be a sign of the end of civilization . In the world of civilizations, the crisis is a sign that civilizations will clash .
 Huntington's thesis rejects the liberal view of a more peaceful, cooperative future . Like realism, Huntington rejects the idea of a peaceful future, he says . Huntington: "Like realism, like realism, it's not a utopian future"
 Future conflict may have as much to do with differences over cultural values as with realist concerns with the balance of military power . Yet, as the cartoon crisis suggests, future conflict may also have cultural issues .
 With the U.S. weakened by its 50-year asymmetrical war with Islamic terrorists, other civilizations emerged as challengers to Western dominance . With the crisis of confidence in Western Europe brought on by declining birthrates and the stalling of the idea of European political integration, Western Europe has
 China rode its remarkable economic growth to a position of world leadership by midcentury . China, in particular, rode its incredible economic growth .
 Chinese universities enrolled students from around the world, as Chinese surpassed English as the language of global commerce . Chinese popular culture and styles were emulated in a manner reminiscent of the attraction once carried by American culture in the twentieth century . This trend was manifested in the growth of Chinese soft power (
 In short, after a brief flirtation with the idea of a universal, global culture, the twently)ntdq) /fkGDhe0 <£hROMzka Ehf aEE&lklasliyGid people around the worlds aught a
 A Clash of Civilizations is a series of pictures from the Middle Ages in France and Europe .
 Critics suggest that it is not only wrong, but dangerous, and dangerous . While its defenders suggest it is the best template for understanding the twenty-first-century world .
 The central weakness of the thesis, according to critics, is that it treats civilizations as monolithic and internally homogeneous . Critics say the thesis treats civilizations in a monolithic way . The thesis has been criticized by some as being too simplistic .
 Much of the conflict and bloodshed involving Islam in the world today seems less like a clash of civilizations than a clash within Islamic civilization . Indeed, much of the bloodshed involved in Islam seems to be within the Islamic world today .
 In places like Iraq and Palestine, this intra-Islamic conflict has been violent and bloody . In places such as Iraq and . Palestine, it has been bloody and bloody. In places .
 Huntington’s theoretical background is within the realist tradition, foiHhls MNkQAQHBo id cheils Irlcorp'jrfi^JnQf^Ssumptions and, arguably, deficient pes .
 That the key actors are civilizations rather than individual states is less a challenge to realism than it might first appear . The key actors in the film are civilizations, not individual states .
 Western politicians play into the hands of the Islamic extremists they are fighting by defining the struggle in their enemy’s terms .
 If politicians lay the clash-of-civilizations template atop the rise of Chinese economic power, they respond in a very different way than they would if they viewed Chinese economic modernization and integration into the global economy as a path to global peace .
 Critics fear that preparing for a clash of civilizations is the best way to ensure that such a clash will occur . In short, the critics fear, preparing for such an event is the way to avoid it .
 The Great Pacific War of 2032-2033 finally and conclusively ended the naive expectations of a peaceful twenty-first century . Great power war ended naive expectations that the world would be peaceful and peaceful . The vision: The Pacific War ended naïve expectations .
 Neither democracy nor economic interdependence proved to be the silver bullet of peace . Democracy and economic inter-independence proved to not be the best way to achieve peace . The U.S. has been in a state of war with the world for decades .
 Each country has provided an additional source of international conflict . The U.S. has been involved in more than 1,000 years of peace talks .
 By 2010 authoritarian regimes in China, Russia, and elsewhere achieved a new level of self-confidence and began pushing back in response to Western policies of democracy promotion .
 Where democratic institutions were successfully transplanted outside the European and European-settled worlds, the results were not what Western policy-makers had anticipated . The results of these transplanted institutions have not been anticipated by the West .
 Democracy in many places has empowered illiberal governments openly hostile to the West, says Julian Zelizer . Instead of bringing to power governments committed to peace and human rights, democracy in many countries is empowering illiberal regimes, he says .
 Conflict over trade, jobs, and resources trumped expectations that globalization was an unmitigated source of peace . Meanwhile, economic interdependence only added to the tensions, adding to the tension .
 International institutions proved unable to cope with the tensions of the increasingly multipolar twenty-first-century world . International institutions failed to cope, leaving international institutions in limbo .
 The U.N. system is an artifact of the increasingly distant post-World War II era . Nor could the entire United Nations system keep pace with the changes of the new century .
 Observers increasingly saw the UN as a Westernand European-dominated institution . The UN was unable to deal with a world in which real power was gravitating eastward to Asia .
 Any country in China’s position would, with its new economic and military power, would seek redress of long-existing grievances, most importantly, the independent status of Taiwan . China bristle at the presence and role of an outside power, the United States and its Pacific fleet,
 American resistance to the challenges posed by the rise of China should have been predictable . U.S. resistance to China's rise in power is predictable, but it's not always been the case .
 In the 1990s a new subtype of structural realism known as offensive realism developed . Its adherents argued that in a world of anarchy, the only true security for a state would be global hegemony .
 The objective would be the establishment of regional hegemony combined with the prevention of regional hegemons from emerging in other parts of the world . Since even the most powerful states could not likely attain global hegemony, the objective is to establish regional hegemony .
 More traditional defensive realism theorists said that states would be satisfied with a balance of power . In contrast, more traditional . theorists said they would be happy with a balanced power .
 The theory of offensive realism predicted, quite accurately in retrospect, that the United States would have to resist . As China displaced American power and influence in East Asia and threatened to become a rival regional hegemon, the theory was accurate .
 After decades of indecision about how to respond to the rise of China, U.S. leaders concluded that China posed a geopolitical threat they had to address . China's rise in power is a major challenge for the United States to deal with, say experts .
 In many ways, the catalyst to the outbreak of war in 2032, the Chinese attack on Taiwan, was almost incidental . The Chinese attack in Taiwan is almost incidental to the start of the war .
 China and the U.S. have been on a virtually unavoidable collision course since the late twentieth century . The two countries have been at odds with each other for decades .
 The only thing in doubt was the outcome of the war, and the amount of damage it would cause, the author says . "The only thing that was in doubt is the outcome," he says .
 The threat that the conflict would become nuclear brought the hostilities to a close without a clear victory for either side . In this case, the threat of a nuclear war brought the conflict to a near-collapse .
 The U.S. left the basis for yet another round of conflict with China . The Chinese government has been criticized for its actions in the region .
 This scenario of a future U.S. war with China reflects the unrepentant realist view that the more things appear to change, the more they remain the same . This scenario reflects the view that a future conflict with China would be unlikely to happen .
 While key actors rise and fall, anarchy, the basic fact of international life, remains . anarchy is a fact of life in the world, and anarchy is anarchy .
 From the realist perspective, the arguments predicting peace in the twenty-first century share an excessively Eurocentric perspective, as they project the current peace found in Western Europe to the world as a whole . The arguments for peace in twenty-20th century share too much Eurocentric, says
 Those arguments ignore Europe’s bloody past but fail to appreciate that Europe's past may be Asia's future . In so doing, those arguments not only ignore Europe's bloody past, they also ignore Asia's bloody history .
 Critics of realism do not view a future U.S.-Chinese war as preordained . But they might find several flaws in the scenario outlined above .
 In the scenario, China may or may not have made a transition to democracy, but it does not matter, for in the realist view, the external security considerations of states rather than the internal qualities of their governments determine their foreign behavior . The external security of states is more important than
 That is like saying that an authoritarian coup in Germany would have no impact on French-German relations, or that the peaceful, unprotected border between the U.S. and Canada would survive the emergence of an authoritarian government .
 The scenario dismisses the liberal commercialist argument regarding the pacifying impact of economic interdependence . Second, the scenario dismissed the argument about economic interdependency . The scenario is the result of the scenario being presented by the scenario .
 It assumes that the only impact of that interdependence is more tension in the U.S.-Chinese relationship . The U.K. and China are interdependent .
 In a real shooting war, each side would destroy some of their own assets . Yet in a real war, the U.S. and China would destroy each other's own assets.
 Shanghai is the economic capital of China but also America’s workshop . Products destined for American consumers are made by subsidiaries of U.S. multinational corporations . Shanghai products are packaged for shipping to Wal-Marts and other stores throughout the United States .
 The billions of U.S. dollars held by the Chinese central bank would be potentially worthless in a postwar world with a devastated United States economy . Likewise, the billions of United States dollars held .
 Economic interdependence did not prevent the outbreak of World War I, and it may not prevent a future U.S. war with China . The United States and China have been at odds for decades .
 At the same time, one cannot automatically assume that such economic considerations will fail to deter war . The U.S. should not rely on economic considerations to deter the war, writes David Frum .
 Such a war, one might argue, is only one possible outcome of the evolving U.S.-Chinese relationship .
 If the warring parties had used nuclear weapons, they might have destroyed the world in which a future historian lives to write the history . If they had used nukes, the world might have been destroyed by them .
 Whether and how escalation to the nuclear level could be stopped in the midst of a full-scale conventional conflict remains unclear .
 The threat of uncontrollable nuclear escalation may be enough to ensure that neither the U.S. nor China contemplates war as an instrument of their policy with one another in the twenty-first century .
 The realist scenario for U.S.-Chinese war could become a self-fulfilling prophecy . The war could be self-defending prophecy, says author .
 The more we assume that war is inevitable, the more both sides act on that belief and transform it into a reality . Both sides are acting on the belief and transforming it into reality, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Constructivist critics of realism would emphasize that how we think about the U.S.-Chinese relationship will itself define that relationship . The relationship will be defined by how it looks at the relationship, they say .
 U.S.-China relations will be what the two states make of them, Wendt says . To paraphrase Wendt, U.K. and China will make the relationship what they make of it .
 Each major paradigm of world politics discussed in this text has both a descriptive and prescriptive dimension . Each paradigm has an important and important role in making a better world .
 In judging and evaluating the perspectives, we must ask how well each describes the way world politics works . We must ask each other how well they describe the way the world works .
 Making a Better World this far, the prescription you embrace for peace and security in the world will depend on which paradigm you judge to be most accurate .
 A liberal internationalist persuaded by the logic and record of the democratic peace, for example, would clearly embrace a foreign policy that aims at promoting democracy . The UK's foreign policy should aim to promote democracy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 For a liberal commercialist, the promotion of free markets, international trade, and global investments are the path to a better world . For a free marketeer, free markets and international trade are the best way to improve the world, he says .
 For liberal institutionalists, the foreign policy priority should be to develop and strengthen international institutions, says Julian Zelizer .
 For a feminist, the path to global peace and security is the empowerment of women . For the first time, women's rights have been taken hostage in the Middle East .
 For a constructivist, it is all about establishing new norms of behavior by changing the discourse about world politics . For the constructivist it is important to establish new norms by establishing new standards .
 Despite differing prescriptions, they share the sense that one can, assuming the embrace of the correct foreign policy prescription, fundamentally change the way world politics is played .
 When the Cold War ended, it was possible to imagine that the world had been utterly changed: the end of international competition and geopolitics . The end of history was the end to international competition, geopolitics, and history . The Cold War is now over .
 In the first decade after the Cold War people began describing the new era of “globalization” The expectation was that the phenomenon of instantaneous global communications, the free flow of goods and services, the rapid transmission of ideas and information, and the intermingling and blending of cultures
 From this optimist perspective, realist notions of how the world works were obsolete . Realist foreign policy prescriptions emanating from realist thinking were an obstacle to progress, he says .
 Realists are realists who accumulate power to balance power of one’s rivals, balance rivals, focus on national interest, and avoid being distracted by ethical crusades remain the guiding principles . For realists, old and time-tested prescriptions to accumulate power, balance the power of
 The fundamental divide between realists and their critics is over the question of whether we can do better than the world that realists describe . Realists and critics are divided over whether we have a better world than they describe . The debate is over whether realists can improve the world they describe
 In seeking to transform the world, to render war obsolete, or to prioritize justice over power in international relations, we are doomed to fail . We also leave ourselves unprepared to deal with other states that have less sentimental and more “realistic” views of the world .
 For critics of that view, realism in the twenty-first century provides a recipe for Armageddon . For critics, that view is not realistic, but it provides for Armageddon, they say . For that view they argue that realism is not the answer to Armageddon .
 Given the state of military technology, the next great power war might well be the last . Given state of technology, it's unlikely that the next war might be the first .
 Some of you who have read this book might be stimulated to go on to graduate school, where you can become a scholar who will contribute to our understanding of world politics and international relations .
 Most of you, however, have read this book and taken this course in order to become more informed citizens . Most of us have read it and taken it to be a better informed citizen .
 In ways big and small, over the course of your life, you may participate in the world of politics as a means of making a better world for yourself and future generations . You can participate in politics over the years as a result of your own actions .
 Knowing something about how the world works is a first step in preparing you to make a difference, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 MyPoliSciKit for How the World Works features multimedia and interactive activities to help students connect concepts to current events and to help instructors follow students' learning .
 Assessment Review each chapter using learning objectives, chapter summaries, practice tests, and more . Review each book using learning objective, learning objectives and practice tests . Review the content of each chapter to ensure students are prepared for the reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Learn the key terms in your textbook; you can test yourself by term or definition . Use flashcards to test your knowledge of key concepts in the textbook .
 The author discusses major themes in IR and apply them to current and historical events . Hear the author discuss the author's views on IR and IR .
 World Politics News Review looks beyond today's headlines in this blog's analysis of world politics . Look beyond today’s headlines to find out what's happening in the world . Read the world's top 10 news stories from around the world, politics and beyond .
 Financial Times Newsfeeds U.S. and world newsfeeds . Get hourly updates of the latest from the Financial Times . Use this feed to help us understand our business .