 Final Warning is an amazing digest of monumental resource material involving a multitude of viewpoints and positions on the conspiratorial concept of history . A History of the New World Order is based on a history of conspiratorial history .
 "I couldn't get it out of my mind. It was just so incredible, so inconceivable, that it couldn't be true," she says . "It was so incredible that it was inconceivable," she adds .
 I wasn't able to make any conclusions regarding his authenticity . However 90% of what he said about the Illuminati was true, and had been documented .
 "The deeper I got, the more disturbing it became. I continued my research, and the deeper it got," she said . "I continued to research and find out what happened," she says .
 When I sat in church as a child, and would hear of what the Bible said about what was going to happen in the ""last days"", it was really hard to imagine how that all could be possible . When I was a child I thought it was impossible to imagine that all
 The Illuminati was putting all of this Eschatology into perspective, he says . Somehow, the information he was finding out about the Illuminati put it into perspective .
 An unsuspecting world was being driven towards the fulfillment of prophecies that had been made nearly 2,000 years ago . Now, not only did it appear possible, it became an undeniable fact, that an unsuspecting world is being driven to fulfill prophecies .
 For six years, I devoted hundreds of hours into finding out all I could concerning the Illuminati . I devoted more than a million hours to finding out what I could about the Illuminati, author says .
 Because of some interest concerning this project, a few copies were printed and sold . A few copies of this project have been printed .
 "I contacted a few publishers hoping to get it published on a larger scale, but none wanted to commit to a book of this size that would only appeal to a small segment of people," says author .
 A job where I worked six days a week pushed this book to the back burner, he says . That, and a job where he worked, pushed the book back burner .
 This, and new information which had come to light in the past couple of years, prompted me to dust off my manuscript, and rework it . New information also prompted him to rework his manuscript .
 What emerged is an astonishing compilation of history and facts which support my theory concerning this developing New World Order . What emerged from this book is a collection of facts and facts that support my theories .
 "My goal was to self-publish the book to show that there was a market for this information," she says . "I wanted to self publish it to show there is a market"
 The book was sold in most Christian book stores in the central Pennsylvania area, was available by mail order, and carried by four distributors around the country .
 100+ publishers that I contacted chose not to consider it for publication . Yet, the 100-plus publishers that contacted me said they would not consider it .
 In the past year, an increasing number of people have heard about the book, and contacted me through the original publisher, hoping to get copies of it . The book is now available on Amazon.com, with a price tag of $3.99 .
 There is still hope that it could be published by a national publisher, but I would be remiss in my responsibility as a writer and researcher, if I did not make an effort to distribute this book .
 In fact, the manuscript contains an additional 75 pages of information not found in the original book .
 Many people have told me that reading my book is like reading an encyclopedia, or a college term paper, or reading a term paper . The author's new book is published by Simon Cowan in New York, New York .
 I wanted to present each aspect in a dossier-style, so that you would have a concise overview of the most important areas of what has come to be known as the New World Order . I wanted you to be able to understand each aspect of the new world order in a brief dossier
 Together, they reveal the existence of a power that has been at work behind the scenes for many years . Yet together, they also reveal the fact that a power has been working in the dark .
 This historical tour-de-force provides the best introduction available on the subject . Since much of the original research was done in the early 1980's, some of the material is dated .
 Although it may be difficult for some people to read, just remember that this is a reference work . Although some people may struggle with reading comprehension, this is an easy reference work.
 It was very important to provide enough information to present a convincing argument, says CNN.com editor .
 For non-Christians, it is to let you know, that there is something really wrong here . For other Christians, it's to tell you that there are things really wrong with the country .
 Abraham Lincoln's pledge of "government of the people, by the people for the people" has become a joke . Abraham Lincoln has been mocked for his pledge of a government of people by people . Lincoln's promise of government by people is now a joke.
 "After reading this book, you will know why things are the way they are," says author . "You can't wait to read this book. After reading it, you can understand why things have to be changed."
 Many churches have lost that sense of urgency, and the need to prepare for the fulfillment of all things . Many churches are losing the urgency of preparing for all things, many have said .
 "We are about to plunge into the midst of what has been foretold many years ago," says President Barack Obama .
 The Bible which you have been reading for years will come alive like never before . The Bible will be brought to life in a new kind of way .
 You knew why it was going to happen, now you will know how it's going to be happen, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Now you know why it's happening. Now you will be able to understand how it will happen," he says .
 There was never really an explanation as to what the term meant, only that it represented a new spirit of cooperation among the nations of the world in order to further the cause of peace .
 Peace is good, so therefore the New World Order is good and should be accepted . And peace is good - so therefore therefore the new world order is good . Peace is a good thing for the world, so is peace and acceptance of peace, he says .
 Like the old saying, you can't tell a book by its cover, I feel there is more here than meets the eye . I feel it's there more there's more there than met the eye, says author . "I feel there's a lot more to come out of the
 Edward VIII became King of England on January 20,1936 . He was forced to abdicate the throne eleven months later, when he married a commoner . Edward VIII abdicated the throne 11 months after his marriage .
 In July, 1940, he became the governor of the Bahamas . He became the Duke of Windsor, and in July 1940, became the . He was also the governor .
 When peace comes this time there is going to be a New Order of social justice, says President Obama . "When peace comes, there will be a new order," says Obama .
 Richard Gardner, former deputy assistant Secretary of State for International Organizations under Kennedy and Johnson, wrote in the April, 1974 issue of the Council on Foreign Relation's journal Foreign Affairs fpq. Gardner was a member of the Trilateral Commission .
 The man who put the New World Order in the limelight, and did more than anyone to bring about its acceptance, was President Bush .
 The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to allow a joint military force to use whatever means necessary to enforce a UN blockade against Iraq . The U.N. Security Council approved the move on August 25, 1990 .
 The crisis in the Persian Gulf, as grave as it is, offers a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of cooperation . The crisis offers a chance for cooperation, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Scowcroft said he had doubts about the significance of Mid-East objectives regarding global policy . In an interview with CNN at the height of the Gulf War, he said that he had doubted about the importance of the objectives .
 A world where the United Nations, freed from cold war stalemate, is poised to fulfill the historic vision of its founders . The U.N. is poised for a world where it is free to fulfill its historic vision . The United Nations was founded in 1945 .
 The implications from these quotes lend a sinister overtone to this New World Order . Somehow, the implications from the quotes, lends a sinister overtones to this new world order .
 After 15 years of research, I have come to the conclusion that this country has been infiltrated by conspirators. After over 15 years, I'm convinced that the country has a conspirator . I have also concluded that the U.S. is in danger of being infiltrated by conspiracyists
 Members of an organiaation dedicated to establishing a one-world socialist government with them in control .
 Introduction sounds unbelievable, like something from a James Bond movie, yet it is a fact . Introduction sounds like something out of James Bond movies, but it is actually a fact.
 A fact that the media has refused to publicise, even attempting to cover it up and deny its very existence, is a fact . The media has tried to cover up the fact that it exists, even though it is a crime .
 One of the documents that provided evidence concerning this, has been proven to be a complete fabrication . The documents provided evidence regarding this, have been proved to be false .
 Some of the International Bankers which actually control this group are Jewish, but there is no basis for indicting the entire Jewish race . Although some of the . International . Bankers . actually control . this group, however, are Jewish .
 "In the interest of truth, and accuracy, I must denounce this theory, and tell you that this book does not pursue that line of thinking," he says .
 In fact, there is plenty of evidence to the contrary, which is referred to in this book . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 I know of the operations of this network because I have studied it for twenty years . I was permitted for two years, in the early 1960's, to examine its papers and secret records . I have been permitted to examine the network's papers and records .
 President Barack Obama made his speech at the Democratic Convention . He said: "As a teenager, I heard John Kennedy's summons to citizenship"
 This is where Clinton received his indoctrination as an internationalist favoring one-world government . Clinton was indoctrinated as a member of the Clintonist Party . Clinton is a proponent of a one world government .
 "This political action group has its own local political support organizations, pressure groups, its own vested interests, its foothold within our government," says the president . "It's a foothold in our government. It's its foothold," he says .
 Russell Long of Louisiana, who for 18 years was the Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said that our government is "completely and totally out of control" Long said that the government is out of touch .
 "We do not know how much long term debt we have put on the American people," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 "We have created a bureaucracy in Washington so gigantic that it is running this government for the bureaucracy, the way they want," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Years ago, your mental system was ""programmed"" to think of the F in ""OF"" as a V, so it seems to disappear when you look for F's . The F in "OF" is thought to be a V .
 It was easy enough to see the ""real"" F's in FINISHED, FILES and SCIENTIFIC, but a conditioned ""blind spot"" blocked your awareness of the other three F's .
 The men working behind the scenes have been maneuvering and manipulating events and situations to achieve their goals . That is how they have been able to accomplish their goals in the past .
 The State of the Nation continues to get worse. That even though a new President is elected and a new Administration takes over, executive policy does not change, nor does the state of the nation . That is despite the new Administration taking over .
 To trace the origin and growth of the group which has come to be known as the New World Order, trace the group to trace the origins and growth . Why there is such a massive campaign to accept it.
 You need to know just exactly what these changes are, and how they will affect the lives and you and your family . The changes will affect your life and family .
 Changes like the ones which have, and are occurring do not take place overnight, say experts . Changes like these don't take away overnight, they say .
 We are dealing with a group which must have been growing for a long period of time, he says . The group must have grown to obtain the power and influence necessary to achieve the global control now being exercised .
 Adam Weishaupt was born on February 6,1748, the son of a Jewish rabbi . He was born in 1748 and died in 1788 .
 When his father died in 1753, he was converted to Catholicism by Baron Johann Adam Ickstatt . He turned the early training of the boy over to the Jesuits .
 Weishaupt later became a priest, but later became an atheist . He developed a distinct hatred for the Jesuits, and became an anti-Jesuit .
 Given access to the private library of Ickstatt, his Godfather, the young man became interested in the works of the French philosophers, and studied law, economics, politics, and history .
 It is believed that Weishaupt got his ideas concerning the destruction of the Church from Voltaire's writings . Voltaire is believed to have been influenced by his ideas about the destruction .
 He studied in France, where he met Robespierre, who later led the French Revolution . He became friends with a few people in the French Royal Court .
 It is believed, that through these contacts, he was introduced to Satanism .
 Chapter One: Chapter One four years as a tutor until he was promoted to Assistant Instructor . Chapter One 4: Chapter 1: "I was a tutor for four years until I became an assistant instructor" Chapter One was Chapter One . Chapter Four: "It was a four-year-
 In 1770, he was chosen by Mayer Amschel Rothschild to develop an organization that he could use . He was chosen in 1770 to develop the organization that Mayer Rothschild would use .
 In 1773, he was made Professor of Canon Law, a post which had been held by the Jesuits for 90 years . The Jesuits had been in the post for more than 90 years before he died in 1773 .
 They founded most of the Universities, and kept strict control of them in order to eliminate Protestant influence . They had founded most . of the . Universities, they kept strict . control of . them in . order to . eliminate Protestant . influence .
 In 1773, Weishaupt got married, against the wishes of Ickstatt, who denounced him . In 1772, he married his wife, against his father's wishes .
 Two years later, at the age of 27, he was made Dean of the Faculty of Law . He was made dean of the Law Faculty at the University of Cambridge .
 The Jesuits, worried about his quick progression, tried to thwart his influence by secretly plotting against him, and his liberal thinking .
 Not wanting to become a martyr for his free-thinking ideas, he began focusing on establishing his organization . He began working to establish his organization.
 He based the organizational structure on the one used by the Jesuits, however, his intention was to have a secret coalition of liberalism . To confuse his detractors, he based the organization on Jesuits' structure .
 He studied the anti-Christian doctrines of the Manicheans, whose teachings revolved around astrology, medicine, and magic . The Manichean teachings revolve around astrological and medicine .
 He had been indoctrinated into Egyptian occult practices by an unknown merchant named Kolmer, from Jutland . Kolmer had been traveling around Europe since 1771 .
 He studied the power of the Eleusinian mysteries and the influence exerted by the secret cult of the Pythagoreans . He also studied the influence of the cult .
 Pythagoras was a sixth century, B.C., philosopher who taught that men and women should combine their belongings which became the basic philosophy behind Communism . Pythagora was a 6th century philosopher who believed that men should combine belongings .
 Weishaupt also acquired copies of the 'Kabala' and 'The Lesser Key of Solomon' which revealed how to conjure up demons and perform occult rituals .
 He studied the various Masonic writings after meeting a Protestant Freemason from Hanover . He met Protestant Freemasons in Hanover and studied the writings .
 At first he thought about creating a superior Masonic-like organization, that would be made up of men possessing superior abilities in all fields . But he concluded that Masonry was too open .
 Weishaupt was instructed by the Rothschilds, to leave the Catholic Church, and unite all the different occult groups . The Rothschilds instructed him to join the occult world .
 He created the coven called the 'Golden Dawn' which, till this day, is allegedly the Rothschilds' private coven . The coven is said to have been created by him and his family .
 Weishaupt spent five years working out a plan through which all of his ideas could be reduced to a single system . The system would be used to fight the oppression of religion, thereby loosening social ties, he said .
 In 1774, he published a fictitious article called ""Sidonii Apollinarus Fragment" which he said was to prepare the people for the doctrine of reason . He said the article was intended to prepare them for the doctrines of reason.
 On May 1,1776, under the direction of the newly formed House of Rothschild (and Wessely, Moses, Mendelssohn; and the Bankers, Itzig, Friedlander, and Meyer), instigated the American Revolution to weaken Great Britain . Weishau
 It refers to someone who is enlightened, spiritually and intellectually . It is a term used to refer to a person enlightened, spiritual and physically enlightened .
 Satan, when he was an angel, was known as Lucifer, the 'Bearer of Light' The group's name evolved from this, and being that the group's goal was to be the same, we can see why .
 May 1st was a great day for all communist nations, where it was known as May Day; and it is also known as a special day to witches . In addition, May 1th was also a good day for witches .
 The Rosheniah, or ""Illuminated Ones", was a group of 'perfect men and women' in Afghanistan during the 16th century . The group sought the 'illumination' from the Supreme Being, who wanted a class of perfect people .
 After reaching the fourth degree, ""Enlightened One" the initiate would receive mystical powers, and when the eighth and final degree was reached, they were told they had achieved perfection .
 An Afghan scholar said that their purpose was to influence people of importance to establish harmony in the world .
 The group survived until the 1700's, and gave birth to a couple offshoots, the Alumbrados of Spain, and the Illuminated Guerinets in France in 1654 .
 They claimed that once perfection had been, they would experience a vision of God, and would enter into direct communication with the Holy Spirit . They claimed, that once perfect had been they would see God in their own vision .
 Once they had received the ""light" they would possess superior human intelligence . They would have received the "light" They would be able to possess superior intelligence .
 Their unusual claims resulted in the Inquisition issuing Edicts against them in 1568, 1574, and 1623 .
 Ignatius de Loyola, the founder of the Jesuits, was put in jail for being a member of the group . Ignatia de loyola was put into prison for being in the Jesuit . Ignatsola was jailed for being part of the Jesuit movement
 The ""Illuminati" was a name used by a German sect that existed in the 15th century . The name was used by the German sect which existed in Germany .
 They practiced the occult, and professed to possess the 'light' received from Satan . The occultists practiced the 'darkest' from Satan, they said .
 Illuminated Theosophists were influenced by the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg . The name was also used by another group in 1760 at Avignon, who was influenced by Swedenborg's writings . Illuminated theosophistists were later found in London and Paris .
 There is no evidence to suggest that Weishaupt's Order of the Illuminati is a continuation of any of these groups . However, whether their teachings and philosophy had an influence on him, is another question .
 The Illuminati wasn't fully operational until 1778 . Starting with only five members, the Illuminati started with five members . The Illuminati was founded in 1717 .
 Novice, Minerval, and Illuminated Minervals; and organized in a manner similar to Freemasonry and the Jesuits .
 He wrote that ex-Jesuits were to be admitted, except by special permission . Even though he admired the structure of the Jesuit hierarchy, he wrote that no ex- Jesuits were allowed to enter .
 Their aim is to have a one-world government, to allow the elite to govern the world, he said . Their aim was to allow future wars to prevent future wars, he added .
 March 21st is New Years Day for witches . Some sources say it is New Year's Day for Witches .
 In 1777, Weishaupt joined the Eclectic Masonic lodge ""Theodore of Good Counsel" in Munich . Towards the end of 1778 he came up with the idea of merging the Illuminati and the Masons .
 Zwack became a Mason on November 27,1778, and working with a brother Mason, Abbe' Marotti, he divulged the secret of the Order . He was the first Mason to become a Mason .
 By the middle of 1779, the Munich Masonic lodge was under the complete influence of the Illuminati . By the end of the 1779-1779 period, the lodge had been under the influence of Illuminati .
 During the first four years, about sixty active members had been recruited by a committee known as the ""Insinuators" Close to 1,000 had become indirectly affiliated with the Order .
 Few knew the supreme direction of the Order . Soon, three more lodges were established .
 Only those within the inner circle, known as the ""Areopagite," were aware of their true purpose . Only those in the circle knew their purpose .
 To all others, Weishaupt said that he wanted a one-world government to prevent all future wars . To all . others, he wanted to stop all future . wars .
 The original liberty and equality they had lost in the Garden of Eden was lost in Eden . Chapter One: Original liberty was lost to them in Eden. Chapter One : Original liberty, equality was lost . Chapter Two: The Bible's creation of Adam Adam Adam, Adam Adam and Adam Adam
 Christ exhorted his disciples to despise riches in order to prepare the world for the community of goods that would do away with property ownership . Weishaupt said that Christ said he wanted the world to prepare for a society of goods to do away from property ownership.
 The Illuminati also used monetary and sex bribery to gain control of men in high places, then blackmailed them with the threat of financial ruin, public exposure, and fear of death . The Illuminati used money, sex, and sex to gain power .
 Internal fighting developed because of Weishaupt's thirst for power . Internal fighting soon developed because he wanted power .
 Only nominal dues were collected, so the Order suffered financially . The Order suffered from a lack of funds .
 He studied law at Gottingen, served in the courts of Hesse-Cassel and Weimar . He was a well-known writer of romance, poetry and philosophy .
 He joined the Masonic lodge of Strict Observance, dedicated to the elimination of the occult sciences, which were widely practiced . The occult sciences are widely practiced in the world .
 Knigge achieved the rank of Brother Commander, and had the title of Knight of the Swan . He was also known as Brother Commander and Brother Commander of the Royal Family .
 Because of his developing exposure and interest in the occult, he joined the Rosicrucians, a secret organization that dated back to the fourteenth century . The group was an occult group who participated in human sacrifice rituals .
 He later renounced alchemy, and devoted his studies to the development of a form of Masonry that would allow man to regain the perfection they once had before the fall .
 His idea was to reform Masonry, and he was going to make these proposals at the Congress of Wilhelmsbad . He was going on to make the proposals . He said: "His idea was that Masonry should be reformed"
 The Marquis of Constanza (known as ""one of the most notorious of the Illuminati"") informed him that the Illuminati had already done that . However, the Marquis told him that he had already been informed by the Illuminati . He said the Illuminati was already done .
 Since this fell in line with Knigge's thinking, he was drawn into the Order . Chapter One: "Since this fell into line with the Order, he became a member of the Order" Chapter Two: "Knigge was drawn to the Order by the Order.
 Knigge was definitely a catch, because he had a talent for organization . He soon became the head of the Westphalia Circle . He was also the leader of the German Communist Party .
 He was instrumental in pushing for a merger between the Masons and the Illuminati . He pushed for a union between the Illuminati and the Freemasons to merge .
 Members of the Areopagite felt that Weishaupt's supreme authority should be delegated to others . They agreed with Knigge's proposed modifications for the organization . The Areopgite was firmly supported by members of the group .
 From 1780 on, the growth of the Order was very rapid because its expansion was facilitated through its affiliation with the Masonic lodges . Knigge was able to recruit the most effective propagandists, and from 1780 onwards the Order grew rapidly .
 Their goal was now to achieve their aims by splitting mankind into opposing ideologies, and for them to fight among themselves, thus weakening national governments and organized religion . The goal was to achieve this, and weaken national governments .
 An understanding was finally reached between the Masons and the Illuminati, and on December 20,1781, a combined Order was proposed . The combined Order would add to the Illuminati organization, the first three degrees of Masonry .
 It wasn't until the Congress of Wilhelmsbad from July 16th to August 29th, 1781 (which was attended by Masons, Martinistes, representatives from other secret organizations from Europe, America and Asia) that the alliance was official .
 I can only tell you that all this is very much more serious than you think. I can't tell you what I say, but I say it's very serious. I'm very sorry for what I've done, and I'm sorry for it,’s very serious .
 A resolution was passed at the Congress to allow Jews into the Lodges . It was obvious that it was done for financial reasons, because the Illuminati moved their headquarters to Frankfurt, Germany, a stronghold of Jewish finance .
 Money was contributed from such leading Jewish families as the Oppenheimers, Wertheimers and Schusters, Speyers, Sterns . Rothschilds contributed money to the Order .
 Rothschild family used the Illuminati as a means to achieve their goal of world-wide dominance . It is believed to have used the Rothschild family as a way to achieving their goal .
 Mayer Amschel Rothschild was born in Frankfurt-on-the-Main in Germany . He was the son of a banker and goldsmith . Mayer Rothschild was also a goldsmith and banker .
 Their name was derived from the 'red shield' (Crotschildt') that hung over the door of their shop . It had been the emblem of revolutionary Jews in Eastern Europe .
 A few years after his father's death, he worked as a clerk in a Hanover bank, which was owned by the Oppenheimers . He worked in a bank owned by his father .
 He became a junior partner in the business started by his father in 1750 . He soon left to take over the business .
 He bought and sold rare coins, and later succeeded in buying out several other coin dealers . He bought out several others, including a coin dealer .
 In 1769, he became a court agent for Prince William IX of Hesse-Kassel . He was the grandson of George II of England, a cousin to George III, a nephew of the King of Denmark, and a brotherin-law to the King .
 Rothschild became the middleman for big Frankfurt bankers like the Bethmann Brothers and Rueppell & Harnier . Rothschild became a leading banker in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Rothschild family began to amass a sizable fortune after expanding his business to antiques, wineries, and the importing of manufactured materials from England .
 Prince William inherited his father's fortune upon his death in 1785, which was the largest private fortune in Europe . William inherited the fortune from his father, who was the richest in Europe at the time of his death .
 Some of this money had come from Great Britain paying for the use of 16,800 Hessian soldiers to stop the revolution in America . Some of the money was never given to the troops .
 In 1804, the Rothschilds secretly made loans to the Denmark government, on behalf of Prince William . The Rothschilds made the loans to Denmark government in behalf of the Prince of Denmark .
 In June, 1806, when Napoleon's troops pushed their way into Germany, Prince William fled to Denmark . Prince William left his money with Mayer Rothschild, leaving his money to Mayer Rothschild .
 History tells us that Rothschild secretly buried William's ledgers, which revealed the full extent of his wealth, a list of debtors and the interest required from them, to keep Napoleon from confiscating it .
 Buderus von Carlhausen, the Treasury official who handled William's finances, was given 'power of attorney' and made Rothschild his chief banker . Rothschild was responsible for collecting the interest on the royal loans .
 Napoleon announced that all debts being paid to Prince William, were to go to the French Treasury . He offered a 25% commission on any debts that he would collect .
 Rothschilds planned to guarantee them financial control of Europe and the world . Rothschilds had a plan which would guarantee them control of the world and Europe .
 Battle of Waterloo was fought at La-BelleAlliance, seven miles south of Waterloo, which is a suburb of Brussels, Belgium . It began with taking advantage of the outcome of the battle of Waterloo .
 Early in the battle, Napoleon appeared to be winning, and the first secret military report to London communicated that fact to London . The first secret report was sent to London in 1877 .
 Under Gebhard Blucher, the tide turned in favor of Wellington . Chapter One: Wellington .
 Rothworth was a courier of Nathan Rothschild, head of the London branch of the Rothschild family . He went by horse to Brussels, then to Ostende, and for 2,000 francs, got a sailor to get him to England across stormy seas .
 Nathan Rothschild received the news on June 20, he informed the government, who did not believe him, so with everyone believing Wellington to be defeated, Rothschild immediately began to sell all of his stock .
 Everyone else followed his lead, and also began selling, causing stocks to plummet to practically nothing . The stock market crashed to a near-zero .
 At the last minute, his agents secretly began buying up the stocks at rock-bottom prices . At the end of the year, he secretly bought them at rock bottom prices .
 Wellington's envoy, Major Henry Percy showed up at the War Office with his report that Napoleon had been crushed in a bitter eight hour battle . Napoleon had lost a third of his men .
 Nathan Rothschild gave the Rothschild family complete control of the British economy . This gave England to set up a new Bank of England, which Nathan Rothschild controlled . The Rothschild family was given complete control over the British banking system .
 Waterloo was the focus of the Battle of Waterloo . However, it wasn't the only angle he used to profit from the battle . The British monarch used the battle to make money from the Battle .
 Buderus was made a Baron, and the Rothschilds were the richest bankers in Europe . The Rothschilds are now the world's richest bankers, with Buderu being made Baron .
 In 1817, France secured loans from a French banking house in Ouvrard and from the Baring Brothers in London . In order to get back on their feet again, France, in order to . get back to their feet, secured . loans from French banking houses in O
 Rothschild agents began buying huge amounts of French government bonds in October, 1818 . The Rothschilds saw their chance to get a firm grip on the French economy .
 On November 5th, they were dumped on the open market, creating a financial panic as their value declined . They were dumped by the government, creating financial panic on the market .
 Mayer Rothschild had established banks in England, France, and Germany . Mayer Rothschild established a bank in Germany, England and France .
 His sons, who were made Barons of the Austrian Empire, were set up to continue and expand his banking empire . His sons set up and expanded the banking empire in Austria .
 Chapter One once said: "I care not what puppet is placed upon the throne of England to rule the Empire on which the sun never sets" Chapter One said: ""I care . not what puppets are placed on the throne, but what puppet will rule the empire"
 Rothschild and Sons has occupied the same premises since 1809, at 2 New Court, St. George Street . Rothschild & Sons has been in the same building since the 1809 and has been at the same location since then .
 The House of Rothschild controlled a fortune estimated to be well over $300,000,000 . This was the beginning of the House of the Rothschild family . The Rothschild family is estimated to have amassed a fortune of over $1.5 billion .
 Rothschilds spanned Europe with railroads, invested in coal and ironworks, and saved the Vatican from bankruptcy . The Rothschilds also financed England's purchase of the Suez Canal, paid for oil exploration in Russia and the Sahara Desert .
 In this country, through their American and European agents, they helped finance Rockefeller's Standard Oil, Carnegie Steel, and Harriman's Railroad . Rockefeller helped finance Standard Oil and Carnegie Steel .
 In 1913, the family fortune was estimated to be over two billion dollars . The family is believed to have had a fortune of over two million dollars .
 The oldest son of the oldest son was to be the head of the family, unless otherwise agreed upon . Nathan was appointed as the patriarch in 1812, when Nathan was the patriarch .
 Mayer's son James Mayer married the daughter of another son, Salomon Mayer . For example, he married another son James, James Mayer .
 This rule became less important in later generations as they refocused family goals and married into other fortunes . This rule was less important as they focused on other goals .
 Rothschild and other International Bankers have financed both sides of every war, since the American Revolution . Chapter One Rothschild, and other . International . Bankers, including Rothschild, have financed . every war . since the . American Revolution, since 17th century .
 Haym Salomon, who supported the patriots during the American Revolution, then later made loans to James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, and James Monroe, was a Rothschild agent .
 During the Napoleonic Wars, one branch of the family funded Napoleon, while another financed Great Britain, Germany, and other nations .
 Their boldest maneuver came prior to the Civil War, which will be covered in a later chapter . The boldest move was to protect the nation's interests in Europe .
 London is home to the Bank of England, the Stock Exchange, Lloyd's of London, the Baltic Exchange, Fleet Street and the London Commodity Exchange . The London Metal Exchange is one of the world's most important commodities exchanges .
 In 1215, King John granted citizens the right to annually elect a mayor . The tradition of electing a mayor continues today .
 'The City' has become the last word in the country's national affairs, with Prime Minister, Cabinet, and Parliament becoming only a front for the real power . Des Griffin, in his book ""Descent into Slavery,"" and Des Knuth, have stated their belief that
 When the queen enters 'The City', she is subservient to the Lord Mayor . This privately-owned corporation is not subject to the Queen, or the Parliament .
 Rothschilds are behind the movement to unite all western European nations into a single political entity, which is just another step towards one-world government . The Rothschilds continue to influence the world economy .
 Free and Accepted Masons, whose goals are, supposedly, to promote brotherhood. Chapter One: The Masons' goals are brotherhood, brotherhood . Chapter Two: The Freemasons' goal is to be brotherhood; Chapter Three: Brotherhood .
 According to early Masonic manuscripts, its origins can be traced back to Adam, who was said to be the first Mason . Adam is said to have been the first man to join the Masonic movement .
 The apron of Masonry allegedly represents the fig leaves worn by Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden . Masonry's apron is said to represent the fig leaf worn by the couple in the garden of Eden.
 The knowledge received by Adam after eating from the forbidden tree, was carried on by his son Seth, and then Nimrod, the great-grandson of Noah, Nimrod . Nimrod was responsible for the Tower of Babel, and Noah's son Seth was the son of Nimrod
 When King Solomon was building the Temple, it is taught that Freemasonry was revived . King Solomon built the Temple in Jerusalem .
 Martin L Wagner revealed in An Interpretation of Freemasonry that the name Solomon is not the Israelitish king . However, Martin Wagner revealed that Solomon was not the king .
 A story recounted in Masonic tradition, has to do with Hiram Abiff, the architect of Tyre . Abiff was said to be hired by Solomon to build the Temple . Hiram is said to have been a Syrian Master Mason .
 He was killed by three Fellow-Crafts, when he would not reveal the secret Masonic word, which was engraved on a gold triangle he wore around his neck . The word was engraved in the name of the Masonic word .
 Solomon found the triangle, and had it placed in a secret vault under the Temple . Solomon found it and placed it in a special vault under his name .
 Another Mason, Daniel Sickles, correlates him with an Egyptian god, and Pierson's Traditions of Freemasonry said that he actually represented all of the pagan sun gods .
 It was the sun god who was the builder of the Temple, which makes this Temple symbolic, and not to be confused with the Jewish Temple .
 The groups who were the forerunners of the Masons, were the builders, carpenters, and craftsmen who erected the huge cathedrals, castles, abbeys and churches during the Middle Ages .
 This is where the term ""masonic lodge"" was originated . Because they ""lodged"" or lived together during the construction, this is where they lived together . Because of this, the term 'masonic lodges' was coined .
 The First Grand Lodge of England met at York in 926 . They adopted handsigns and passwords to identify themselves .
 Their workplace, or Lodges, was where their initiations, rites, rituals and ceremonies took place . The Lodges were where their initiation rites, rites and rituals took place.
 In the 13th century, they formed an association, headquartered at Cologne, with Lodges at Strasbourg, Vienna and Zurich .
 Near the end of the 16th century, people who weren't builders, were admitted into the fraternity, and were called ""Accepted"" Masons .
 They were usually distinguished members of the community, or in short, a source of funding . They are usually distinguished .
 Working masons and builders eventually quit, as did the Accepted Masons, who had become disappointed at what the organization really was . Accepted members of the Freemasons left the organization .
 He had been initiated by a secret society of intellectuals dedicated to civil and religious freedom .
 Bacon wrote a sequel to New Atlantis, which included details and timetables of how his Great Plan was to be accomplished . Bacon is believed to have written the sequel to the novel New Atlantis .
 Researchers believe Thomas Jefferson was the last to examine the contents of the vault . Thomas Jefferson is believed to have been the last person to examine this vault . The vault is located in Jefferson's home in New York .
 Inigo Jones reorganized the Lodges, introducing the Descartes rationalism, and they were now known as the Free and Accepted Masons .
 Three members met at the Apple-Tree Tavern, thus beginning the era of modern Freemasonry . Chapter One called the Grand Mother Lodge) by three members .
 Rather than being a guild of stone masons and builders, they altered their philosophy and became a pseudo-religion . The guild tried to cooperate with the Church so as to be able to work from the inside, rationalize the doctrine of Jesus .
 The members of the Grand Lodge of England brought their fraternity to America . The Grand Lodge is based in New York City .
 The Masons were firmly entrenched in the eastern colonies, but since 95% of the population identified themselves as Christians, they had to modify their philosophies to include Christian teachings .
 The Grand Lodge of the United States was established in 1777, which officially cut all ties to their British counterparts . Grand Lodge officially cut ties to the British counterparts in the 1777 .
 France, Ireland, Spain, Holland, Germany, Africa, Scotland, Portugal, Switzerland, Russia, Canada, Sweden, Sweden . Prussia, Austria, Poland, and Mexico .
 Benjamin Franklin became a Mason in 1731, at the age of 25 . Benjamin Franklin was originally against the Masonic Order . Franklin was a Mason .
 He became Provincial Grand Master of Pennsylvania in 1734, and was the ""appointed spokesman"" of the secret societies . He was the Provincial Grand . Master .
 As ambassador to France, he was honored there at a major Masonic lodge . He was honored at the lodge .
 It is believed that while he was on a diplomatic trip to Paris to seek financing for the Revolution, he was initiated as a member of the Illuminati .
 He took his Oath of Office on a Masonic Bible, as did his Vice-President, John Adams, who was also a Mason . Adams took his oath of office on a Bible from a Mason Bible . Adams and Adams were both men .
 This Masonic Bible has an introductory section that explains that Masonry is not a Christian fraternity, but in fact supports all religions . Masonry has a history of supporting all religions, including Christianity .
 Eight of the signers of the Declaration of Independence signers were also members of the Fredericksburg Lodge .
 Chapter One signers were believed to be Masons . However, only 8 were known to be members, while another 24 were suspected of being members . Chapter 1 signers believed to have been Masons, but only 8 of them were members .
 It is believed 8 to 10 signers of the Articles of Confederation were Masons . It is also believed that 8-10 signers were also Masons.
 There were 9 Masons that signed the Constition, while 6 others later became members . The Constition was signed by 9 members of the Masons .
 Some have said there were as many as 28 members who signed the Constitution . Other sources have used the figure of 13, while others have said 28 .
 Because of the disagreement between various books and on-line sources, representing Masonic and non-Masonic sources, it's easy to see how erroneous information becomes perpetuated as fact, and truth .
 If the Masons can't even nail down the specifics of their own history, then, the only thing I can hope to do, is to produce as accurate of a picture as possible, based on the facts .
 It was actually the Masons who instigated and carried out the American Revolution . The Masons instigated the revolution in 17th century .
 The secrecy of the Masonic lodges allowed the Colonial patriots to meet and discuss strategy . The secrecy led to the secrecy of Freemasons' lodges .
 It was commonly believed that the reason for the Revolution was ""taxation without representation" when actually it was because the Parliament in the 1760's passed a law that no colony could issue its own money . The law was passed in 1760s .
 The colonies had to issue bonds, and sell them to the Bank, who would then loan them money . The colonies would then have to issue money to pay for their bonds .
 Andrew Lodge in Boston dressed up as Mohawk Indians and went aboard the Dartmouth . The Dartmouth was anchored in the harbor, and dumped its load of tea overboard .
 The British government responded by closing the port, and sending in British troops . British government closed the port and sent in troops .
 Empress Catherine the Great of Russia refused to send in 20,000 Russian troops against the colonists, when asked by King George III of England . Catherine refused to join the fight against the colonies .
 The Supreme Council of Scottish Rite Freemasonry was established in Charleston, South Carolina in 1801 . The area was geographically located on the 33rd parallel .
 In 1755, the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry had expanded to 32 degrees, and now they added a 33rd degree . The 33th degree was added in 1755 .
 In 1813, the Northern Supreme Council was established, consisting of 15 states, and was headquartered in Boston . The council was established in 1813 and headquartered in the United States .
 The Supreme Council, which represented the Southern jurisdiction, relocated to Washington, D.C. It now covers the remaining 35 states, the District of Columbia, and the United States protectorates . It is now the Supreme Council .
 State Governors, U.S. Senators and Congressmen are Masons . Many State Governors and Senators are members of the Masonic Lodge .
 There are about 16,000 Blue or Symbolic Lodges, with a Grand Lodge in every state, which represent more than four million members . The Lodges represent about four million people worldwide .
 Members must be 21 years old, however, sons of members can be initiated at 18 . Sons of the members can also be initiated . Members must also be 21 .
 Order of Demolay, The Order of Rainbow for Girls for Girls, and The . Order of Job's Daughters, which allow children as young as 11 to become indoctrinated in Masonic .
 Order of Eastern Star, Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, and Daughters of the Nile are closely aligned with the Masons . Order of the Eastern Star is closely aligned to Masons, and the Order of Order of The Eastern Star .
 "Any organization which strives to adhere to such a high moral standard certainly should deserve our admiration and respect," says author .
 Pope Clement XII in 1738, Pope Benedict XIV in 1751, Pope Plus VII in 1821, Pope Leo XII in 1825 and Pope Plus VIII in 1829 . Pope Plus IX in 1846 and 1873 and Pope Leo XIII in 1884 and 1892 . Pope Clement
 Bavarian government considered Masonry a danger to the state in 1784 and 1845 . In 1784, and again in 1845, Bavarian authorities considered it a danger . Masonry was considered a threat to Bavarian society .
 The Regency of Milan and Governor of Venice echoed these same sentiments in 1814 . In 1814, The Regencies of Milan, The Governor of . Venice echoed the same sentiments .
 King John VI of Portugal issued orders in 1816, and again in 1824, prohibiting the operation of the fraternity . The fraternity was founded in 1815 .
 Masonry was just a cover organization for Satan worship, according to Bataille . Masonry is just an organization that covers Satan worship within its higher degrees .
 In France, a number of the Masonic sects dabbled with magic and occultism . The Freemasons were involved in the Freemasons .
 Many Druid ceremonies and witchcraft rites have been incorporated into Masonic rituals . Rituals include Druid ceremonies, witchcraft rites and rituals associated with Freemasons .
 Their literature claims that Jesus was just a man, equal to Mohammed and Krishna, the Hindu God . Their literature says Jesus was equal to Krishna and Mohammed . Jesus was the son of Jesus Christ .
 Chase said that the Bible is just one of the ""holy books"" of man, equal to the Koran, Hindu Scriptures and others . Chase said Bible is equal to Koran and Hindu Scriptures . Chase: "Bible is just a holy book of man"
 Masonic philosophy is that God is whatever you want him to be and is referred to in general terms as the ""deity"" and the ""Great Architect of the Universe" In higher degrees, he is identified as a force of nature, usually the sun . Humanity therefore is the only personal
 No masonic prayers in monitors, handbooks and guides, end in Jesus' name . Grand Lodge of that state will revoke their charter if it is discovered .
 Norman Vincent Peale, author of The Power of Positive Thinking, was a 33rd degree Mason . His name appeared in many Masonic publications . Peale's name was published in many publications .
 Dina Donahue, a contributing editor for Guidepost magazine, said that any submission to the publication can never refer to the deity of Jesus, and claim that He is the only means by which salvation can be achieved . In May, 1991, at a Dallas, Texas seminar for
 He can only be presented in a historical context as a prophet and philosopher . He can be presented as an example of a prophet .
 She said that the reason for this was that Guidepost is an interfaith magazine, and Dr. Dr. Martin was offended by the magazine . Dr Martin said that Dr Martin was not allowed to appear in the interview .
 High level Masons believe that Lucifer never fell to earth, and that Lucifer is really God . Masons refer to Jehovah by the name of ""Adonay", saying that he is the god of evil because he forces men to be subservient to him .
 Chapter One handpicked members of the 32nd and 33rd Degrees say Jesus was an impostor, and that Lucifer is the true God . Chapter One also says that Jesus is an imposteror and that Satan is Lucifer .
 He wrote that "every man's conception of God must be proportioned to his mental cultivation, and intellectual powers, and moral excellence"
 I think these various passages should settle any arguments concerning the anti-Christian nature of the Masons . The Masons were founded in 18th Century .
 Their role in history seemed to be to act as a diluting factor, to lessen the impact of Christianity through tolerance, and to politically work towards the goals established by the Illuminati .
 It is not intended that he shall understand them; but he shall imagine he understands them . It's not intended to be understood, but it's intended to make him understand them .
 The Mother Supreme Council of the World in Washington, D.C., awards all 33rd Degrees . Andrew is a Grand Elect Knight of Kadosh Consistory of Sublime Princes of the Royal Secret .
 From Bavaria, the Order of the Illuminati spread into Austria and Switzerland . Order of Knights Templar spread into the Knights of the Red Cross and Knights Templar .
 By 1786 they had numerous lodges across the various German provinces, Austria, Hungary, England, Scotland, Poland, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Holland, Spain, Sweden, Russia, Ireland, Africa, and America .
 Students who were members of wealthy families, with international leanings, were recommended for special training in internationalism . Students who are members of a wealthy families were recommended .
 Those trained at such schools were placed behind the scenes as experts and advisors to perpetuate Illuminati goals . Those trained in such schools have been placed behind scenes as advisors to the Illuminati .
 Weishaupt, worried that his control of the Order was diminishing, argued repeatedly with Knigge . Weisaupt was worried that he was losing control of his Order .
 Knigge wanted to move on to more substantial things . While he preferred to work in secrecy, he wanted to focus on more substantial work .
 On April 20,1784, Knigge quit, followed by Baron Bassus, Count Torring, Prince Kreitmaier, and others . On April 21, 1784, he quit .
 In July, Knigge signed an agreement promising to return all documents in his possession, and to keep quiet on what he knew about their plans and activities . In July he signed a deal to return the documents and keep quiet about their activities .
 He resumed his work as a writer, later becoming an inspector of schools at Bremen, where he died on May 6,1796 .
 A warning as to the consequences of betraying the Order was included in the ceremony of initiation .
 Chapter One would point a sword at the initiate and say: ""If you are a traitor and a perjurer, learn that all our Brothers are called upon to arm themselves against you" Chapter One of the initiators would have pointed a sword to the initiate .
 In October, 1783, a lawyer, who had dropped out of the Order in August, presented to the Duchess Maria Anna, a document which detailed the activities of the Illuminati .
 He was upset because he had been promoted too slow, and was constantly prodded to prove his loyalty . He was angry that he was promoted too slowly, and had to prove loyalty to him .
 The goals of the Illuminati were to ""in time rule the world,"" by overthrowing all civil government . Duke Karl Theodore Dalberg, the Elector Palatinate of Bavaria, criticized all secret societies .
 On March 2,1785, 1785, he issued a proclamation identifying the Illuminati as a branch of the Masons . He ordered that their Lodges be shut down, and ordered that they be closed .
 The government began a war against the Order by initiating judicial inquiries at Ingolstadt .
 The government was able to seize many of their papers when they raided the Lodges . In an attempt to preserve the secrecy of their motives, the Areopagite burned many documents, however, many of them were burned .
 Utzschneider was able to convince three other members to come forward in April, 1785 .
 They were fellow professors at the Marienburg Academy who had doubts about the validity of the organization's principles when they discovered that they would receive no mystical powers .
 The purposes of these six points were to divide the people politically, socially, and economically; to weaken countries and create a one-world government . The purposes were intended to divide people politically and socially, socially and economically .
 The government pardoned all public officials and military leaders who publicly admitted membership . The pardoned those who admitted to membership .
 Those who didn't, and were discovered to be members, lost their rank and standing, were removed from office, and openly disgraced and humiliated . Those who did not, and found to be part of the organization, were stripped of their rank .
 Weishaupt was preparing to set his plans into motion for the French Revolution . The French Revolution was slated to begin in 1789 .
 This book contains a history of the Illuminati, and many of their ideas for expansion and future endeavors . This book contained many of them, including the Illuminati's ideas .
 As the courier rode through Regensburg on horseback, he was struck by lightning and killed . However, after leaving Frankfurt, the courier was killed by lightning .
 The authorities found the document and turned it over to the government .
 Another source indicates the possibility that he may have been murdered, and the documents planted on him . Another source says he may be murdered .
 Xavier Zwack, a government lawyer, and one of the Order's most prominent leaders, had his house in Landshut illegally searched by the police in October, 1785, and his papers seized . His name was on Renner's list .
 The danger first realized by the government, had now become a national emergency . Needless to say, all of this information shed more light on the Order, and the danger was first realized .
 In 1786, the government gathered all of the confiscated documents and published them in a book called Original Writings of the Order and Sect of the Illuminati . The book was circulated to every government and crowned head in Europe, including France, to warn them of the impending danger .
 The leaders of the Order who appeared before the government's Court of Inquiry testified that the organization was dedicated to the overthrow of church and state . The leaders testified that they were dedicated to overthrowing the state .
 The revelations did little to alert the public, because of their unbelievable claims . However, these revelations, and the publication of their documents, were published by WikiLeaks .
 The leaders of the Order were arrested and formally interrogated, then forced to renounce the Illuminati . The leaders were arrested, formally interrogated and formally . They were later forced to . renounce .
 The final blow came on August 16,1787, when Dalberg issued his final proclamation against the Illuminati . Dalberg's final proclamation was issued in August 1787 .
 Anyone found guilty of recruiting members were to be executed, while those who were recruited would have their property confiscated and then be deported .
 Zwack sought sanctuary in the Court of Zweibrucken, where he was later appointed to an official position in the principality of Salm-Kyburg . He was banished and later exiled to a position in a principality .
 He was later summoned by Dalberg, as the government tried to deal with the problem of fugitives who might attempt to reorganize the Order .
 On November 15,1790, 1790, another Edict was announced against the members of the organization . The Edict against the organization was announced in 1790 .
 The following year, a list of 91 names of alleged members was compiled . List of 91 alleged members of the KKK compiled .
 The apparent demise of the Order was taken into stride by its highest members, who continued to operate underground . The Order's highest members were taken in stride by the apparent demise .
 "In this manner, and by the simplest means, we shall set in motion and in flames," he said . "We shall set motion and burn," he added .
 To hide their subversive activities, the highest members of the Order began to masquerade as humanitarians and philanthropists . The Order was forced to hide its subversive activities .
 Weishaupt fled to Switzerland, later returning to Germany, when the Duke of Saxe-Gotha gave him sanctuary .
 The Order moved their headquarters to London, where it began to grow again . The Order is now based in London and has a history of growing in the UK .
 Weishaupt told his followers to infiltrate the lodges of Blue Masonry, and to form secret circles within them .
 Only Masons who proved themselves as Internationalists, and were atheists, were initiated into the Illuminati . The Illuminati was founded by the Masons in 1903 .
 Chapter One took advantage of the Illuminati's apparent demise by recruiting several of its members for his so-called ""German Union"" in 1787 . Chapter One recruited several members of his 'German Union' Chapter One used to recruit several of his members .
 Bahrdt, the son of a minister, called his group the German Union for Rooting Out Superstition and Prejudices and Advancing True Christianity . The group is called the "German Union"
 That same year, he was visited by an Englishman who urged him to establish the Union . The Englishman promised to link it with the British masonic structure .
 In 1787, he received another letter containing more details of organizational details . The organization was organized in 1787 . In 1788, he sent a letter containing details of the organization .
 Bahrdt had done some religious propaganda work for Weishaupt, ""to destroy the authority of the Scriptures"", and it was commonly believed he was directing the activities of the organization behind the scenes in order to carry on the goals .
 The German Union appeared to be a Reading Society . One was set up in Zwack's house in Landshut, Germany . It was also set up by the German Union .
 The membership initially consisted of 17 young men, and about five of Bahrdt's friends . The membership of the group was initially 17 men and five of his friends .
 In a pamphlet entitled To All Friends of Reason, Truth and Virtue, Bahrdt wrote that the organization's purpose was to accomplish the enlightenment of people in order to disseminate religion, remove popular prejudices and root out superstition .
 By 1788, Bahrdt had sunk over $1,000 into the group, and was spending all of his time working on it . They planned to have magazines and pamphlets, but by 1788 they had no magazines and no pamphlets .
 Bahrdt responded by anonymously writing another pamphlet of the same name to satirize it . The pamphlet was published anonymously in the 1930s and 'was a parody of the book'
 The German Union of XXII, a New Secret Society for the Good of Mankind"", in which he revealed that the group was a continuation of the Illuminati . He also revealed that he had been involved in the Illuminati, which he claimed to be part of the group .
 The German Union, which represented Weishaupt's ""corrected system of llluminism"", never really got off the ground because of its openness . It provoked hostile attacks from the government and members of the clergy .
 The Illuminati had secretly spread to France by 1787, through French revolutionary leader Count Gabriel Victor Riqueti de Mirabeau . He had been indoctrinated by Col. Col. Gabriel Victor . Victor .
 Jacob Mauvillon was in Berlin on a secret mission for King Louis XVI of France in 1786 . He was in Germany on a mission for the King of France .
 The initiations took place at the Illuminati's Grand Lodge in Ermenonville, France . The Marquis de Gerardin owned the mansion where the initiations were held .
 The famous impostor Saint Germain presided over the initiation ceremonies . The famous impostor presumed the initiation ceremonies.
 Germain was believed to be a Portuguese Jew, who was a member of the Philalethes Lodge . Germain is believed to have been a Portuguese Jewish .
 He was a Mason, a Rosicrucian, and belong to several other occult brotherhoods . He was also a Rosist, a Mason and Rosistist, and belonged to several others .
 He spoke Italian, German, English, Spanish, French, Greek, Sanskrit, Arabic, and Chinese . He spoke English, German and French .
 He was arrested in London in 1743 for being a Jacobite spy . He took credit for establishing Freemasonry in Germany . He was later arrested for being Jacobite .
 As an impostor, he posed as Comte Bellamarre, Marquis de Montferrat, and Chevalier Schoening . He posed as the Marquis of Montferrrat and Comte of the same name . He was also known as the Cheval
 During initiation, new members were sworn to reveal to their new chief all they had heard, learned and discovered, and also to seek after and spy .
 Count Alessandro de Cagliostro, a Jew from Sicily, was said to be one of the greatest occult practitioners of all time . He was initiated into the Illuminati at Mitau in 1780, in an underground room in the city of Mitau . Count Alessandand
 The book was an outline of their plans, which included an attack on Rome . It was published by the Nazis in 1941 . The book included a detailed plan to attack Rome .
 He discovered that they had money at their disposal in banks at Amsterdam, Rotterdam, London, Genoa, and Venice . He also discovered that the group had money in banks in Holland, Italy, Amsterdam and London .
 He found out that the Illuminati had 20,000 lodges throughout Europe and America, and that their members served in every European court . The Illuminati had members serving in every court .
 Cagliostro was instructed to go to Strasbourg, France, to make the initial contacts necessary for the instigation of the French Revolution . He was sent to make contacts necessary to instigate the revolution .
 Identified as a Grand Master of the Prieureure' de Sion, it is believed that he was the liaison between them and the Illuminati . It is believed he was a liaison between the Illuminati and his Grand Master .
 The French Masons committed themselves to overthrowing the government, under the guise of liberty and equality, in order to have government by and for the people . The Masons planned to overthrow autocratic regimes, ending the autocratic .
 Jeremy Bentham and William Petty planned and directed the French Revolution, then later directed the plot towards America . William Petty was Earl of Shelburne .
 In 1788, at the request of Mirabeau and Talleyrand, Johann Joachim Christoph Bode, a lawyer at Weimar, and a Mason, was summoned to France . He was a lawyer and Mason .
 He had been initiated into the Illuminati at the Congress of Wilhelmsbad . He later took over the Order in the absence of Weishaupt . He was initiated by the Illuminati .
 Bode and Baron de Busche said they were there to investigate the influence of the Jesuits on secret societies . Bode was a Dutch military officer in the service of the Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt, in order to conceal the purpose of their presence in France .
 The real reason for them being there, was to further the goals of the Illuminati in France . However, the real reason was to help the Illuminati achieve their goals, according to the French Illuminati .
 Intellectuals known as ""encyclopedists" were instrumental in spreading Illuminati doctrine . Intellectuals were instrumental to spreading the doctrine of Illuminati .
 Other lodges became aligned with the Philalethes, such as the Nine Sisters; the Lodge of Candor, which included members like Laclos, Sillery, D'Aiguillon, the Lameth Brothers, Dr. Dr. Lameth .
 The Illuminati created situations in order to create dissention among the people . The Illuminati used situations to create a situation that would be created by the Illuminati to create dissent .
 The Duke of Orleans instructed his agents to buy up as much grain as they could, then the people were led to believe that the King intentionally caused the shortage, and that the French people were starving . For instance, the Duke of . Orleans instructed agents to . buy up . as much
 The people were manipulated into turned against a king whose reign had strengthened the middle class . Thus the people were turned against the king's reign .
 The revolutionary group of 1300 people emerged on July 14,1789 as the Jacobin Club . When they needed a larger meeting place, they used the hall of Jacobin's Convent . The club was founded in 1789 .
 The Illuminati controlled the Club, and were directly responsible for fermenting the activities which developed into the French Revolution . The Illuminati were responsible for the events which led to the revolution .
 Through all the fire and smoke, we perceived the evidence of calculating organization, says CNN iReporters . "Through all the smoke and smoke," says Reporters .
 King Louis and his family were executed in the wake of a plan which called for the population to be cut down by one-third to one-half . Over 300,000 people died, plus King Louis's family and his wife were executed .
 Those who responded with the proper Masonic handsigns, had their lives spared . Those who did not respond to the handsign were spared .
 The Jacobins controlled the National Assembly, and for all intents of purposes, Mirabeau became France's leader . The Jacobinists controlled the French National Assembly .
 The Revolution was considered at an end on July 28,1794, when Robespierre was guillotined . The Revolution considered to have ended on July 27, 1794, but was considered to be an end .
 Thomas Jefferson described the events as ""so beautiful a revolution"" and said that he hoped it would sweep the world . Thomas Jefferson, who served as minister to France for three years, described the revolution as ""beautiful a revolution"
 Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton said Jefferson helped start the French Revolution . Jefferson wrote in a letter to a friend, dated May 26,1792, that Jefferson ""drank freely of the French philosophy, in religion, in science in politics"
 Illuminist, Vicomte de Barras, witnessed a 24 year old Napoleon repelling a siege at Toulon in 1793 by English and Spanish military forces . Napoleon was a 24-year-old Napoleon .
 Barras was appointed by the French Assembly as the Commander-inChief of the French military in 1795 . Barras became a member of the five-man Directory, which began to govern France .
 Napoleon feared Barras was attempting to restore the Monarchy . Napoleon broke his ties with Barras in 1799 . Napoleon was a Knights Templar, but was not a monarch .
 Napoleon eliminated the Directory, and in 1804, with the support of Talleyrand, became Emperor . In 1804 he became Emperor, Napoleon became Napoleon .
 As a puppet of the Illuminati, his reign brought about the total disruption of Europe, which was needed for the Illuminati to get control and unify it . Unwittingly, as a puppet, he was needed to unify Europe, he said .
 He ended the Holy Roman Empire, and made his brother Joseph, the King of Naples, in 1806 . He ended his brother's reign and made him the king of Naples .
 Joseph was replaced by Napoleon's brother-in-law Murat, when Joseph became the King of Spain in 1808 . Joseph replaced by Murat when he became the king .
 His brother Louis was made King of Holland, and another brother Jerome, the King of Westphalia . His brother Jerome was King of Germany and Holland .
 In 1810, Napoleon confiscated the contents of the Vatican archives, which amounted to 3,000 cases of documents, and took it to Paris . Napoleon confiscated them and took them to Paris, where they were taken to France .
 By this time, Napoleon had changed the face of Europe, but, he settled his warring ways . Ultimately, the French Revolution had failed, because Europe had not been fully conquered . Europe still had a long way to go .
 Nathan Rothschild tunneled money to his brother James, who handled financial transactions for the French government, in Paris, who got it to Wellington's troops in Spain .
 The Illuminati secretly worked to make agreements that shifted national alliances against France . In addition, the Illuminati secretly made agreements to shift national alliances . The Illuminati worked to shift alliances with France .
 Napoleon was exiled to the island of Saint Helena in the south Atlantic after his defeat at Waterloo . He died there in 1821, where he was exiled from the island .
 He referred to himself and other members as ""the enlightened ones"", and said that the United States Constitution was a ""leaky vessel"" which was ""hastily put together when we left the British flag,"" and needed revision .
 In 1786, a lodge was started in Portsmouth, Virginia, where allegedly, Thomas Jefferson was a member . The lodge was followed by 14 others in different cities of the thirteen colonies .
 In April, 1793, France sent new ambassador Edmond Genet to America, so he could collect payment for the American debt incurred during the American Revolution . The money could be used to finance France's war with England .
 Thomas Paine, author and political theorist, helped the Illuminati infiltrate several Masonic lodges . Paine was a member of the Illuminati . He helped Paine infiltrate several lodges in the Freemasons .
 His book The Age of Reason was published in 1794, dealing with the role of religion in society . He revealed his loyalty to them when he published a book in 1793, which dealt with religion .
 Although he believed in God, he could not accept the entire Bible as being fact . The Bible was not accepted as fact by the author .
 Examination of the Prophecies) also appeared, which seriously questioned the deity and existence of Jesus .
 Jacobins are nothing more nor less than the open manifestation of the hidden system of the Illuminati . The Jacobins were nothing more than the Jacobins, the Illuminati's secret society .
 The Order has its branches established and its emissaries at work in America . The Order was founded in 1903 in New York City .
 I hold it a duty, my brethren, which I owe to God, to the cause of religion, to my country and to you, at this time, to declare these truths . I declare to you thus honestly and faithfully, these truths, and I owe them to God .
 My only aim is to awaken you and myself to due attention, at this alarming period, to our dearest interests . I only aim was to awaken myself and my family to our best interests .
 When he went to Germany, he was given Weishaupt's revised conspiracy plans to study, in order to expand the Illuminati's influence in the UK .
 Both books sought to warn America about the Illuminati conspiracy, but were not taken seriously . Both books were taken seriously by the American public .
 Luther Snyder, a Lutheran minister, wrote a letter to President Washington expressing his concern about the Illuminati infiltrating the American Masonic lodges .
 The idea I meant to convey was, that I did not believe that the lodges of Freemasons in this country had, as societies, endeavored to propagate the diabolical tenets of the first, or pernicious principles of the latter .
 Shortly before his death, Washington issued two more warnings about the Illuminati . Shortly before he died, he issued two further warnings .
 These letters were allegedly kept at the Rittenburg Square Library in Philadelphia, but have mysteriously vanished . Letters allegedly kept in the library, but mysteriously vanished from the library .
 Adams wrote to Washington that Jefferson and Hamilton were misusing Masonic lodges for Illuminati purposes and the worship of Lucifer . Adams also wrote that the lodges were misused by the two men .
 Benjamin Franklin was also accused of being a member of the Illuminati, but there is no substantative proof of this . Benjamin Franklin also claimed to have been involved in the Illuminati .
 There is some evidence that he did use Democratic Societies and Jacobin Clubs in his 1796 battle with John Adams for the Presidency .
 They are doubtless secretly striving to undermine all our ancient institutions, civil and sacred, they say . They are . doubtless secretly trying to undermine . all our . ancient institutions . Civil and sacred .
 These societies are closely leagued with those of the same Order, in Europe; they have all the same object in view . The Order of the Order is closely linked with those in Europe, in the same way .
 Should infidelity generally prevail, our independence would fall out of course . We need to be more secure in the future, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 British looted and burned Washington in 1812, was to destroy secret documents that would have exposed the treason against the United States, by various people high within the government .
 Chapter One opposed a strong central government as set forth in the U.S. Constitution of 1789 . Chapter One succeeded in getting the Bill of Rights added .
 They were against a single, national government, upper class rule, and a weak program for the separation of powers . They wanted a single national government .
 Jeffersonian Republicans, so named because of the anti-monarchy views of the AntiFederalists, had power from 1801-1825 . The Jeffersonian Republican Party was formed in 1801 .
 In 1826, the Democratic-Republicans became known as just plain Democrats . In 1854, the National Republicans became identified as only Republicans in 1854 .
 The fraternity known as Phi-Beta-Kappa was organized in 1776 by students at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia . The second oldest in the country, founded in 1694, as a secret debating club . The fraternity is the second oldest fraternity in the
 It was later infiltrated, and used to introduce Illuminati principles to America . It was used to infiltrate America and introduce its principles to the Illuminati .
 Open only to university students, their goal was to make philosophy, not religion, the guiding principle of man's actions . The group's aim was to create a philosophy that would guide man to his own actions .
 They had secret hand signals and handshakes up to 1830, when it was reorganized and changed from a social organization to an honorary society for upper classmen .
 Elisha Parmele received a grant to establish chapters at Yale in 1780, and in Harvard in 1781 . The fraternity established chapters at Harvard and Yale .
 Russell had visited Germany that year, where he was exposed to the Illuminati, and possibly initiated . Russell visited Germany where he had been exposed to Illuminati .
 He wanted to establish a similar group in America, where their sons could become members of a secret Order that would give them a favored status . He wanted their sons to be members of the Order .
 In 1873, some Yale students broke into their headquarters, a windowless building called ""The Tomb" adjacent to the campus, where they discovered their insignia the skull and bones . Some real skulls and bones were found in the building .
 The Russell Trust is endowed by $54 million in alumni grants . It is the group that controls the Russell Trust .
 Its members have assimilated themselves into every area of business and government . The group has assimilated into every aspect of business, government .
 From these positions, they can use their influence to work towards their common goal of one-world government . Chapter One government, in various capacities, can help them achieve their goal of a single world government .
 Skull and Bones, Phi-Beta-Kappa, are indicative of the way the Illuminati functions . The Skulls and Bones are the most secretive group in the world .
 They know that if they can grab, control, and mold young minds, then they will have unwitting pawns to do their bidding, and could be called upon to contribute to their efforts . They know they want to grab and control young minds and mold them .
 The early history of the Illuminati was nothing more than a seed that was planted . The Illuminati was planted by the Illuminati in the early 20th century .
 "There was a big emphasis on infiltrating educational institutions with their doctrine. That is why there was a lot of emphasis," he said . "That's why there were a big focus on infiltrators," he added .
 As each class graduated through the educational systems of the world, the more people there were to perpetuate their plans . The more people who succeed in the world's educational systems, there will be more people to perpetuate those plans .
 The Illuminati knew they would have enough of the right people, in the right places, for them to secretly further their goals . In time, the Illuminati knew there would be enough people to secretly help them achieve their goals, and that they had enough people .
 In 1802, Europe was dominated by England, Austria, Russia, Prussia and France . France was the most powerful country .
 Napoleon Bonaparte took over France in 1804, taking control of virtually all of Europe . His military exploits had led to the complete control of nearly all of the continent . Napoleon's military exploits led to his military exploits .
 Even today, France has more land than any other country in western Europe . France has the most land in the world .
 In 1812, when Napoleon moved against Russia, England, Spain and Portugal were already at war with France . England, Portugal and Spain had already been at war against France .
 In 1814, the coalition defeated France, and in March of that year, marched into Paris . The coalition was defeated France in 1814 .
 Napoleon was exiled to Elba, a small island off the Tucson coast of Italy . France's borders were returned to their original 1792 location, which had been established in 1792 .
 After the Napoleonic Wars, the Illuminati thought the world would be tired of fighting, and would accept any solution to have peace . The Illuminati thought any solution would be a solution to the world's problems would be accepted .
 Through the Congress of Vienna, the Rothschilds hoped to create a sort of League of Nations . The Rothschilds wanted to create the sort of sort of World War II .
 From September, 1814, to June, 1815, the four powers of the allied coalition, winners of the Napoleonic Wars, met at the Congress of Vienna . A large number of rulers and officials representing smaller states attended the Congress .
 The main concern of the Congress was to redistribute conquered territories, create a balance of power, restore the pre-Napoleonic order through King Louis XVIII, return the power to families who were ruling in 1789, and to return the Roman Catholic Church to its former power .
 Discussion revolved around the creation of a Federation of Europe that would establish a group of independent kingdoms which would be tied together through an administrative governing body that would, among other things, provide military defense .
 In their plan, Switzerland was made a neutral state that served as a repository for their finances . Switzerland is made a repository of their finances, and Switzerland is a repository .
 Napoleon left Elba in March, 1815, because the pension promised him by King Louis XVIII was discontinued . Napoleon believed Austria was preventing his companion, Marie Louise, and his son, the former King of Rome, from being able to join him .
 The coalition at the Congress put aside their diplomatic business, and joined in the battle . The coalition put aside diplomatic business to join in the fight against ISIS .
 The treaty was signed shortly before Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo . It was signed on June 9,1815 .
 He died on St. Helena, an island 1,000 miles off the African coast, where he died in 1821 .
 The Russian czar saw through the planned European federation, recognizing it as an Illuminati ploy, and would not go along with it . The czar recognized it as a ploy and refused to participate in it .
 On September 26, 1815, the Treaty of Holy Alliance was signed by Alexander I of Russia, Francis II of Austria, and Frederick William III of Prussia . The treaty was signed during the Second Peace of Paris .
 The Treaty guaranteed the sovereignty of any monarch who would adhere to Christian principles in the affairs of State . The Treaty was signed by the King of England in 1903 .
 Alexander claimed he got the idea from a conversation with Castlereagh . Alexander claimed to have been inspired by a conversation he had with the Irishman .
 Prussia and Austria claimed they went along with it, out of fear of Russian retaliation . Austria and Prussia said it was fear of retaliation from Russia .
 The Alliance had no influence on matters, but it did indicate to other countries that they had banded together against them . It succeeded in temporarily crushing Europe's growing liberal movement .
 The whole purpose of the Congress of Vienna, was for the Illuminati to create a Federation, so they would have complete political control over most of the civilized world . The Illuminati wanted to be able to control the world's most civilized society .
 Many of the European governments were in debt to the Rothschilds, so they figured they could use that as a bargaining tool . Rothschilds were able to use that to get a deal out of their debt .
 The Illuminati, in their first attempt, had come terrifyingly close to gaining control of the world . The Illuminati had come to the brink of taking over the world for the first time .
 The head of the family, Nathan Rothschild, awaited the day that his family would get revenge by destroying the Czar and his family, which they did in 1917 . Nathan Rothschild's family was killed in Russia in 1917 by Czar Czar Vladimir Czar .
 Shortly afterward, he was arrested and charged with stealing and indebtedness, and put in jail .
 The Illuminati tried him in absentia, convicted him of treason, and ordered five men, led by Richard Howard, to execute him . Richard Howard led the English Illuminist to execute the executioner .
 When he was released from jail, he was warned, and he attempted to flee to Canada . He was warned that he would be arrested if he tried to flee the country . He has since been sentenced to life in prison .
 Howard caught him at the border, and took him to Fort Niagara, where he was held for a couple of days . Howard caught the man, and held him there for several days .
 Freemasons that accompanied Howard carried him off in a boat, and drowned him in the Niagara River . Howard was a member of the Freemasons, who was killed in Niagara Falls .
 One of three men who carried out the assassination confessed on his deathbed in 1848 . One of the three men in the 1848 assassination confessed .
 Masonic leaders refused to cooperate with the lengthy investigation, which didn't get anywhere, since many of the police officers were Masons . The investigation was unsuccessful .
 Press, religious leaders, temperance and anti-slavery groups, united to condemn the apparent murder . However, the press and religious leaders condemned the murder .
 The murder caused over half of the Masons in the northeastern U.S. to break off their alignment with the Illuminati . The murder led to the death of over half the members of the Illuminati in the Northeast .
 The Freemasons wanted to stop the aristocratic conspiracy, and prevent all members of Masonic organizations from public service . They wanted to prevent all . members of . all . from . public service, they said .
 A National Convention was held in Philadelphia in 1830, and another in Baltimore in 1831 . William Wirt, former United States Attorney General (under Monroe and John Quincy Adams, 1817-1829), was nominated as a Presidential candidate in 1829 .
 The movement caught on mainly in New England and the Mid-Atlantic states . The movement was mostly in the New England states .
 Wirt only carried the State of Vermont in 1832, while Andrew Jackson, a Mason, won big . Even though they won quite a few Congressional seats, Wirt was not a Mason .
 In the grave was a piece of paper that had the name John Brown written on it . Brown's name was written on the paper in his grave .
 In 1828, she became the co-editor of the New Harmony Gazette with Owen . She became the editor of the Gazette with him in 1828 .
 At the meeting, she spoke of equal rights, atheism, and free love, as she promoted a Women's Auxiliary of the Illuminati .
 Those present were told that an international movement of subversives was being developed along the lines of Illuminati principles . They would be used to ferment future wars, they were told .
 In 1843, poet Heinrich Heine wrote a book called Letece, which was a compilation of articles he wrote for the Augsburg Gazette from 1840-1843 . Heine revealed the knowledge he had about this new group when he wrote about them .
 In 1872, he ran for the Presidency, against Ulysses S Grant, on the Liberal Republican ticket . He ran for President Grant in 1872 .
 In 1841, Clinton Roosevelt wrote The Science of Government Founded on Natural Law . The book was the blueprint of the conspiracy to eliminate the United States Constitution .
 The detailed plan for the New Deal and the National Recovery Act was implemented 92 years later by his direct descendant Franklin D Roosevelt . It contained the detailed plan that was implemented by FDR's direct descendant .
 Their goals were to establish an independent treasury and to enact anti-monopoly legislation . With their political strength concentrated mainly in the Northeast, they were mainly in Northeast .
 Andrew Jackson refused to Charter the Second Bank of the United States . Jackson's main complaint was President Andrew Jackson's refusal to charter the second bank .
 Giuseppe Mazxini, an Italian patriot, and revolutionary leader, was appointed head of the Illuminati in 1834 . He died on November 18,1830, at the age of 82 .
 It is believed that Weishaupt rejoined the Catholic Church with a deathbed repentance . It was believed to have rejoined with the church on his deathbed .
 In 1831, he was exiled to France, where he founded the ""Young Societies"" movement, which included Giovane ltalia, Young England, etc. He was exiled from France .
 This group united those who wanted to achieve unification through force through force . The group was united by those wanting to achieve unity through force.
 Mazzini moved to England in 1837, then returned to Italy in 1848 to lead the revolution against the Austrians . He led the revolution in Italy against Austrians in the 1848 revolution .
 In the 1850's, he led more revolutionary activities, and through his actions, Italy became united in 1861, as a single kingdom, rather than the republic envisioned by Mazzini . In 1861, Italy was united as a kingdom, not a republic .
 Mazzini tried to carry on the activities of the Illuminati through the Alta Vendita Lodge, the highest lodge of the Carbonari . He became known as the ""Evil Genius of Italy" and became known .
 From 1814-48, the Haute Vente Romaine led the activities of most of Europe's secret societies . The group led most of the world's most secret societies from 1814 to 1948 .
 Mazzini likes to talk about a great many things, about himself above all . He says he has a lot to say about himself, but about himself .
 About 1,000 AD, after the Normans had driven the Arabs out of Sicily, they established a feudal system . The Normans established a system of feudal system in Sicily .
 Mazzini, Autorizza, Furti, Incendi, and Avvelengmentmenti were the group of criminals that Mazzin gave the name ""Mafia"""Mafio"" was an acronym for Mazzinis, Autorsizza,
 Known as the Mafiosi, they were authorized by Mazzini to commit thefts, arson and murder . They were authorized to commit crimes such as arson, murder and arson .
 It was this organization that came to America during the 1890's with the beginning of Italian immigration . The organization was founded by Italian immigrants to America .
 Albert Pike, a lawyer, was chosen to coordinate Illuminati activities in the United States in 1859 . Pike was fascinated with the idea of a one-world government . Pike is a lawyer and leader of United States Scottish Rite Masonry .
 He said they needed to create a political party that would keep the world fighting, until they could bring peace . He said the world needed to keep fighting until peace was reached .
 Pike was born on December 29,1809, in Boston, went to Harvard, then later served as a Brigadier-General in the Confederate Army . Pike served in the Civil War . Pike was a Confederate Brigadier General .
 He was appointed by the Confederacy to be the Indian Commissioner in order to create an army of Indian warriors . The Confederate Indian Commissioner was appointed to create a force of warriors .
 He succeeded in creating an army of Chickasaws, Comanches, Creeks, Cherokees, Miamis, Osages, Kansas, and Choctaws . He became Governor of the Indian territory, and succeeded .
 The savagery of their attacks caused Jefferson Davis to disband the Indian army . Jefferson Davis, the President of the Confederacy, disbanded the army .
 After the Civil War, Pike was found guilty of treason and jailed, only to be pardoned by President Andrew Johnson on April 22,1866, who met with him the next day at the White House . Pike was convicted of treason in 1866 .
 On June 20,1867, Scottish Rite officials conferred upon Johnson, the 4th 32nd degrees, and he later went to Boston to dedicate a Masonic Temple .
 A 33rd degree Mason, he was head of the Ancient Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry . He was one of the founding fathers of the Scottish Rite .
 Pike was said to be a Satanist, who indulged in the occult . He possessed a bracelet he used to summon Lucifer, with whom he had constant communication . Pike is said to have been Satanist and indulged into the occult.
 He was the Grand Master of a Luciferian group known as the Order of the Palladium(or Sovereign Council of Wisdom) The group had been founded in Paris in 1737 . He was Grand Master .
 Palladism was brought to Greece from Egypt by Pythagoras in the fifth century . It was this cult of Satan that was introduced to the inner circle of the Masonic lodges .
 Baphomet established the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite in Charleston, South Carolina . He helped establish the Scottish Rite .
 Pike, his successor, changed the name to the New and Reformed Palladian Rite . Pike's successor, Pike, changed it to the new and reformed Palladian Rites . Pike is the current leader of the Palladian Order . Pike was born in 1903 .
 Pike's right-hand man was Phileas Walder, from Switzerland, who was a former Lutheran minister, Masonic leader, occultist, and spiritualist . Pike was also a Masonic leader and occultist .
 Pike intended to use the Palladian Rite to create a Satanic umbrella group that would tie all Masonic groups together . Pike, along with Mazzini, Lord Henry Palmerston of England, and Otto von Bismarck of Germany, intended to create the group . Pike and Mazz
 Because of Mazzini's revolutionary activities in Europe, the Illuminati had to again go underground . The Illuminati was forced to go underground again because of his revolutionary activities . The group had to go under the cover of the Illuminati .
 He set up 23 subordinate councils in strategic places throughout the world, including five Grand Central Directories in Washington, DC, Montevideo, Naples, Calcutta, and Mauritius .
 All of these branches have been the secret headquarters for the Illuminati's activities ever since . The Illuminati's secret headquarters have been in these branches since the Illuminati was founded .
 "With regard to our brothers in Masonry, these men must be pledged to the strictest secrecy," he said .
 The first world war was to enable communistic atheism to destroy the czarist government in Russia . The war was designed to enable the czars to destroy their government .
 Second world war was to begin by pitting Great Britain against Germany, in order to destroy Naziism, and advance the cause of Zionism, so that Israel could become a nation . The second world war would be to end Naziism and destroy the Naziism .
 At the Potsdam Conference, Russia was given a chunk of Europe, and that helped to sweep the tide of Communism into China . After this war, Communism was to be made strong enough to begin taking over weaker governments, in 1945 .
 The plan also called for a third world war, which is to be ignited by firing up the aggression between the Zionists and the Arab world . The Arab world will destroy each other, bringing the rest of the world into a final conflict .
 This conflict will be engineered to produce complete social, political, and economic chaos . Out of this chaos, out of which will emerge an llluminati-controlled world government . The world will be governed by the lll Illuminati .
 For a short time, this letter, had been on display in the British Museum Library in London . It was on display at the time of the letter .
 After Mazzini's death, Pike appointed Adriano Lemmi, a banker from Florence, Italy, to run their subversive activities in Europe . Pike appointed Lemmi to run the group's subversive activities .
 Lemmi was a supporter of Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Garibaldi . Lemmi may have been active in the Luciferian Society founded by Pike . He may have supported the Italian revolutionary .
 Rothschilds found out early, that when you control the money, you basically control everything else . The Rothschilds had a history of controlling the world's finances .
 While their political plans were being thwarted, they began to concentrate on tightening their grip on the financial structure of the world . So, while their political . plans were thwarted, . they began . to tighten their grip .
 In the mid 1700's the Colonies were prospering because they were issuing their own money, called Colonial Scrip, which was strictly regulated, and didn't require the payment of any interest . In the 17th century, Colonial money was issued by the colonies, and was regulated .
 When the bankers in Great Britain heard this, the British Parliament passed a law prohibiting the currency, forcing them to accept the debt money issued by them . The British parliament passed the law, forcing the banks to accept it .
 Contrary to what history teaches, the American Revolution was not ignited by a tax on tea . Instead, it was sparked by a tea tax . The tea tax was introduced in 1777 .
 After Great Britain tried to destroy and control the currency of our new country, Congress realized the danger of fiat, or paper money created by law . The danger of paper money was realized by Congress .
 Paper money had been issued to finance the war in 1775 . Independent state legislatures passed laws requiring citizens to accept it as legal tender . Paper money was issued to pay for the war .
 Since it was created from nothing, inflation developed . Since it is not backed by any precious metal, inflation has developed . Inflation developed .
 Alexander Hamilton immigrated to the colonies in 1772 from Nevis, on the Leeward Islands in the British West Indies . Alexander Hamilton was an Illuminist, and agent of European bankers, and had immigrated from the colony of Nevis .
 Hamilton and Robert Morris convinced Congress not to take this power literally . Bank of North America was established in 1781 .
 At the time, America had a foreign debt of $12,000 (in money borrowed from Spain, France, Holland, and private interests in Germany) at the time of the war . America had $42,000 in debt, and a domestic debt of nearly $50,000
 Hamilton urged the Congress to charter a privately owned company to have the sole responsibility of issuing currency . Hamilton favored Central Banking in 1790 .
 His Plan called for Congress to create a Central Banking system, with a main office in Philadelphia, and smaller branches located in important cities throughout the country .
 It would be used to deposit government funds and tax collections, and to issue bank notes to increase the money supply needed to finance the country's growth .
 It would be administered by a President, and 25 Board of Directors, with 20 to be elected by the stockholders, and 5 appointed by the government . It would also have 25 Board members, 20 elected by stockholders .
 Central Banking was initiated by international banker William Paterson in 1691 . He obtained the Charter for the Bank of England, which put control of England's money in a privately owned company .
 One of their first transactions was to loan 1. million pounds at 8% interest to William of Orange to help the king pay the cost of his war with Louis XIV of France . One of the first transactions to be made was to help William pay for his war .
 If we run into such debts, we be taxed in our meat and our drink, in our necessities and in our comforts, says the author of the book .
 Washington signed the Bill into law on February 25, 1791 . Alexander Hamilton became a very rich man . Thomas Jefferson and James Madison opposed the Bill .
 It would later be controlled by Warburg-Kuhn-Loeb interests, and in 1955 it merged with Rockefeller's Chase Bank to create the Chase Manhattan Bank .
 When Jefferson became President, he opposed the bank as being unconstitutional, and when the 20 year charter came up for renewal in 1811, it was denied .
 This brought on the War of 1812, our second war with England, which facilitated the rechartering of the Bank of the U.S. Bank . War of the 1812 led to the re-opening of the bank of the United States .
 On May 10,1816, President James Madison signed the Bill which created the second Bank of the U.S. The bill was signed by James Madison .
 Inflation, heavy debt, and the unavailability of an entity to collect taxes, were some of the reasons given for its rechartering .
 The new charter allowed it to operate another 20 years, raised its capital stock to $35 million . It also authorized the creation of bank branches, and the issuing of notes with denominations no smaller than $5.00 .
 Congress had implied power to create the Bank, according to Mason (Mason), who said that Congress had the implied power of creating the Bank .
 People began to see how much power the Bank really had, and the voter backlash led to the election of Andrew Jackson as President in 1828 . Andrew Jackson was elected President of the U.S. in 1827 .
 After fiscal mismanagement by its first President, former Secretary of the Navy, Captain William Jones, the Bank was forced to call in loans and foreclosed on mortgages, which caused bankruptcy, price collapse, unemployment and a depression .
 The Bank began to flourish under its new President, financier Nicholas Biddle, who petitioned Congress for a renewal of the Bank's Charter in 1832, four years before its current charter expired .
 He ordered the Secretary of the Treasury to remove all Government deposits from U.S. banks and deposit them in state banks . He also ordered all government deposits from United States Banks to be deposited in states .
 On January 8,1835, Jackson paid off the final installment on our national debt . It was the only time in history that the national debt was reduced to zero . $35 million of that was distributed to the States .
 Boston Post compared it to Christ throwing the money-changers out of the Temple . The Boston Post said it was like Christ throwing money out of Temple .
 The Bank continued to operate until 1836, and it was used by Biddle to wreak havoc upon the economy . Biddle reduced loans and increased the quantity of money .
 The censure was later reversed by the Senate in 1837 . Chapter Two says that he did it because of the ""abuses and corruptions" of the Bank .
 President John Tyler vetoed two bills in 1841 that would have rechartered the Bank of the United States . Tyler vetoed the bills . Tyler vetoed two bills to rechartate the bank .
 In 1829, as a 15-year-old, he started working for the bank in Frankfurt, Germany . He proved himself to be a financial genius .
 In 1832, he was promoted to the Bank at Naples, so he could be fully integrated into international banking . He was promoted in 1832 to become fully integrated with international banking.
 His mission was to stir up financial trouble within the southern banks . He was in charge of stirring up financial problems within the banks . The banks were hit hard by the financial crisis .
 'They had to create an incident which would allow the establishment of a Central Bank, and that had to be a war' 'War' was the reason for the Central Bank to be established, he says . War is expensive, and governments have to borrow to pay for it, he
 Canada and Mexico, weren't strong enough, as evidenced by Santa Anna's defeat in Texas the year before . England and France were too far away, and Russia wasn't under their control; so they decided to ""divide and conquer" by fermenting a conflict between the North and
 The North was to become a British Colony, annexed to Canada, and controlled by Lionel Rothschild . The South was to be given to Napoleon III of France, controlled by James Rothschild, while the North was given to the South .
 Bickley used slavery to spread racial tension from state to state, using slavery as an issue . The author of the book, "Slavery," is credited with spreading racial tension across the country .
 The Ku Klux Klan, formed in 1867, were the military arm of the Knights of Klansmen . The Knights of Knights formed in the KKK in the early 1800s .
 The states which seceded, united into the Confederate States of America . If the South would win, each state would be like an independent country . The states maintained their independence .
 He had coastal ports blockaded to keep supplies from being shipped in from Europe . He had blockaded ports in order to stop the flow of supplies .
 Chapter Two was commissioned to sell bond issues, arranging with Belmont to sell Union bonds in Europe .
 Judah P Benjamin of the law firm of Slidell, Benjamin and Conrad, in Louisiana, was a Rothschild agent . He became Secretary of State for the Confederacy in 1862 .
 Slidell's daughter was married to Baron Frederick D'Erlanger, in Frankfurt, who was related to the Rothschilds, and acted on behalf of them . Slidell was a member of the family who acted for their interests .
 Slidell was the representative of the South who borrowed money from the D'Erlangers to finance the Confederacy . Slidell loaned the money to fund the Confederacy from Slidell . The money was used for the Confederacy's funding by the South .
 In 1862, English, French and Spanish troops landed at Veracruz, Mexico, supposedly to collect on debts owed them by Mexico . Towards the end of 1861, England sent 8,000 troops to Canada, and in 1862, English, French, Spanish and French troops landed
 On June 10,1863, French General ElieFrederic Forey took over Mexico City . Forey, with the help of 30,000 additional French troops, took control of most of the country . General Forey was a French general .
 Confederates offered states of Louisiana and Texas to Napoleon III if he would send his troops against the North . Czar Alexander II in Russia discovered that the Confederates had offered the states to Napoleon .
 Russia had already indicated their support for Lincoln, but wanted something more . Russia wanted to send their large navy to defend the country . Russia has already indicated they support Lincoln .
 On January 1,1863, Lincoln issued his Emancipation Proclamation to free the slaves, just as the Czar had done with the serfs in 1861 . Lincoln issued the proclamation as a gesture of goodwill .
 On February and March, 1862, and March 1863, Lincoln received Congressional approval to borrow $450 million from the people by selling them bonds, or ""greenbacks""", to pay for the Civil War .
 They were not redeemable until 1865, when three could be exchanged for one in silver . They were exchanged for three in silver, and were not redeemed until 1864 .
 Lincoln solved America's monetary crisis without the help of the International Bankers . Lincoln solved the crisis without help from the international bankers .
 "It will become prosperous beyond precedent in the history of the civilized governments of the world," says President Obama . "The world will be prosperous beyond anything beyond precedent," he says .
 "They understood at once, that the United States would escape their grip. They understood that they understood that the U.S. would escape them."
 Before the Lincoln administration, private commercial banks were able to issue paper money called state bank notes . That ended with the National Banking Act of 1863, which prohibited states from creating money .
 A forerunner of the Federal Reserve Act, it began the movement to abolish redeemable currency . The act was a forerunner to the federal Reserve Act . It was the first attempt to abolish the idea of redeemable currencies .
 A system of private banks were to receive charters from the federal government which would give them the authorization to issue National Bank Notes . Private banks would be given permission to issue bank notes .
 This gave banks the power to control the finances and credit of the country, and provided centralized banking, under Federal control, in times of war . The banks were given the power of the government to control finances, credit and credit .
 Salmon P Chase, Secretary of the Treasury under Lincoln, said that his role in promoting the passage of the National Banking Act was the greatest financial mistake of my life . Chase said that he was responsible for the National Bank Act's passage .
 It has built up a monopoly which affects every interest in the country, it has been claimed . It has been built up by the government, it is said .
 It is more despotic than monarchy, more insolent than autocracy, more selfish than bureaucracy . It is 'more despotic' than monarchy and 'insulting' than autocrisy, it is said .
 "I see in the near future a crisis approaching that unnerves me and causes me to tremble for the safety of my country," says President Obama . "A crisis approaching" is "nervous" says Obama .
 Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth on April 14,1865, and Seward was shot that same day . Seward's life was also threatened by Booth's assassination attempt .
 In 1866, an attempt was made to assassinate Czar Alexander II, and in 1881, the Czar was killed by an exploding bomb . Alexander II was assassinated by an assassination attempt in 1866 and 1881 .
 In Booth's trunk, coded messages were found in the trunk of his trunk . The key to that code was found among the possessions of Judah Benjamin .
 It was always known that Lincoln's death was the result of a massive conspiracy . Lincoln was assassinated in 1865 . Lincoln's assassination was a massive political assassination .
 Chapter Two found the 18 pages that were removed from Booth's diary, which revealed the names of 70 people who were directly or indirectly involved in Booth's original plan to kidnap Lincoln .
 Stanton's involvement in the conspiracy included Assistant Secretary of War; and Major Thomas Eckert, Chief of the War Department's Telegraph Office, also involved .
 Journals and coded papers by Colonel Lafayette C Baker, Chief of the National Detective Police, detailed Lincoln's kidnap and assassination conspiracy, and subsequent cover-up . The papers detail Lincoln's kidnapping and assassination .
 The plot included a group of Maryland farmers, Confederates, Northern Banking and Industrial interests . Radical Republicans wanted to control the southern states as military territories .
 All of these groups pooled their efforts, and used actor John Wilkes Booth . Booth is a Confederate patriot . Booth was a Confederate hero .
 The original plan called for the kidnapping of Lincoln, Vice President Andrew Johnson, and Secretary of State Seward . Lincoln, Seward, Lincoln, Andrew Johnson and Andrew Seward were kidnapped .
 The National Detective Police discovered their plans, and informed Stanton . Stanton's plans were discovered by the National Detective .
 Captain James William Boyd, a secret agent for the Confederacy, was a prisoner of war in the Old Capitol Prison . Boyd was used by the National Detective Police to report on the activities of the prisoners, and to inform on crooked guards . He was used to spy on the prison guards .
 Boyd took over the Northern end of the conspiracy, which had been joined by the Police and the War Department . Stanton had him released, and Boyd took control of the Northern part of the plot . Stanton was released and Boyd was freed .
 The North wanted to kill Lincoln, while Booth wanted to kidnap him and use him as leverage to get Confederate prisoners of war released . Booth wanted Lincoln to be used as a prisoner of war . Booth used Lincoln's kidnapping to get the Confederate prisoners released .
 Booth failed twice in March, and then ended up shooting Lincoln at Ford's Theater . Booth failed to shoot Lincoln three times in March . Booth's shooting spree was the first time he had been shot .
 Boyd, warned that he could get implicated, planned to flee to Maryland . Boyd, who was warned he could be implicated, decided to flee the state . Boyd planned to move to Maryland to avoid prosecution .
 Boyd Boyd was the one who was shot at Garrett's farm, and identified as Booth . Boyd was one of the two men killed in the shooting . Booth was the man who was identified as Boyd .
 The Police and Stanton discovered that it was really Boyd, after it was announced to the nation that it had been Booth . Booth's identity was revealed to the public after the announcement .
 The only picture taken of Boyd's dead body was found in Stanton's collection . Boyd's remains were found in the collection .
 Lafayette Baker was taken to the old Arsenal Penitentiary, where it was buried in an unknown place, under the concrete floor . Lafayette Baker's body was transported to the prison, but it was never found .
 Baker and Detectives Luther and Andrew Potter, knew the case wasn't closed, and had to find Booth to keep him from talking . Baker and Potter were able to get Booth to talk again .
 States, where in Enid, Oklahoma, he revealed his true identity on his deathbed . Chapter Two States .
 The mortician who was summoned, instead of burying the corpse, had it preserved, and it is still in existence today . Instead of burying it, the mortician preserved it and it was preserved .
 Baker broke off relations with Stanton, who was discharged from the Army, and as head of the Secret Service in 1866 . Baker broke up with Stanton after he was discharged .
 In 1867, in his book, the History of the United States Secret Service, he admitted delivering Booth's diary to Stanton . In another occasion, he testified that the diary was intact when it was in his possession .
 This means Stanton removed the pages to facilitate a cover-up, because the pages were found in his collection . This means that Stanton did remove the pages in order to cover up his actions . Stanton did not remove pages because they were in the collection of his books .
 Andrew Johnson issued the Amnesty Proclamation on May 29, 1865, to reunite the country . Andrew Johnson, who became President, issued the Proclamation .
 It stipulated that the South would not be responsible for the debt incurred, that all secession laws were to end, and that slavery was to be abolished . The South was to not be held responsible for debt incurred .
 Rothschilds, who heavily funded the south, lost alot of money . Needless to say, the Rothschilds lost lots of money.
 The cost of the support of the Russian fleet cost the country about $7. million . In addition, the country also spent $7 million to support the Russia fleet .
 Johnson didn't have the constitutional authority to give money to a foreign government, so arrangements were made to purchase Alaska from the Russians in April, 1867 .
 Seward purchased what was then a worthless piece of land, when in fact it was compensation for the Russian Navy . It was labeled as ""Seward's Folly" because it appeared that Seward had purchased what appeared to be worthless land . Seward bought the land for the
 In August, 1867, Johnson, failed in an attempt to remove Stanton from office, and impeachment proceedings were begun against him in February, 1868, by Stanton and the Radical Republicans . Stanton and his party attempted to remove him from office in 1867 .
 Johnson was charged with attempting to fire Stanton without Senate approval, for treason against Congress, and public language ""indecent and unbecoming"" as the nation's leader .
 Benjamin F Wade, President pro tempore of the Senate, next in the line of Presidential succession, was so sure that Johnson would be impeached, that he already had his Cabinet picked . Wade was so confident that he had already picked his Cabinet for President Johnson .
 Lafayette Baker, who threatened to reveal the conspiracy, was slowly poisoned till he died in 1868 . Lafayette Baker was poisoned by the plot to poison him .
 Chapter Two succeeded in establishing itself, and they had elected governors and congressmen . Chapter Two was founded in 1881 .
 They advocated a progressive income tax, for railroads, communications, and corporations to be regulated by the Federal government . They also called for government mediation to stabilize falling commodity prices, and for the initiation of credit programs .
 They were against the gold standard, and the country's private banking system, which was centered at Wall Street . They were also against the government's gold standard and the private banking .
 They were impressed with Lincoln's ""greenbacks" because of its ability to adapt in order to meet the credit needs of the economy . Lincoln's 'greenbacks' were able to adapt to meet credit needs .
 They wanted the money supply to be controlled by their elected representatives, not the money interests of Wall Street, they said . They said they wanted to control money supply by elected representatives .
 In 1896, the Populists hitched their wagon to the campaign of William Jennings Bryan, who lost to McKinley, effectively ending the movement . And in 1896, they hitched . to the . campaign of Democrat William Jennings . Bryan .
 This political movement created the initial stirrings for what eventually became the Federal Reserve Act . The Fed Act was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 The end of the Civil War in 1865, ruined the Illuminati's chances to control our monetary system, as they did in most European countries . The Federal Reserve Act was passed in 1864 .
 Instead of tearing down from the top, they were going to start at the bottom to disrupt the foundation of our monetary system . The U.S. has been in the midst of a financial crisis in recent years .
 The instrument of this destruction was a young immigrant by the name of Jacob Schiff, the author of the book, Schiff .
 Schiff family traced their lineage back to the fourteenth century . Schiff family even claimed that King Solomon was an ancestor of King Solomon .
 Moses Schiff's father, Moses Schiff, was a successful stockbroker on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange . Moses Schiff is a rabbi and a former stock broker on the German stock exchange .
 In 1865, he came to America, and in 1867, formed his own brokerage firm with Henry Budge and Leo Lehmann . He came to the U.S. in 1865 and founded his own firm .
 Kuhn and Loeb were German Jews who had come to the United States in the late 1840's . They pooled their resources to start a store in Lafayette, Indiana, to serve settlers who were on their way to the West .
 Later, they added pawn broking and money lending to their business pursuits . Later, the business expanded into pawnbroking, money lending and pawn lending .
 He became a millionaire by financing railroads . He entered into a partnership with Edward Henry Harriman to create the greatest single railroad fortune in the world .
 He married Solomon Loeb's oldest daughter, Theresa, and eventually bought out Kuhn's interest . Kuhn bought out his interest in the company .
 For all intents and purposes, he was the sole owner of what was now known as Kuhn, Loeb and Company . He was now owned by Kuhn and Loeb .
 Robert L Owen of Oklahoma indicated that Kuhn, Loeb and Company was a representative of the Rothschilds in the U.S. in the US .
 Schiff was rapidly becoming a major influence by distributing desirable European stock and bond issues during the Industrial Revolution . John Pierpont Morgan, the top American Rothschild representative, was the head of the American financial world .
 Edward H Harriman financed Standard Oil for John D Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie's steel empire . Andrew Carnegie was also involved in Standard Oil .
 By the turn of the century, Schiff was firmly entrenched in the banking community . Schiff was ready to fulfill his role as the point man in the Illuminati's plan to control our economic system, weaken Christianity, create racial tension, and to recruit members to get them elected to Congress .
 In 1636, Miles, John, and James Morgan landed in Massachusetts, leaving their father, William, to carry on the family business of harness-making in England . William Morgan died in 1636 .
 Joseph Morgan, successful in real estate and business, supported the Bank of the United States . Morgan was a successful businessman and real estate developer .
 In 1863, he liquidated, and became a partner with Charles H Dabney, and established a firm known as Dabneys, Morgan and Co. He established the firm in 1863, and liquidated in 1863 .
 He later teamed up with Anthony J Drexel(son of the founder of the most influential banking house in Philadelphia), in a firm known as Drexel, Morgan and Co. He later joined Anthony J. Drexels in the banking house known as Drexle,
 In 1869, Morgan and Drexel met with the Rothschilds in London, and began consolidating their influence in the U.S. The Northern Securities Corporation consolidated the Rothschild's power in the United States .
 Morgan continued the partnership that began when his father acted as a joint agent for the Rothschilds and the U.S. government . Morgan continued to work with the Rothschild family and the government .
 Researchers believe the Illuminati controlled the company through these shares . Researchers believe that these shares were controlled by the Illuminati .
 P. Morgan, with the assistance and cooperation of a few of the interlocking corporations which reach all over the United States in their influence, controls every railroad .
 "They control practically every public utility, they control literally thousands of corporations," they control all of the large insurance companies, they say . They control virtually every public . utility, corporations, and insurance companies . The United States is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 They have four branch offices, and foreign offices, in London, Paris, Brussels, Frankfurt, Rome, and Tokyo .
 Paul Moritz Warburg, and his brother Felix, came to the United States from Frankfurt in 1902 . They bought into Kuhn, Loeb and Co. with the financial backing of the Rothschilds . Warburg and Warburg bought into the partnership of Kuhn and Loeb with
 Warburg and Co., a Rothschildallied bank in Frankfurt, Hamburg, and Amsterdam, was founded in 1798 by their great-grandfather . Warburg & Co. was founded by the Warburg brothers in Frankfurt and Amsterdam .
 Paul married Nina Loeb, the daughter of Solomon Loeb; Felix, in March, 1895, married Frieda Schiff, daughter of Jacob Schiff . Paul, in April, 1896, was married to Nina Schiff; Felix in March 1895, 1895 .
 Max, a major financier of the Russian Revolution, helped Lenin cross Germany into Russia in a sealed train . His brother Max ran the Hamburg bank until 1938, when the Nazis took over .
 The Nazis, who didn't want the Jews running the banks, changed its name to Brinckmann, Wirtz and Co. The Nazis also changed the name to the banks . The banks were later known as the Bank of Austria . The bank's name was changed to Br
 Warburg and Co. took over Seligman Brothers' Bank in 1956 . Warburg & Co. in London, bought Warburg's Bank in 1950s . By 1956, Warburg had taken over the Seligmans' Bank and taken it over .
 The Warburgs are another example of how the Illuminati controls both sides of a war . The Warburys are another good example of the Illuminati controlling both sides .
 Paul and Felix Warburg were sent to Washington by the Rothschilds to lobby for a central banking law in Congress . Paul Warburg was one of the men with a mission, sent with a message to the U.S. Congress . The Warburg brothers are now in the process of
 In 1903, Paul Warburg gave Schiff a memo describing the application of the European central banking system to America's monetary system . The memo was given to Schiff by Warburg in 1903 . Warburg's memo was published in 1903 in New York .
 In 1891, he studied French banking methods; and from 1892-93, traveled the world to study central banking applications . In 1892, he traveled to France to study banking methods .
 "The bottom line, was that he was the foremost authority in the world on central banking," says David Cameron .
 The fifth plank in the 1848 Communist Manifesto had to do with central banking . It is interesting to note, that the fifth plank of the document was the central banking plank .
 Walter Burns, Clinton Dawkins, Edward Grenfell, Willard Straight, Thomas Lament, Dwight Morrow, Nelson Perkins, Russell Leffingwell, Elihu Root, John W Davis, John Foster Dulles, S Parker Gilbert, and Paul D Cravath .
 The financial panics were initiated by Morgan with the intent of pushing for a much stronger banking system . The panics of 1873,1884,1893,1907, and later 1920 were started by Morgan .
 When Morgan initiated the economic panic in 1907, by circulating rumors that the Knickerbocker Bank and Trust Co. of America was going broke, there was a run on the banks, creating a financial crisis . The crisis began to solidify support for a central banking system .
 During this panic, Warburg wrote an essay called ""A Plan for a Modified Central Bank"" which called for a Central Bank, in which 50% would be owned by the government, and 50% by the nation's banks . Warburg called for the government to own 50% of
 Schiff laid out the final plans to seize the American monetary system in 1908 . Schiff wrote in 1908 that he wanted to seize control of the U.S. currency system .
 Colonel Edward Mandell House, the son of British financier Thomas W House, made his fortune by supplying the south with supplies from France and England during the Civil War . Bernard Baruch, whose stock market speculating made him a multi-millionaire by the early 1900's,
 Nelson W. Aid rich (father-in-law of John D Rockefeller, Jr. and grandfather of Nelson and David Rockefeller) proposed a bill in which banks, in an emergency situation, would issue currency backed by federal, state, local government bonds, and railroad bonds .
 It was harshly criticized because it didn't provide a monetary system that would respond to the seasonal demand, and fluctuate with the volume of trade . It was criticized for not providing a system that could respond to seasonal demand .
 Aldrich was the most powerful man in Congress, and the Illuminati's head man in the Senate . Aldrich is the head of the Senate, and was most powerful in Congress . He was also the head man of the Illuminati .
 A member of Congress for 40 years, 36 of them in the Senate, he was Chairman of the powerful Senate Finance Committee . He was a member of the Senate for 36 years .
 Joseph Cannon, at a meeting in a hotel room at the Arlington House, his bill became known as the Vreeland Substitute . Cannon's bill was known as "Vreeland Subitute"
 It called for the acceptance of asset currency, but only in emergency, only in cases of emergency . Currency would be based on commercial paper rather than bonds .
 The Aldrich-Vreeland Bill, called the Emergency Currency Act, was passed on May 30,1908 . The bill led to the creation of the National Monetary Commission, which was made up of members of Congress .
 Any monetary legislation sent to Congress, would have to go through this group first . Now, any monetary legislation would need to go to Congress .
 Bill approved by the National Monetary Commission was known as the Aldrich Bill . It formed the legislative base for the Federal Reserve Act . The Aldrich Act was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 It was introduced as an amendment to the Republican sponsored Payne-Aldrich Tariff Bill, in order to have Republican support . The bill was introduced in a bid to get Republican support in the Senate .
 It was based on Warburg's plan, except it would only have 15 districts . Half of the directors on the district level would be chosen by the banks, a third by the stockholders, and a sixth by the other directors . Half would choose their districts by the bank or stock
 Warburg called for a United Reserve Bank to be located in Washington, D.C., having the capital of $100 million . Aldrich was appointed as head of the National Monetary Commission, which studied the central banking system .
 The system would be controlled by a Board of Directors, chosen by the banking associations, stockholders, and the government . The country would be divided into 20 districts, with the system controlled by the Board .
 Warburg said that the U.S. monetary system wasn't flexible, and it was unable to compensate for the rise and fall of business demand . Warburg: The U S. currency system isn't flexible and it's unable to cope with the rising and falling demand .
 Farmer: Farmers would sell grain for whatever they could get for grain when it was harvested . Farmer: When grain was harvested, merchants didn't have cash on hand to buy and store a large supply of grain .
 This would cause the price of wheat to greatly fluctuate, forcing the farmer to take a loss . This would mean the farmer took a loss on the sale of wheat .
 Warburg called for the development of commercial paper to circulate as currency, which would be issued in standard denominations of uniform sizes . Warburg: Commercial paper would circulate in standard denomination of uniform size .
 They would be declared by law to be legal tender for the payment of debts and taxes . The money would be used to pay debts and tax bills .
 On November 22,1910, Aldrich called a meeting of the banking establishment and members of the National Monetary Commission . The commission was proposed by Henry P Davison .
 All those summoned to the secret meeting, were members of the Illuminati . The meeting was held in secret .
 They met on a railroad platform in Hoboken, New Jersey, where they chartered a private railroad car owned by Aldrich to Georgia . Aldrich and Aldrich chartered the car to Georgia on a private train .
 They were taken by boat to Jekyll Island, off the coast of Brunswick, Georgia . They were then taken to the island .
 Simons, Tybee, Cumberland, Wassau, Wolf, Blackbeard, Sapelo, Osselo, and Sea Islands . Blackbeard was a pirate .
 Eugene du Bignon bought Harvard Business School for $125,000 . William Rockefeller, Cyrus McCormick, William Rockefeller , William K Vanderbilt, George F Baker, William K. Vanderbilt, and George F. Baker founded the school with a gift of $5 million .
 Up until the time it was converted into a public resort, no uninvited foot ever stepped on its shores . The island is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
 Simons Island, a short distance away, to the north, was also owned by Illuminati interests . Simons is a short . distance away from the island .
 Those attending the meeting at the private hunting lodge were said to be on a duckhunting expedition .
 They were sworn to secrecy, even addressing each other by code names or just by their first names . They would swear to secrecy even though they were sworn in secrecy .
 Two versions of a central banking system were created to confuse the opposition . Ten days later, they emerged with the groundwork for the system, in the form of, not one, but two versions .
 The banker-initiated mini-depressions, the last of which had occurred in 1907, helped get Congressional support for the Bill . The National Citizens League for the Promotion of a Sound Banking System, an Illuminati front-organization, publicly announced their support for Aldrich's
 The Illuminati went to Plan B, which was the second version hammered out at the Jekyll Island summit . Plan B was the original version of the original plan .
 The National Citizens League publicly withdrew their support of the Aldrich Bill . The move was on to disguise it, so that it could get through Congress . The Aldrich bill was passed by Congress .
 President Taft would veto it, so they had to wait until they could get their own man elected . Once the new version was ready, they were a little apprehensive about introducing it in Congress, because .
 The Democrats, with the exception of Grover Cleveland's election, had been out of power since 1869 . The Democrats were out of office in 1869, but had been in office since 1868 .
 During the late 1800's, they began the process of changing the Democrats from conservative to liberal, and the Republicans, from liberal to conservative . During the 1800s, the Democrats began to change the Republicans from a liberal to a conservative .
 He taught Political Science and History at Bryn Mawr and Wesleyan . In 1902, he became President of Princeton .
 Because of his support of Aldrich's Bill, when it was first announced, he was supported by the Illuminati in his successful bid to become Governor of New Jersey in 1910 .
 The deal was made through Vanderlip agents, William Rockefeller and James Stillman, at Vanderlip's West Chester estate .
 In March, 1917, he will be inaugurated for the second time as President . He was inaugurated as President of Russia in March 1917 .
 Wise, who made this prophetic statement in 1910, later became a close advisor to Wilson . Wise later became an advisor to the president of the United States .
 He had good reason to believe what he said, because the deal had already been struck . The deal was struck, and the deal was already in place .
 The main problem of the Democrats, was the Republican voting edge, and the lack of money, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The Democrats' main problem was the Republicans' lack of a strong voting edge .
 After the Illuminati made the decision to support Wilson, money was no problem . After the decision, money would be no problem for the Illuminati, Wilson said .
 The Illuminati was working on the voter registration edge, but that was a project that they were working on . The problem of voter registration was a bit more difficult, but the Illuminati was able to do it .
 The Russian pogroms of 1881 and 1882, in which thousands of Russians were killed; and religious persecution and anti-semitism in Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria in the early 1890's, began three decades of immigration into the United States by thousands of Jews .
 It was the Democrats who initiated a program to get them registered to vote . Democrats say it's a good way to get people registered for the vote .
 Humanitarian committees were set up by Schiff and the Rothschilds, such as the Hebrew Immigration Aid Society, and the B'nai B'rith . When the Jews arrived, they were made naturalized citizens, registered Democrat, then shuffled off to other large cities .
 This is how the Jews became a solid Democratic voting bloc, and it was these votes that would be needed to elect Wilson to the Presidency .
 In 1912, President Taft was running for re-election against Wilson . The Illuminati needed some insurance for Taft, who was running against Wilson in 1912 .
 Former Republican President Theodore Roosevelt ran on the Progressive ticket . Roosevelt ran for the Progressive Party in 1912 . Roosevelt was a Democrat and Republican .
 Taft was chosen by Roosevelt to succeed him as President . Taft had served as Roosevelt's Secretary of War . He was chosen to succeed Roosevelt as President of the United States .
 A recent example of the same plan that pulled votes away from Taft, in order to get Wilson elected, occurred in the 1992 Presidential election .
 In a 1994 interview, Barbara Bush told ABC-TV news correspondent Barbara Walters, that the third-party candidacy of independent H Ross Perot was the reason Bill Clinton was able to defeat President George Bush .
 Second version of the Bill prepared at Jekyll Island was to be an alternative, so public attention was turned against the Aldrich Bill . Remember, the second version was intended to be a alternative .
 An aristocrat, having socialistic views, was in favor of an independent reserve system, because he didn't trust the ""common men" which made up Congress . Wilson promised to free the poor people of America from control by the rich .
 Chapter Two already announced their opposition to the Aldrich Bill, now Wall Street banking interests had come out against the Glass Bill . The Glass Bill was actually a disguise . Chapter Two had already announced .
 The threat from this powerful private banking system was to be ended with the establishment of a central bank . The central bank was to end the threat from private banking by establishing it .
 Wilson proposed a special session of the 63rd Congress to be convened to vote on the Federal Reserve Act . Wilson himself suggested that the regional banks be called "Federal Reserve Banks"
 On June 23,1913, 1913, he addressed the Congress on the subject of the Federal Reserve . He threatened to keep them in session until they passed it, threatening to keep Congress in session .
 The Glass Bill was introduced in the House of Representatives on June 26, 1913 . It was the first Glass Bill to be introduced in Congress in 1913 .
 The revision mentioned nothing about central banking, which was what the people feared . The revision was not what people feared, it was what they feared .
 It was referred to the Banking and Currency Committee, reported back to the House on September 9th, and passed on September 18th . The House passed the bill on September 17th .
 The Senate Banking and Finance Committee drafted a Bill which was more open-minded to the suggestions of the bankers . Robert Latham Owen of Oklahoma, Chairman of the Senate Banking & Finance Committee, drafted the Bill .
 Gilbert M Hitchcock, a Democrat from Nebraska, called for the elimination of the ""lawful money" provision . Hitchcock stipulated that note redemption must be made in gold . Hitchcock called for an end to the provision, and stipulated note redemption would be in gold.
 It also provided for public ownership of the regional reserve banks, which would be controlled by the government . The government would also have control over the regional banks .
 In the Senate, the Glass Bill was reported back to the Senate on November 22,1913 . The Glass Bill passed the Senate Banking Committee in 1913 .
 Owen, who opposed the Aldrich Bill, made some additional revisions, in an attempt to keep them from completely dominating our monetary system . Owen made additional revisions to the original version of the original bill .
 The Conference Committee was stacked with six Democrats and only two Republicans . It was established to ensure that certain portions of the original Bill would remain intact .
 An hour after the Senate vote, Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act into law, and the Illuminati had taken control of the American economy .
 Gold and silver in the nation's vaults were now owned by the Federal Reserve . The gold and silver was now owned in the U.S. vaults .
 Baron Alfred Charles Rothschild masterminded the entire scheme, then made plans to further weaken our country's financial structure . Baron Rothschild made plans for further weakening our country’s financial structure, he said . Baron Alfred . Charles Rothschild, who masterminded . the entire . scheme, Baron Alfred
 William Jennings Bryan played a major role in gaining support for the Federal Reserve Act . Carter Glass and Carter Glass were given the credit for getting the bill through Congress .
 Reserve Bank Organization Committee was given $100,000 to find locations for the regional Reserve Banks . Committee controlled by Secretary of the Treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo, and Secretary of Agriculture David F Houston . Committee later became Treasury Secretaries .
 On October 25,1914, the formal establishment of the Federal Reserve System was announced . It began operating in 1915 . The Federal Reserve system was established in 1914 .
 Administrator revealed the manner in which Wilson was controlled by the government . Administrator .
 Communist Manifesto: Inflatable currency and graduated income tax were two of the ten points in the communist Manifesto for socializing a country . Incidentally, a central bank providing inflatable currency and a graduated tax were among the points of the manifesto .
 House hand-picked the first Federal Reserve Board . Benjamin Strong was named the Chairman of the first board .
 In 1914, Paul M Warburg quit his $500,000 a year job at Kuhn, Loeb and Co. to be on the Board, later resigning in 1918, because of his German connections . In 1918, during World War I, he resigned because he had German
 The Banking Act of 1935 amended the Federal Reserve Act, changing its name to Federal Reserve System, and reorganizing it in respect to the number of directors and length of term .
 This group decides whether or not to buy and sell government securities on the open market . It decides whether to buy or sell government bonds on the market .
 The Government buys and sells government securities, mostly through 21 Wall Street bond dealers, to create reserves to make the money needed to run the government . The Government makes the money through government securities .
 The Committee determines the supply of money available to the nation's banks and consumers . The Committee also determines the Supply of Money Available to Banks and Consumers .
 Each of the Banks have nine men on the Board of Directors . Six are elected by member Banks, and three are appointed by Board of Governors . Three of the nine members of the Board are appointed .
 Four out of ten commercial banks are members of the Federal Banks . All Federal Banks are members, and four out of every ten commercial banking branches are .
 The Federal Reserve System controls about 70% of the country's bank deposits . In whole, the Federal Reserve system controls the majority of deposits .
 Warren G Harding said in a 1921 Congressional inquiry, that the Reserve was a private banking monopoly . Harding was elected to the Presidency in 1920, and said in 1921, that it was a bank monopoly .
 His term was cut short in 1923, when he mysteriously died, leading to rumors that he was poisoned . His term in office ended in 1924, when his death was mysterious .
 When there appeared to be growing support for his son Charles to run for the Presidency, his grandson was kidnapped, and apparently killed . His grandson was apparently killed by his father's assassination .
 Every effort has been made by the Federal Reserve Board to conceal its powers, but the truth is the FED has usurped the government . The truth is that the Fed is usurping the government, the author says .
 The Federal Reserve is not part of the Federal Government, it is a privately held corporation owned by stockholders . Plain and simple, the Federal Reserve does not belong to the federal government .
 Only Congress has the right to issue money and regulate its value, so it's illegal for private interests to do so . Only Congress can issue money, regulate it and issue it .
 Class A stockholders were to be kept a secret, and not to be revealed . Yet it happened, and because of a provision in the Act, it happened . Yet, it was not revealed .
 Rockefeller's National City Bank had 30,000 shares; Morgan's First National Bank had 15,000 . Chase National, Chase National National, 6,000 Shares; and National Bank of Commerce, 21,000 Shareholders . Rockefeller's national bank of Commerce had 21,500 shares .
 National City Bank of Cleveland, First City National Bank of Houston, and Seattle First National Bank, are among the banks from Cleveland, Houston and Seattle .
 Each year, billions of dollars are ""earned"" by Class A stockholders, from U.S. tax dollars which go to the FED to pay interest on bank loans .
 The history of the two metals used for currency is shown below . The two metals have been used in currency for over 100 years .
 The Coinage Act of 1792 established a dollar consisting of 371.25 grains of pure silver, but was later replaced with a gold dollar with 25 grains of gold . The Act was passed in 1792, and the silver dollar was replaced with the gold .
 In 1873, the Coinage Act was passed, prohibiting the use of Silver as a form of currency, because the quantity being discovered was driving the value down . Silver was found to be worth less than half the value of the Silver .
 The U.S. was put more firmly on the gold standard by the Gold Standard Act of 1900 . In 1875, after temporarily suspending gold convertibility during the Civil War greenback period, the U. S. temporarily suspended gold convertibles . The act was passed by Congress in
 President Franklin D Roosevelt accepted the advice of England's leading economist, John Maynard Keynes, a member of the Illuminati, who said that deficit spending would be a shot in the arm to the economy .
 Most of the New Deal spending programs to fight economic depression, were based on Keynes theories on deficit spending, and financed by borrowing against future taxes . Most of New Deal programs were funded by borrowing from future taxes against the future .
 A Presidential Executive Order by Roosevelt on April 5,1933, required all the people to exchange their gold coins, gold bullion, and gold-backed currency, for money that was not redeemable in precious metals . The order was issued in 1933 .
 The Gold Reserve Act of 1934, known as the Thomas Amendment, made it illegal to possess any gold currency . The Thomas Amendment amended the Act of May 12,1933, to make it illegal for possessing any gold .
 Gold coinage was withdrawn from circulation, and kept in the form of bullion . Gold was withdrawn in favour of keeping it in a form of silver .
 The people received $20.67 an ounce in paper money issued by the Federal Reserve . However, the Reserve was paid in Gold Certificates .
 In 1934, the value of gold increased to $35 an ounce, which produced a $3 billion profit for the Government . Chapter Two: Gold produced $35 per ounce, producing a $35 billion profit in 1934 .
 When the price of gold increases, the value of the dollar decreases . The value of gold in the United States is dependent on the strength of gold .
 In 1974, our dollar was worth 221/2 cents, and in 1983 it was only 38 cents . In 1983, the dollar was only worth 38 cents, according to the Daily Mail .
 When the value of the dollar decreased, more money was printed . Since our money supply had been limited to the amount of gold in Treasury reserves, we had to print more .
 The first United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference was held in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, from July 1 to July 22,1944 . Harry Dexter Wnite established the policies of the International Monetary Fund .
 Its goals were to strip the U.S. of its gold reserves by giving it to other nations; and to merge with their industrial capabilities; and their economic, social, educational and religious policies; . To facilitate a one-world government, the group planned to give the United States
 Of the amount remaining, $12 billion was reserved by law for backing the paper money in circulation . Of the remaining $13 billion remaining, the money is still being used to back up paper money .
 Our money had been backed by a 25% gold reserve in accordance to a law that was passed in 1945, but it was rescinded in 1968 . Our money was backed by 25% of gold reserves in accordance with a law .
 The amount of gold slipped from 653. million troy ounces in 1957, to 311. million ounces in 1968 . The decline was due to sales to foreign banking institutions, sales to domestic producers and the buying and selling of gold on the world market .
 In August 1971, gold was used only for world trade, because foreign countries wouldn't accept U S dollars . In August, 1971, the U.S. dollar was only used to pay for international trade .
 Sources had indicated that the gold reserve had dropped to 264 million troy ounces in 1981 . As of November, 1981, sources said that the reserves had dropped .
 A complete audit was never done, so officially, nobody knows what has occurred . The U.S. Code, requires an annual physical inventory of our gold supply, but the audit never happened .
 Jesse Helms seemed to think that the OPEC nations have our gold, while others believe 70% of the world's gold supply is being held by the World Bank . The World Bank is dominated by the financial grip of the Rothschilds and the Rockefellers .
 counterfeit $5,000 and $10,000 Federal Reserve Notes have been used to steal U.S. gold reserves . I have received information from a gentleman in Michigan which indicates that counterfeit . Reserve Notes are being used as a way to steal United States gold .
 These notes are actually checks which are used to transfer ownership of large amounts of gold without actually moving the gold itself . Illegal to own, these notes are checks which can be used to move large sums of gold .
 Using public records, he shows serial numbers of the bills which were originally printed, and how there are now more in existence . The serial numbers are shown to show how the bills were printed in the 1930s .
 Some of it is American-owned, but most is owned by the central banks of other countries . Some of the world's largest central banks are owned by American banks .
 It is stored in separate cubicles, and from time to time, it is moved from one cubicle to another to satisfy international transactions .
 After March, 1964, Silver certificates were no longer convertible to Silver dollars . In March, 1968, near the conclusion of the Johnson Administration, the Silver backing of the dollar was removed .
 This was just like the Silver Certificate, which was guaranteed by a dollar in silver that was on deposit . The Silver Certificate is guaranteed by the deposit of silver on a dollar .
 The 1950 series bore the same information, but reduced it to three lines, and reduced the size of the type . The '50 series was the first of its kind, with three lines and three lines .
 Since 1933, the Reserve Reserve has been printing too much money, compared to the declining Gross National Product . The Reserve has printed too much since 1933 .
 GNP is the accumulated values of services and goods produced in the country . GNP was created in 2007 and 2008 . GNPs are accumulated values in the value of goods and services produced in each country .
 If the GNP is 4 %, then the money produced should only be about 5-6% . This insures enough money to keep the goods produced by the GNp in circulation .
 Additional social services, which are promised during election year rhetoric to gain votes, increase the Federal Budget, so more money is printed . Additional social programs are promised to increase the federal budget .
 Then the Government will cut the Budget, establish wage and price controls, he says . Then the government will establish wage, price controls and introduce price controls . The Government will then cut the budget and establish wage controls .
 The extra money in circulation decreases the value of the dollar, and prices go up . It also decreases the amount of money that's in circulation .
 Too much money in circulation causes inflation, and that is what the Reserve Reserve is doing . The Reserve is purposely printing too much money to destroy the economy, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the Reserve is creating too much inflation in order to destroy economy .
 On the other hand, if they would stop printing money, our economy would collapse, he says . On the one hand, he said: "If they stopped printing money ... it would collapse"
 The Reserve is responsible for setting the interest rate that member banks can borrow from the Reserve, thus controlling the interest rates of the entire country . The Reserve's interest rate is set by members of the Reserve .
 The Federal Reserve determines the amount of money needed, which is created by the International Bankers out of nothing . So what it boils down to, the Federal Reserve decides the money needed .
 Besides the face value, they charge the government 30 to produce each bill . The government charges each bill at face value .
 The Federal government pays the Reserve in bonds, and then pays the bonds off at a high rate of interest . The Reserve pays the Federal government in bonds in bonds .
 Federal interest interest will soon become the largest item in the Federal Budget . That interest will very soon become an interest in the government .
 Chapter Two scientifically brought down each year by 3-31/2% in order to allow wages to go up . Chapter Two is brought down by 3/31/3% each year . Chapter 2 was brought down every year by a percentage of less than 3% of the GDP .
 The reasoning behind this, was that the people were being made to think that they were getting more, when in fact they were really getting less . The people were made to believe that they had more, but they had less .
 Congress has also contributed to this process, by approving Federal Budgets, year after year, which requires printing of more money to finance the debt, which is now over $ 4,800,000,000 . The debt has now reached a record $4.8 billion .
 When Wilson was President, the debt was about $1 billion, and in 1974, it was $1 trillion . Wilson was in office at the time of the debt crisis . Wilson is now in office in Washington, DC .
 Charles G Binderup of Nebraska called for the Government to buy all the stock, and to create a new Board controlled by Congress to regulate the value of the currency and the volume of bank deposits .
 The Federal Open Market Committee decides the country's monetary policy . The committee is one of the most secret societies in the world .
 Patman has sought to force the FED to allow an independent audit, lessen the influence of the large banks, shorten the terms of the . FED Governors, expose it to regular Congressional review just like any other Federal agency, Patman says .
 In 1967, Patman tried to have them audited, and on January 22, 1971, introduced HR11, which would have altered its organization, diminishing much of its power . HR11 was introduced in 1971, and would have changed the organization .
 He was later removed from the Chairmanship of the House Banking and Currency Committee, which he held for years .
 Henry Gonzales of Texas introduced HR1470, that called for the repeal of the Federal Reserve Act . Gonzales was the first member of Congress to introduce the bill .
 The Federal Reserve System has never been audited . Their meetings, and minutes of those meetings, are not open to the public . The Fed has never audited the system .
 In 1967, Arthur Burns, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, said that an audit would threaten the independence of the Reserve . Arthur Burns said in 1967, an audit of the Fed would threaten its independence . The Federal Reserve has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 In 1979, after dismissing Secretary of Treasury, Michael Blumenthal, President Jimmy Carter offered the position to David Rockefeller, the CEO of Chase-Manhattan Bank, as did Nixon, but he turned it down . Nixon also offered the job to Rockefeller, who is now the American Illuminati chief .
 He turned down the nomination for the Chairmanship of the Federal Reserve Board . He also turned down a nomination to be the Chairman of the Fed .
 Volcker graduated from Princeton with a degree in Economics . He graduated from Harvard with a public administration degree in Public Administration .
 Nixon Administration official helped formulate policy that took us off the gold standard in 1971 . He and Treasury Secretary John Connally helped formulate the policy . Fort Knox had dwindling gold reserves at Fort Knox .
 Lance predicted that he would bring high interest rates and high unemployment . Lance predicted high unemployment and high interest rate rates .
 He was confirmed by the Senate Banking Committee in August, 1979, replacing Arthur Burns, an Austrian-born economist with close ties to the Rockefellers . Burns replaced Burns, who was a CFR member, in August 1979 .
 Volcker was against a gold-back dollar, and gold being used as a form of currency . Volcker: "Gold is not a way of dealing with currency. It's a way to deal with people who want to use it as a currency."
 He attempted to tighten the money situation in order to curb the 10% annual growth in the money supply, and to ease the pressure of loan demand, he said .
 Interest rates climbed to 131/2% by September, 1979, and then soared to 211/2 % by December, 1980 . The result was a dramatic increase in interest rates . Interest rates rose to 211-2% in December 1980 .
 Conjecture could dictate that this economic decline was purposely engineered to cause the political decline of Carter . Carter's political decline may have been caused by the economic decline of the country .
 It's carefully isolated from any influence by the President or Congress, it's said . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world .
 Even though inflation had skyrocketed to all-time highs, Volcker kept Volcker on . Reagan kept him on despite inflation at record high levels . Volcker was forced to step down from the Fed .
 Congress passed the Monetary Control Act in 1980 . It gave the Federal Reserve control of all banking institutions, regardless if they are members or not .
 Alan Greenspan, who became the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in 1987, is a member of the Council of Foreign Relations . Greenspan is a former chairman of the Fed .
 He met Ayn Rand, the author of Atlas Shrugged, in 1952, and they became friends . He met Rand in 1952 and became friends with the author .
 In February, 1995, the seventh increase in the interest rate, within the period of a year, took place . The interest rate was the seventh in a year to take place in a row .
 Media spin doctors churned out information that totally skirted the issue concerning the FED's actual role in controlling our economy . It was very interesting how the media spin doctors .
 On March 13, 1979, while meeting at Strasbourg, France, the Parliament of Europe, which governs the European Economic Community, oversaw the establishment of a new money system .
 The ECU is backed by 20% of the participating countries' gold reserves . Known as the ECU, it was backed by the countries involved in the project . It has been backed by around 20 per cent of the participants' gold .
 All nations buying oil from OPEC, had to use U.S. dollars to buy oil from the group . The dollar had little strength in the past, but now it has been weakened .
 More and more financial analysts are talking about the disastrous condition of our financial system . Even though our economy continues to hang on, more and more analysts say the system is in danger .
 In 1992, independent candidate H Ross Perot garnered nearly 20% of the vote by making the state of the economy an issue during the campaign . Perot made the issue an issue in 1992's presidential election .
 Bob Kerrey promised to support President Bill Clinton's Budget Plan if Clinton would appoint a Committee to study the condition of the American economy . Kerrey said he would support the plan if Clinton appoints a Committee .
 The President established a 32-member bipartisan committee and issued their report in August, 1994 . The report was published in August 1994 .
 Unless drastic changes are made, we won't even be able to pay the interest on the national debt . By 2012, by the year 2012, the debt will not be enough to pay, committee finds .
 The destruction of the American economy has been part of a deliberate plot to financially enslave our nation . Knowing this, if the federal government allows the current trend to continue, then it is obvious that the destruction of our economy is a deliberate plan to enslave us .
 Federal Reserve Emergency Relocation Facility in Culpepper, Virginia, is built into the side of a mountain . It would be able to continue functioning during the aftermath of a nuclear or natural disaster .
 When our monetary system is finally destroyed, the new money will be issued . The new money is expected to be issued when the system is destroyed . When that happens, the money will still be used to make money .
 Chapter Two threads, and colors, and may include holograms, diffraction gratings, or watermarks, will be made in coordination with six other nations: Canada, Britain, Japan, Australia, West Germany and Switzerland .
 According to the government, the only reason for the currency changes is to deter counterfeiting . The government says the changes are intended to deter counterfeiters .
 The Treasury Secretary has the authority to change the currency . According to law, the Treasury secretary has the power to change currency .
 Over $3 million had been spent under ""counterfeit prevention" authority for the development of the new money . The new money would be issued by the Federal Reserve Board .
 The variations shown, consisted of each denomination being a different color; Federal Reserve seals replaced with a design utilizing reflective ink . Other optical devices like holograms, and multilayer diffraction gratings, were also used to create bills containing metal security threads .
 A consumer research firm from Illinois was hired by the Treasury Department to gauge the public's reactions to the various designs . The Treasury Department says the public will be able to see the designs .
 It was shown that a drastic change would not be accepted, so a process of incrementalism was adopted . The government has been forced to adopt incrementalism in the past .
 It was decided that the Bureau of Printing and Engraving would have a fine metallic strip running through the currency, leaving the basic design intact . However, they later decided to use a clear imprinted polyester strip, woven into the paper, running vertically .
 The length of the translucent polyester filament reads ""USAIOO" for $100 bills, and ""USA50"" for $50 bills . The translucent filament can only be read if held up to direct light .
 Checkmate Electronics, Inc., which manufactures the equipment needed to scan checks, scanned the new money, and found the strip to contain ""machine detectable" aluminum .
 There is microscopic type printed around the picture which reads, ""The United States of America"", but appears to only be a line . Though the basic design did not change, there is a line in the picture .
 This currency was introduced in August, 1991, with $100, $50 bills and $20 bills . The Government discontinued printing any of the old money, and began emptying their vaults .
 The International Monetary Fund has been responsible for the decline of our dollar, and our present economic situation . The IMF is responsible for our country's economic decline, says David Cameron . Cameron: The IMF has contributed to the decline in our dollar .
 Chapter Two Control Act of 1980 mandated the Federal Reserve to only have one dollar on deposit for every twelve they create . The Federal Reserve now has one dollar in reserve for every one of its twelve created .
 International cooperation is intense to coordinate currency changes among its member governments . International cooperation has been intense to coordinated currency changes .
 The European Currency Unit Banking Association was established by bankers in Europe, Japan, and the United States . It was formed to get world cooperation for a unified currency, and had support from banks in Europe and Japan .
 It was an offshoot of the Banking Federation of the European Community, which has been engaged in shutting down small banks in order to develop a conglomerate of a few huge banks .
 The Federal Reserve Bank, the European Central Bank, and the Central Bank of Japan are the three largest central banks in the world .
 Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve, said that exchange rates could be fixed in order to solve the problem of uniformity between the currencies of various nations . Greenspan: Exchange rates should be fixed to solve problem .
 Many countries had planned to come out with new money, such as Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Japan, Canada, France, Germany, Australia, and Brazil . Many of the countries planned to release new money .
 Most currencies had a common 1"" square, usually on the left side of the bill . Of the countries that already had, most currencies had the square square . The square square is usually on either side of a bill .
 Held over a light, a hologram appears on the spot, barely visible to the naked eye, which cannot be reproduced on a copier . A hologram can be seen on a light held over a wall, which can't be reproduced .
 It is believed that this spot is reserved for a central World Bank overprint .
 They also contain metallic strips that can be detected when they pass through scanners at airports and international borders . The strips can also be detected by detecting metallic strips .
 USA Today carried a page-one article concerning major changes in the design of the paper currency . The changes are expected to take place by the end of the year .
 Officials from the Treasury, the Secret Service, and the Bureau of Engraving said that the changes were necessary to combat counterfeiters .
 The minor changes they had made before, for the same reason, had stopped with the twenty dollar bill, which kind of leads me to believe that the changes were just a smokescreen to prepare us for bigger changes .
 Benjamin Franklin has been pushed to the right side of the new $100 bill, and the Eagle in the center of the bill . Benjamin Franklin's portrait of Benjamin Franklin was pushed to a larger portrait of Franklin .
 The line ""United States of America"" appears along the top right, and the line ""One Hundred Dollars"" appears on the lower left, with the serial number being placed over that .
 Some financial experts have theorized that when every denomination is changed over to the new money, that the business sector may not want to accept old bills, which would then become worthless, and create a financial emergency .
 Federal officials have said that the old money would be accepted, but scrutinized . Federal officials say they would accept the money but scrutinize it in a new way .
 It has been suggested that the government could really take advantage of the situation . In order for people to exchange their old money for new, an exchange rate may be determined .
 Or perhaps, the new money is just a transitional currency, the first step in testing the public's willingness to accept economic change . Or perhaps the new currency is just an attempt to test the public .
 The institution of a common world-wide currency may be delayed because of the possibility of moving right to a cashless system, making paper money obsolete . Paper money could be made obsolete by a cash-free system .
 If this is the case, there would be a massive campaign to promote debit cards . A move to accommodate their use in all aspects of business would be possible .
 The Visa MagiCard seems to be the first step towards a national debit card . The Visa magiCard was created by Visa in 2007 . It was designed to be a debit card for the first time in the country .
 With Visa, you can make purchases at any of the 10 million merchants who accept Visa, and have the amount electronically deducted from your checking account . With this card, the amount is automatically taken out of your account .
 Financial experts believe that in only a few years, there will be more debit cards than credit cards . Financial experts say debit cards will soon be more accepted in America .
 They couldn't touch the money of the people, because the Constitution did not contain any provision for the taxing of income . So they now set into motion a plan to accomplish this, in order to oppress the middle class, and increase the lower class, who would have to depend on the
 The tax was criticized because it wasn't apportioned among the states according to population . It was criticized for not apportioning the tax among states based on population .
 The Act of 1862 also provided for a sales tax, excise tax, and inheritance tax . It established the office of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, who was given the power to assess, levy, and collect taxes .
 The Supreme Court ruled that the tax was unconstitutional, because it was not distributed among the states in accordance with the Constitution . The tax was passed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973 .
 Newspapers controlled by the Illuminati denounced the Court's decision . Newspapers controlling the Illuminati denounce the decision . The Illuminati's decision was made by the Supreme Court .
 When the income tax legislation was introduced in the Senate in 1894, Sen. Sen. Joe Biden was a member of the House of Representatives . The income tax bill was introduced by Sen. Edward Kennedy in 1896 .
 In 1909, Aldrich proposed the 16th Amendment to the Constitution, with the support of President Taft, which called for the creation of a progressive graduated income tax . Aldrich had come out against it, saying it was ""communistic and socialistic"
 It was ratified in February, 1913, and levied a 1% tax on all incomes over $3,000 . A progressive surtax on incomes over . $20,000 was added to the tax on incomes between $2,000 and $3.5,000.
 Secretary of State Philander C Knox ignored various irregularities, and fraudulently declared that the 16th Amendment had been ratified by three-fourths of the 48 states . Knox declared the ratification of the amendment on February 25,1913, shortly before the end of his term .
 Benson obtained more than 17,000 pages of documents proving that the 16th Amendment was not ratified . Benson traveled to all the states, and to the National Archives in Washington, DC, to obtain the documents . Benson obtained the documents from the National Archive .
 A 16-page memo dated February 15,1913, to Knox, from his solicitor, stated that only four states had ""correctly" ratified the amendment . Minnesota had not forwarded their copy yet, according to the memo .
 The other thirtythree resolutions all contain errors either of punctuation, capitalization, or wording . The other three resolutions also contain errors .
 Minnesota, it is to be remembered, did not transmit to the Department a copy of the resolution passed by the legislature of the state . Minnesota did not send the resolution to the department .
 Benson discovered that some word changes and misplaced commas were done by legislative intent . Benson: "Some of the changes were done in legislative intent. It's unfortunate that some of the words were changed in the wrong way."
 State Legislatures voting to ratify a proposed Constitutional amendment must use a certified, exact copy, as passed by the Congress . State Legislators must use an exact copy of the amendment passed by Congress to vote on a proposed amendment .
 This passage reveals the true intention of our forefathers, which was for the Federal Government to coordinate the efforts of all the States in order to combine their resources when it came to things like trade and defense, since the States were like separate countries .
 Congress only had jurisdiction over the area of Washington, D.C., and non-state territories like Alaska, and Hawaii . Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and others; and Federal property such as military bases .
 The Government has a responsibility to protect the inalienable rights of its citizens, as granted by the Constitution, rather than to grant privileges, known as civil rights, which are decided by the will of the majority . America is a Republic, and not a democracy, and the Government has
 The Federal Government has been able to wield its influence over the entire country, rather than the area referred to as the District . Therefore, the federal government has had the power to influence the entire nation .
 This is possible, because, for all intents and purposes, there are two of every state . This is because of the fact that every state has a state of its own .
 The gold-fringed flag was reserved for use by the General of the Army . The flag was present at military headquarters and displayed at courtmartials .
 Its use elsewhere, as a government battle flag, was only to be done at the discretion of the President, within his role as Commander-in-Chief of the military .
 This gold-fringed flag, which is common in many public places, is not the national flag which represents our constitutional republic . It is not a national flag that represents the constitutional republic, it represents the British constitution, writes David Cameron .
 It means that when Congress declares an emergency, there is no Constitution, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: When Congress declares emergency, it means that there are no Constitution . He says the emergency is a state of emergency, and the Constitution must be protected .
 It is not mandatory to apply for a Social Security number; however, in order for a sovereign state citizen to be eligible for Social Security benefits, they have to waive the rights given to them under our Republic .
 The Income Tax system is the most incredible example of the adhesion contract . The income tax system is one of the most controversial examples of the tax system .
 Since ""wages"" are received as compensation for labor, it can not be legally taxed . Therefore, since wages are received, they are not taxed . It is not taxed because it is compensation for work .
 Constitution only allows Congress to collect taxes, limited to uniform excise tax on gasoline, alcohol, tobacco, telephone bills, firearms, and tiresthings revolving around interstate commerce .
 The payment of these taxes are voluntary, because they are based on consumption . The payment is voluntary, as it is based on the consumption of the tax .
 These funds go directly to the United States Treasury to pay the expenses of the country . These funds are used to fund the U.S. Treasury .
 Internal Revenue Service Code, Title 26 USC, could not be passed into law by the Congress . Instead, it was passed only as a Resolution, which is a formal expression of intent that was to pertain only to citizens of the District .
 To the left of that is the word ""label"", which seemingly identifies the entire section as a whole . However, to the right of that word, the word "label" is used to identify a section of the section .
 The Internal Revenue Service is considered to be a Bureau of the Department of Treasury, like the Federal Reserve, but they are not part of the Federal Government . The IRS was incorporated in Delaware in 1933, and is now based in Washington .
 All official Federal Government mail is sent postage-free because of the franking privilege . However, the IRS has to pay their own postage, which indicates that they are not a government entity .
 Federal Reserve does not collect any taxes for the U.S. Treasury . They are in fact a collection agency for the Federal Reserve .
 If you have ever sent a check to the IRS, you will find that it was endorsed over to the Federal Reserve . The Federal Reserve is the largest bank in the world, with the majority of money sent to the Treasury .
 The Federal Reserve deposits the money with the International Monetary Fund of the United Nations . It is filtered down to the International Development Association, which is part of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
 The American people are unknowingly contributing to the financing of a World Government in-the-making . Therefore, it is now clear, that the American people . contribute to the . financing of the . World Government .
 The tax was an indication that the U.S. was heading for a planned war, because they couldn't go into a war without money . The tax would be an indication of the U S. being heading for war, the author says .
 In July, 1943, workers in this country were subject to a payroll withholding tax in the form of a ""victory tax" The tax was touted as a temporary tax to boost the economy because of the War, and would later be discontinued .
 Illuminati avoided tax by transferring their wealth to tax-free foundations . Under the guise of philanthropy, the Illuminati avoided taxation by transferring wealth . The Illuminati avoided taxes by transferring money to tax free foundations .
 Before 1900, there were only 18 foundations . During the 1920's, 173 foundations were made; during the 1930's, 288, 288; the 1940's, 1,638; and during the 1950's, 2,839 foundations .
 Kellogg Foundation (the Kellogg Cereals), Carnegie Corp., Alfred P Sloan Foundation, Moody Foundation , Moody Foundation, Lilly Endowment, Pew Memorial Trust, and the Danforth Foundation all have assets of well over $100 million .
 The first Congressional Committee to investigate the tax-free foundations was the Cox Committee in 1952 . The Cox Committee was led by Rep. Cox .
 Cox discovered that officers and trustees of some foundations were Communists . Some foundations had given grants to Communists or Communist-controlled organizations .
 Cox died, and the facts were glossed over in a cover-up . During the investigation, Cox died . Cox died. Cox died during the investigation .
 Three of the four who were selected for the Committee, with Reece, were House members who had voted against the investigation . Three of those selected were members of the House who voted against it .
 He prohibited evidence discovered by two of its investigators from being used . He also banned evidence from being shown to the public .
 Reece's Special Committee to Investigate Tax Exempt Foundations discovered that many foundations were financing civil rights groups, liberal political groups, political extremist groups, and supporting revolutionary activities .
 There is here is here, as in the general realm of social sciences, a close interlock . There is no doubt that social scientists and social scientists have a close relationship .
 John Davison Rockefeller was the richest man of his time . He was the grandfather of former Vice-President Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller .
 He started out in 1859 as a produce merchant, turning to oil in 1865, at the age of 26 . He turned to oil as a result of his success .
 Standard Oil of Ohio of Ohio was incorporated in 1870 . Rockefeller controlled 21 out of 26 refineries in Cleveland, Ohio . In 1870, Standard Oil was incorporated .
 In 1879, he controlled over 90% of all refined oil sold in the country, with 20,000 producing wells, and 100,000 employees . He also controlled 20% of the country's oil production, with over 90,000 wells .
 The Rockefellers and Rothschilds have been partners ever since the 1880's . Rockefeller was able to get a rebate on each barrel of oil he shipped over the Pennsylvania, Baltimore and Ohio railroads, which were owned by Kuhn, Loeb .
 In 1888, details concerning the Rockefeller Oil Trust began to leak out in the newspapers . The trust was set up by the Rockefeller family .
 In Ohio, at the time, a company within the state could not own stock in a company in another state . Rockefeller bought out smaller companies when he bought them out . Rockefeller's company was bought out by the company in Ohio .
 Using the secret Trust, which was established in 1879, the trustees for the companies that had been taken over, the 37 Standard Oil stockholders, and Standard Oil of Ohio, relayed all out-of-state stock to three clerks from Standard Oil .
 In 1882, three ""dummy" trustees, 42 Standard Oil stockholders, and Standard Oil of Ohio, transferred all its stock to nine trustees, who were controlled by Rockefeller . Rockefeller controlled the oil company .
 Standard Oil withdrew from the Trust after Ohio and other states outlawed trusts . Standard Oil was forced to withdraw from the trust in March, 1892, after the Ohio Supreme Court ordered it to withdraw .
 Rockefeller countered by moving Standard Oil to New Jersey, who allowed their corporations to hold stock in out-of-state companies, thus, Standard Oil of New Jersey became that holding Company .
 He promised to support the school for ten years, which he did, donating $34,708,375 . He also promised to donate $34.708,000 .
 The Board was organized by Fred Gates, the front man for the Pillsbury flour company . Fred Gates was the founder of the Board .
 Rockefeller gave $1 million to the Rockefeller Sanitation Commission . In 1909, he established the commission to improve sanitation in New York City .
 Rep. Joseph Sibley, of Pennsylvania, was President of the Rockefeller-controlled Galena Signal Oil Co. In 1898, Rep. Joe Siblely was President . Rep. Siblety was President in 1898, when he was in charge of the Galena signal oil company
 John P Elkins, also of Pennsylvania, accepted a $5,000 bribe from Standard Oil . John Elkins accepted a bribe from the Standard Oil company . Elkins is also a Pennsylvania resident .
 Sen. Bois Penrose of Pennsylvania received a $25,000 bribe from Rockefeller . Rockefeller also received a bribe from a Pennsylvania senator . Rockefeller received $50,000 from Rockefeller, according to reports .
 Rockefeller received ""rebates"" Rockefeller received from various railroads, were actually kickbacks . Rockefeller received the 'rebates' which he received were kickbacks from railroads .
 These rebates made it possible for him to keep his prices lower so he could bankrupt his competition . He kept prices lower and bankrupted his competition by keeping prices lower . The rebates allowed him to bankrupt his competitors by keeping their prices lower.
 Standard Oil also made kickbacks in the form of stock to railroad people, such as William H Vanderbilt, who received stock without contributing any capital, as did various bankers who lent money freely to Standard Oil . Standard Oil was also made a large percentage of stock from railroad people .
 In 1905, an expose' by Ida M Tarbell, called The History of Standard Oil Co . came on the heels of an 1894 book by Henry Demarest Lloyd, called Wealth Against Commonwealth .
 An analysis of the Directory of Directors found that through interlocking directorates, less than a dozen men controlled the country's business interests . However, a few years later, it was discovered that through an analysis, the majority of business interests were controlled by just a few dozen men .
 Nelson Aldrich of Rhode Island, introduced a Bill of Incorporation for the Rockefeller Foundation, but it came at a time when there was an antitrust suit against Standard Oil, and the Bill was withdrawn . The Bill withdrew after Standard Oil was sued .
 Standard Oil of New Jersey was the subject of a 20,000 word decision by the U.S. Supreme Court . Standard Oil won't be allowed to run Standard Oil in New Jersey . The decision was the result of a Supreme Court decision .
 The Court said Standard Oil wanted to establish a monopoly in order ""to drive others from the field and exclude them from their right to trade,"" and that ""seven men and a corporate machine have conspired against their fellow citizens" Standard Oil .
 Rockefeller owned 25% of Standard Oil of New Jersey, which meant that he now owned all 38 Standard Oil subsidiaries . Rockefeller now had 25% ownership of all 38 of the company's subsidiaries .
 The endowment to establish the Foundation totaled $182,851,000, and was given in securities, enabling the foundation to disperse over $1 billion . The foundation is only third in total assets compared to the Ford and Johnson Foundations .
 The CEO says he's not involved in the day-to-day operation of the company . But only in regard to being involved with the company, he says .
 He didn't officially retire until 1911, when he resigned as President of Standard Oil . He was officially retired from Standard Oil in 1911 .
 When he died, he only left a taxable estate of $26,410,837.10, which after Federal and State taxes were levied, left about $16 million . He had become America's first billionaire .
 The remainder of his fortune had been left to surviving relatives , his sons, and his foundations .
 Rockefeller, said to own 20% of American industry, between 1855 and his death in 1937, gave away nearly $550 million . Rockefeller was said to have owned 20% American industry .
 Rockefeller gave $182,851,480 to the Rockefeller Foundation, $129,209,167 to the General Education Board . $73,985,313 to the Laura Spelman and Rockefeller Memorial Fund . $60,673,409 to Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research .
 John D Rockefeller Jr. was married to Abby Aldrich, daughter of Sen. John Rockefeller, Jr., who is married to Sen. Rockefeller Jr.'s daughter, Abby . The Rockefeller family is one of the wealthiest in the world .
 Nelson Aldrich was part of a corrupt political machine, according to a 1905 McClure's magazine article . Aldrich died in 1918 at the age of 92 .
 He spent over $40 million to buy up land and convert it to National Parks, donating it to the public . He spent the money to buy and convert the land into National Parks .
 Jackson Hole Preserve at the Grand Teton National Park in northeastern Wyoming is one of the most prominent national parks in the world . The most prominent of these parks is the Jackson Hole preserve in the region .
 He also built 45 other buildings, including three hotels to serve the public, and planted gardens . He also planted gardens in the gardens .
 The Rockefeller empire is run from the 55th and 56th floors of the RCA building, at 30 Rockefeller Plaza . The empire is located in Rockefeller Plaza in New York .
 The Rockefellers are undeniably the richest family in America . They increased their fortune by marrying into other wealthy and influential families . They married into wealthy families .
 Percy Rockefeller married Isabel Stillman, daughter of National City Bank President James Stillman . Percy Rockefeller, married Isabel stillman in 1926 . Rockefeller died in 1924 .
 Edith Rockefeller, married Harold F McCormick, heir to the International Harvester Co. fortune . She was married to Harold F. McCormick . The Rockefeller family is one of the richest in the world .
 McCormick's son Fowler married Fifi Stillman, the divorced wife of James Stillman . Their son, Fowler, is the grandson to John, Sr. and Cyrus McCormick . The McCormick family was married in 1945 .
 Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller, was married to Mary Todhunter Clark, the granddaughter of the President of the Pennsylvania Railroad . Nelson Rockefeller was also married to the president of the Pennsylvania Railroad .
 Charles Percy, who had been one of the Senate's most influential members, was one of its most powerful members . Percy was a member of the U.S. Senate .
 Rockefeller family had been joined in marriage to Stillman, Dodge, McAlpin, McCormick, Carnegie, and Carnegie . Wealth has been estimated to be well over $2 billion . Rockefeller family is thought to be worth over $1 billion .
 Hunt, Hunt, and the Duponts and Mellons had fortunes between $2-$4 billion . Hunt, had fortunes of $2-4 billion; and the DuPonts and the Mellons of $3-$5 billion respectively . Hunt had fortunes as high as $2
 The Rockefellers had been able to avoid any sort of accounting in regard to their vast assets and holdings . Ever since the TNEC hearings in 1937, they had been allowed to avoid accounting . The hearings were held to find out who was controlling the American economy .
 Nelson Rockefeller was nominated to be Vice-President in December, 1974 . Nelson Rockefeller's nomination ended in December 1974, when he was nominated for Vice President .
 J Richardson Dilworth appeared before the United States House of Representatives' Judiciary Committee during the 1975 ""Hearings into the Nomination of Nelson Rockefeller to be Vice-President of the U.S."" to document the family's wealth, which he said only amounted to $1.
 Kresge, Texaco, National Cash Register, Avon, American Home Products, Delta Airlines, Braniff Airlines, Northwest Airlines, United Airlines, and Burlington Industries .
 Rockefeller-controlled banks accounted for about 25% of all assets of the 50 largest commercial banks in the country . Rockefeller controlled about 30% of assets of 50 largest life insurance companies in 1970s . Rockefeller's control of the banking industry was a major factor in the financial boom .
 The Chase Manhattan Bank, however, remains the supreme symbol of Rockefeller domination . The bank was founded by Rockefeller Rockefeller in 1903 .
 Founded in 1877 by John Thompson, the Chase National Bank was named after Salomon P Chase . Founded by Salomon Chase, the bank is named after the banker who died in 2008 .
 It was taken over by the Rockefellers in a merger with their Equitable Trust Co., whose President was Winthrop Aldrich, son of Sen. Sen. Winthrop .
 In 1961, Chase Manhattan Bank Plaza was built in downtown Manhattan, at a cost of $125,000,000 . The Chase Manhattan Plaza is located in downtown New York City . It was built at the same time as the Bank of New York .
 It is 64 stories high, with five basement floors, the lowest of which contains the largest bank vault in the world . The lowest of the five floors is the lowest, with the lowest containing the world's largest vault .
 They have 28 foreign branches, and over 50,000 banking offices in more than 50 countries . They have a controlling interest in many of the largest corporations in America . They also have control over many of America's largest corporations .
 Searle, Sunbeam, Beckman Instruments, Texas Instruments, Sperry Rand, Boeing, Diebold, Cummins Engine . Cummins engine, Bausch and Lomb, CBS-TV and Aetna Life .
 Men from Chase Manhattan's Board of Directors have also sat on the Boards of many of the largest corporations, which have created a system of interlocking directorates . Chase Manhattan is one of the world's largest corporations .
 The Chase Investment Corp. owns a sheep and cattle raising operation in Australia, hotels in Puerto Rico and Liberia, a ready-mix concrete facility in Brazil, a cotton textile mill in Nigeria, a paint factory in Venezuela, a steel mill in Turkey, a petrochemical plant in Argentina
 Our tax dollars, through the Export-Import Bank, International Monetary Fund, and International Stabilization Fund, are used to give aid to other countries, some who were communist . Some of these countries were communist, some of whom were in fact communist .
 Millions of dollars were given to Yugoslavia, including hundreds of jets . Many of the jets ended up being given to Castro in Cuba .
 Chase, and the Export-Import Bank financed 90% of the $2 billion loan to build the Kama River truck complex in Russia . The complex was equipped with the world's largest industrial computer system, with the capability of producing up to 200,000 ten-ton trucks a year
 Besides the production of trucks, they also have the capability of producing jeeps, military transports and rocket launchers .
 The repayment period for the loan was twelve years, with a 41/2 year grace period . The loan was repaid with a twelve-year repayment period .
 Chapter Three repayment was guaranteed by the U.S. taxpayers through government agencies like the Overseas Private Investment Corp., and the Foreign Credit Insurance Association .
 Export-Import Bank put up $40 million for $400 million fertilizer plant in Russia . Private U.S. banks also put up all but $40M for fertilizer plant . Export-Imporporation Bank and other private American banks put up for plant .
 In 1967, the International Basic Economy Corp. owned by all five Rockefeller Brothers, run by Richard Aldrich, was formed by the Rockefeller Brothers . The company is now owned by the five Rockefeller brothers . The group is based in New York City .
 Tower International, Inc., headed by Cyrus S Eaten, Jr., Jr., a Cleveland financier, was the son of a man who started his career as secretary to John D Rockefeller, later making his own fortune . Nelson Aldrich (Nelson Aldrich) and Rodman
 This partnership built a $50 million aluminum production center in Russia, and announced a multi-million plan for Russia and other Eastern European countries . It included the building of large hotels in Bucharest, Sofia, Budapest, Belgrade, Prague, and Warsaw .
 Tower International made an agreement with the Soviet patent and licensing organiaation, Licensintorg, to promote Soviet-American trade, which up to that time was done by Amtorg Trading Corp., the agency in America . Tower International agreed to promote trade between the Soviet Union and
 This gave the Rockefellers and Eatens complete control over what technology was sent to Russia . This gave them complete control of what technology they sent to the country .
 David Rockefeller controls many secondary interlocks which contribute to the family's power and influence . David Rockefeller is the head of the Chase Manhattan, and the family patriarch, David Rockefeller .
 Reynolds Industries, United States Steel Corp., Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., May Department Stores, Sperry Rand Corp. and Standard Oil of Indiana are among the winners .
 Chapter Three directors of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, and members of the Council on Foreign Relations, Trilateral Commission, and Bilderbergers, also have similar connections to these and hundreds of other major corporations . Chapter 3 directors also have connections to the 12 Fed Banks and the Trilateral
 Like-minded individuals have been able to control American industry and business . Now you can see how these like-minded people have been successful in business .
 Cyrus Vance and Dean Rusk were both Presidents of the Rockefeller Foundation . Prior to their appointments, both were Presidents of Rockefeller Foundation.
 Rockefeller Foundation uses money to help fund education and medical research . Rockefeller Foundation is the brainchild of the Rockefeller family . The foundation is based in New York City .
 Through interlocking directorates, the Foundation controls the Carnegie Endowment, and the Ford Foundation . The Carnegie Foundation controls two of the largest foundations in the world .
 Rockefeller Foundation concentrates on education, as it relates to domestic issues . Carnegie Endowment deals with education, but focuses on international issues . Rockefeller Endowment focuses on education as a matter of international matters . Rockefeller Foundation will focus on education in the United States .
 The Kinsey Report heralded a new era of sexual immorality . The Foundation funded the Kinsey report .
 Andrew Carnegie came to the U.S. as a poor immigrant from Scotland in 1848 . Carnegie never became an American citizen . Carnegie's estate is worth millions of dollars .
 Carnegie sold the company to Morgan Morgan for $500 million . Morgan incorporated the company into the United States Steel Corporation in 1901 . Carnegie retired in 1901, enabling him to concentrate on philanthropic activities .
 In 1889, William Torrey Harris, the U.S. Commissioner of Education, told a high-ranking railroad official that schools were being scientifically designed not to overeducate children .
 He believed that the schools should alienate children from their parents and religion . He said children should not be alienated from parents or religion .
 Morgan, and John D Rockefeller, owned everything, and controlled the government . Rockefeller: 'They owned everything. They not only owned everything but also controlled everything' Rockefeller: Morgan, Rockefeller, and Rockefeller .
 His worry was that subsequent generations would realize this, and work against them . His worry, was that future generations would work against him .
 His solution was to control the education system, and to create a direct relationship between the amount of education a person had, and how good of a job they could get, he says .
 This created a motivation for children to attend school, where they would be taught only what the social engineers of this country wanted them to know . Therefore, this created an incentive to children to go to school, especially in the UK .
 Prussia became the first government to have compulsory education . Prussia set up a three-tiered system in order to keep students out of poverty .
 The children of the elite, about one-half of one percent, went to schools called academies, and were taught to think and be independent . The children were educated at academies .
 About five and one-half percent went to Realschulen, where they were partially taught how to think . About five-and-one-half of those who went to the school are now in Germany . About 5 and 1-1-5 percent of students went to
 The other 94% went to Volkschulen, where the idea of being a follower and a good citizen was stressed . The idea of a follower is stressed in the school, which is based in the Netherlands .
 The success in creating an organized cumpulsory educational system in this country has allowed the elite of this country to prevent each generation from truly understanding how this country is actually run, thus keeping them from doing anything about it .
 This has enabled the government to more easily assimilate the people of this country into a population which can be easily deceived and controlled . This ""dumbing-down"" has enabled . the . government to . more easily . assimilate people into a . population which is easily deceived . and
 Carnegie Foundation gave over $20 million to retiring teachers at universities and technical schools in the U.S. and Canada . Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching was established in 1905 .
 Carnegie set up the Carnegie Hero Fund to reward heroic deeds by civilian citizens . In 1904, in the U.S., and 1908 in the UK, he gave out close to $500,000,000 .
 He also established the world renowned Carnegie Hall, and over 2,000 public libraries . Carnegie Hall was also established in 1903 .
 The Carnegie Endowment, on its face, appeared to be innocent . With such a history of philanthropic contributions, it appeared that it was innocent . The Endowment has a long history of charitable contributions .
 Chapter Three ruse to disguise its true purpose to promote one-world government . Chapter Three is a ruse for disguise to disguise the true purpose of the Chapter 3 ruse . Chapter 3 is supposed to be part of a plan to create a world of power .
 Members of the Temple met at the Endowment headquarters in the United Nations Plaza . Temple members met with the Temple at the endowment headquarters .
 Institute of Pacific Relations used the media to convince the American people that the Communists in China were agricultural reformers . The Carnegie Endowment and Rockefeller Foundation gave over $3,000,000 to the Institute . The Institute was given the money by the Rockefeller Foundation .
 The Endowment has also given money to the Council on Foreign Relations, the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies, the U.N. and the American Civil Liberties Union .
 Norman Dodd was appointed as the research director of the Special Congressional Cormnittee to investigate Tax-Exempt Foundations . Dodd discovered that the oldest tax exempt foundations were established before the initiation of income taxes, therefore they existed for a different purpose .
 He examined minutes of the Board of Trustees, and found that for the first year, the members concentrated on whether there was any means more effective than war to alter the life of the people of a nation .
 Chapter Three concludes that to get America into an upcoming war, they had to control the diplomatic machinery of the State Department . Chapter Three concluded that to . get America . into a . war, the State Dept. would control the . diplomatic machinery .
 Dodd discovered that all high-level appointments in the State Department took place only after that had to be cleared through a group called the Council of Learned Societies . Dodd: All appointments were cleared through that group, which was established by Carnegie Endowment .
 The Carnegie trustees hoped to involve the United States in a world war to set the stage for world government, a columnist said in 1958 .
 Dodd said they wanted to bring the idea of 'one-world( government) to the point where it is acceptable to the people of this country . Dodd said that they wanted ""to bring the . idea of . 'one world( government)" to the . point where . it is
 The Guggenheim Foundation agreed to award fellowships to historians recommended by Carnegie Endowment . 20 historians were assembled and sent to London, where they were briefed and became founding members of the American History Association .
 The A.H.A. was given a grant of $400,000 by Carnegie to write a 7-volume study on the direction the nation was to take . In 1928, the Carnegie grant was used to study the direction of the country .
 Rockefeller Foundation, Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Endowment, and the Carnegie Corporation jointly sponsor conferences to push the goals of the United Nations . He also described how the Rockefeller Foundation and Ford Foundation also sponsor conferences .
 Over 50,000 copies of the book were distributed by the foundation to libraries and scholars .
 They also gave a $340,000 grant to print a 17-volume study on American education by Dr. Dr. John Dewey .
 In 1903, Henry Ford, Sr. founded the Ford Motor Company . In 1907, he bought out all of his partners, so his family would control the entire company .
 In 1924, he was so popular that polls indicated that he would be elected President if he ran . In 1924 he was popular enough to be elected president .
 In 1936, with his son Edsel, he established the Ford Foundation as an inheritance tax dodge, which he saw as a plot to take money away from Americans; and for his family to retain control after his death . Ford saw the tax dodge as an attempt to keep his family in
 Ford wanted American hero Charles A Lindbergh to be the Director of his Foundation, but he refused . Ford wanted to be an enemy of the establishment, an enemy-of-the-establishment, to be a Director of the Foundation .
 Edsel's widow, and grandson Henry Ford ll, died before the Foundation's leadership could be placed in safe hands . Control of the Foundation was passed to his widow, who brought in such ""insiders"" as William Benton, Dr. Ford, and his son Edsel .
 The Ford Foundation, with assets of $4 billion, is the world's largest endowment . Ford Foundation is also known for its endowment of $3 billion .
 Ford also established the Edison Institute; and the Henry Ford Hospital . Ford gave two-thirds of its grants to education, and one-third to communications, public health, economic development, science, engineering, senior citizens, the arts and the arts .
 Chapter Three Relations; Adlai E Stevenson Institute of International Affairs; UNESC0; Institute for International Educational,625,000; American Assembly; World Affairs Council; Congress for Cultural Freedom . CED's Foreign Policy Research; National Committee on U.S.-China Relations;
 The Fund for the Republic was founded in 1953 under the direction of Robert G Hoffman and Robert M Hutchins . They are known for their attacks on the internal security program of America, and criticism towards the FBI .
 They were responsible for ending the anti-communist fervor that was sweeping the country . They helped end anti-Communist sentiment, ending the Soviet-led Soviet Union .
 They were also responsible for the establishment of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, in Santa Barbara, California . They developed a Constitution for a one-world government .
 Robert McNamara, an executive with the Ford Motor Co. Co., became the Foundation's President in 1960 . McNamara resigned to serve as the Secretary of Defense in the Kennedy and Johnson Administration .
 McGeorge Bundy, a CFR member, became President of the Foundation in 1966 . Bundy was the Chief Advisor for Foreign Affairs for Kennedy and Johnson . Bundy served as President of CFR during the Kennedy administration . Bundy is a member of the CFR and served as Secretary of State John Kennedy .
 He ushered in an era of social unrest by announcing that the Negro movement, ""the first of the nation's problems,"" would be his top priority . He announced that he would be the first of America's problems .
 We will instill in the Whites, a guilt complex for the exploitation of the Negroes. While enflaming the Negro minority against the Whites. We'll instill . the White. guilt complex . The White.
 "We will aid the Negroes to rise to prominence in every walk of life, in the professions, and in the world of sports and entertainment," says President Obama .
 In 1922, the Comintern provided $300,000 for the spreading of communist propaganda among Negroes . The Comintern was responsible for spreading communist propaganda in the black .
 A dozen Blacks were recruited for propaganda training in Russia in 1925 . In 1925, a dozen Blacks had been sent to Russia for training .
 In 1930, they changed their name to the League of Struggle for Negro Rights . The League was formed in the 1930s .
 In 1947, they united with the Civil Rights Congress, a communist front group, in 1947 . In 1947 they joined with the civil rights Congress, which was a Communist front group . They were the first members of the civil Rights Congress .
 In a 1928 pamphlet by John Pepper called American Negro Problems, a move was being made by Stalin to ferment revolution and stir the Blacks into creating a separate Republic for the Negro . In the 1928 pamphlet, John Pepper wrote that Stalin was trying to stir up a separate republic .
 It contained a firm pledge that a revolt would be supported by all American communists and liberals . The pledge was made in the pledge of support for the revolt . It was signed by the U.S. House of Representatives in New York .
 A Manual On Organization by J Peters, he writes: ""The other important ally of the American proletariat is their mass of 13,000,000 Negro people in their struggle against national oppression"
 They have nothing to lose but their property and discrimination, and a whole world of prosperity, freedom, and equality to gain . They should lose their property, discrimination and discrimination to gain, says David Cameron .
 The Supreme Court issued the desegregation law in 1954, under elitist Earl Warren . Eisenhower and Kennedy enforced the law by using Federal troops .
 Warren Court prohibited prayer and the singing of Christmas carols in schools . Incidentally, it was the Warren Court who prohibited prayer in the schools .
 Jacob Schiff, the Rothschild's man in America, decided that the best way to create racial tension, was to establish leadership among the Blacks .
 In 1909, he laid out plans for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . He was a member of the NAACP .
 In the beginning, the top leaders of the NAACP were a group of Jews appointed by Schiff . Schiff was a Jewish leader in the organization .
 The NAACP is the largest Black organization in the country, with well over 1500 chapters, and about a half-million members . The NAACP has about half a million members .
 The man who, more than anyone else, personified the heroic determination of the Black people to win their liberation now. The man's heroic determination to win the liberation now, he said .
 King, the most powerful Black leader in the country, was a pawn of the Illuminati . King was the leader of the country's most powerful African-American community .
 Nine of his closest aides were high ranking communist activists . One of those later became an aide to Rev. Rev. John Sutter .
 This is the major reason I severed my relationship with him during the fifties . This is a major reason he severed his relationship with his father during the 1950s .
 "I know for a fact the Communists would never have promoted him, financed him, and supported him if they couldn't trust him," he says .
 A 1977 court order sealed the FBI's extensive surveillance records on King in the National Archives for 50 years . A 1981 book by David Garrow told of King's liaisons with prostitutes and the misappropriation of funds .
 Schiff, along with Chicago author and attorney Sigmund Livingston, reorganized the Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith to fight anti-semetism .
 They have been used as an instrument to convince people that an attack on the Rothschilds and the Illuminati, is a direct attack on Jewish people . The Rothschilds are a direct threat to the Jewish people, according to the author .
 They are the most powerful Jewish organization in the world, with chapters in 44 countries . The Jewish National Council of American Jews is the world's largest Jewish organization .
 In the U.S. they have over 2,000 agencies, about 25 regional offices, and a membership of a half-million . In the United States, they have about 25 regions, and about 25 national offices .
 Their influence on advertising with some major department stores, hotel chains, and major corporations, has been able to slant the media toward Blacks . Their influence has been seen in advertising with major corporations .
 Nearly half of their annual budget comes through donations from non-Jews . Nearly half the annual budget is made through non-Jewish donations .
 The American League to Limit Armaments was established on December 18,1914 . The League was a spinoff of the Emergency Peace Federation, led by communist Louis Lochner .
 The League was organized by Jane Addams, John Haynes Holmes, George Foster Peabody, Stephen Wise and Stephen Wise, L Hollingsworth Wood, and Morris Hillquit .
 In 1915, they changed their name to the American Union Against Militarism, establishing a Civil Liberties Bureau to oppose draft laws . In 1920, with the help of Clarence Darrow, Norman Thomas, Felix Frankfurter, and Arthur Garfield Hays, founded the American Civil Liberties Union
 Since the 1920's, 80% of its National Committee members had Communist connections . 80% had Communist ties to the Communist Party since the 1920s .
 I seek the social ownership of property, the abolition of the propertied class, and social control of those who produce wealth . I seek to abolish the proper tied class and control of wealth .
 The ACLU is made up of about 200,000 members, with about 3,000 unpaid volunteer attorneys . The ACLU has chapters in 47 states and is based in 47 .
 They are a finger organization of the Illuminati, and are most noted for their cases involving the separation of church and state . They are known for their work on separation of state and church .
 They have defended the rights of Jehovah Witnesses to refrain from saluting the flag . They have also defended rights of the Nazis and KKK to organize and speak freely .
 They have become the most powerful weapon against the Church, and Christian tradition, in the country . They have also become a powerful weapon in the fight for Christian tradition in the U.S.
 World War I began in 1914, and in 1915, the United States, who were not yet involved, lent France and Great Britain $500 million through American banks . The United States was not involved in the war, but lent the money to France and Britain .
 In all, the total amount of the loans to these allied countries amounted to $3 billion, plus another $6 billion for exports, none of which were repaid . The loans were never repaid, and none of them were repaid.
 Had Germany won, those bonds held by U.S. bankers would have been worthless . Germany's victory would have left the bonds held in the United States .
 Morgan, Rockefeller, Warburg, and Schiff, were instrumental in pushing America into the war, so they could protect their loans to Europe . Morgan served as England's financial agent in the U.S. Rockefeller made more than $200,000,000 on the war .
 The llluminati-controlled newspapers played-up the sinking of the British auxiliary cruiser, the Lusitania, which was torpedoed by a German U-Boat on May 7, 1915 .
 The Germans said they had the right to attack an allied ship, even though the United States, up to that time, had been neutral . The U.S. was neutral at the time .
 On December 14,1914, British Intelligence broke the German war code, which meant that the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, knew the location of every U-Boat in the English Channel area . Three months earlier, Germany had issued a proclamation that the waters around
 Illuminati used the incident to create a war fever, portraying the Germans as being barbaric . The Illuminati used it to create an image of the Germans being barbaric.
 President Wilson's handling of the Lusitania affair caused his Secretary of State to resign . William Jennings Bryan resigned because of the affair . Wilson was the president of Wilson's administration .
 When the war was over, over 63,000 American soldiers had been killed in the fighting . The war was finally over in 1945 and ended in 1945 .
 Lenin offered four-fifths of Soviet territory in exchange for formal recognition of his communist government, and economic aid from the United States . A year later, in 1919, in . 1919, Lenin offered . Soviet territory, in exchange . for the formal recognition .
 He offered to accept the creation of allied-sponsored non-communist states in the Baltic region, in the area of Archangel, Western Byelorussia, half of the Ukraine, Crimea, the Caucasus, the Ural Mountains, and Siberia .
 Wilson rejected the offer for ""patriotic reasons" because the Illuminati had big plans for that country . Wilson rejected it for 'patriototic reasons' because of the Illuminati .
 Had he accepted the offer, Russia would have never have become a world power, says Putin . Russia would never have been able to become a major power, he says .
 Before World War I, the Illuminati urged the creation of an organization to promote world peace . George Washington warned against involvement with foreign nations . The Illuminati used various influential groups in the United States and Great Britain .
 President Wilson favored the idea, and echoed those sentiments in his famous ""Peace Without Victory"" speech before the Senate . President Wilson also spoke of peace without victory . Wilson's famous speech was made in his speech to the Senate in 1918 .
 He proposed his idea of a League of Nations to the Senate in 1917 . He saw it as a means of preventing another World War . He proposed the idea in the Senate .
 It would provide ""collective security" - an attack on one on one would be considered an attack . It would also provide "collective security" - a security that would protect all .
 League would help in arbitration of international disputes, reduction of armaments, and the development of open diplomacy . League would also help in the arbitration of disputes, the reduction of arms and disarmament reduction .
 It demanded that Germany pay war reparations to the victorious countries . Germany was forced to pay reparations for the war's defeat .
 This amount was set at $32 billion, plus interest; which called for annual payments of $500 million, plus annual payments, plus a 26% surcharge on exports . This amount called for $32billion plus interest .
 The agreement forced Germany to forfeit some of her prime provinces, colonies, and natural resources . Germany was forced to forfeit its prime provinces and colonies .
 They signed away their rights, had to make trade concessions, and lost what property they had in foreign countries . The U.S. signed away rights, made trade concessions and lost their property .
 "When you place conditions on a people that it cannot possibly keep, you force it to either breech the agreement or to war," he says . "You force it [the U.S. government] to either breezech the deal or to go to war"
 The League of Nations was signed and sealed at the Paris Peace Conference . The League was signed by the Peace Conference at the end of the war .
 Bernard Baruch, head of the War Industries Board, made about $200,000,000 for himself . He was also in the American delegation at the Paris Conference .
 English Prime Minister George was accompanied by Sir Philip Sassoon, a member of the British Privy Council and a direct descendant of Amschel Rothschild . George became Prime Minister of England in 1903 .
 Georges Clemenceau, the French Prime Minister, had at his side, Georges Mandel, also known as Jeroboam Rothschild . Mandel was also known for his role in the French government .
 The citizens of the United States refused to accept the League of Nations . They felt it would draw them into future European conflicts . The U.S. refused to take part in any of Europe's conflicts .
 Frank B Kellogg proposed a pact to the French Foreign Minister, Aristide Briand in the spring of 1927 . Kellogg was inspired by the American ""outlawry of war" movement .
 Its purpose was to create alliances directed against a possible resurgence of German aggression . The U.S. anti-war alliance was created to counter possible German aggression in 1940s .
 The Pact of Paris was signed on August 27, 1928, by 65 nations, who promised to settle all international disputes by peaceful means . 65 nations were involved in the signing of the Paris Pact .
 The League of Nations was headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, throughout the 1920's . It helped settle minor international disputes, and helped settle international disputes .
 The Illuminati's second attempt at establishing a one world government failed . However, weakened by the failure of the United States to join, and the restlessness of dissatisfied nations such as Japan, Italy and Germany, the second attempt failed .
 The League ceased to exist in 1946 when the United Nations was established . The League had little impact on international affairs, and ceased in 1946 .
 What the League of Nations did do, was allow the Illuminati to get more of a grip on world finances . The Illuminati is now in control of the world's finances, according to the Illuminati .
 Rockefeller said that no country could get a loan unless the International Bankers controlled the bank . Countries which belonged to the League, sought financial aid from the U.S. Rockefeller said no country can get a . loan unless . the International . Bankers control the bank.
 The Bank for International Settlement, established in 1930, was able to control more of the world's money . Through the bank's control of the money, the Illuminati controlled the majority of money in the world .
 The Federal Reserve Board held a secret meeting on May 18,1920, to plan a depression . The meeting was meant to prepare for a stock market crash . The crisis was the result of a massive recession .
 Large banks began calling in loans, causing stocks to drop from a high of 138.12 in 1919, to a low of 66.24 in 1921 . Large banks called in loans to help fund the drop .
 When the value of government bonds plummeted, they were forced to call in even more loans . The value of the government bonds has plummeted, forcing the government to borrow even more .
 Thousands of banks' customers could not pay their notes, the banks seized their assets . Banks seized assets of thousands of customers when they couldn't pay notes .
 After 1922, profits rose, and with the Federal Reserve's ability to lend ten times more than their reserves, credit was easily obtained . The Federal Reserve was able to borrow ten times the amount they needed to borrow .
 The Reserve expanded the money supply by 62%, and this excess money was used to bid the stock market up to fantastic heights . This excess money used to boost the stock markets .
 The media began publicizing that there was an enormous profit to be made from the stock market . The media then began to publicize that there were an enormous profits being made from stocks .
 This push was planned at a meeting of the International Bankers in 1926, who made the boom possible, and who was going to bring about financial disaster later . It was planned to push the push at the meeting in 1926 . The push was intended to bring financial disaster .
 In 1928, the House hearings on the Stabilization of the Purchasing Power of the Dollar revealed that the Federal Reserve Board had met with the heads of various European central banks at a secret luncheon in 1927 to plan a major crash .
 Illuminati members got their money out of the stock market, reinvesting it in gold and silver . After Paul Warburg issued a tip in March, 1929, Illuminati members, who knew what the future held, reinvested money .
 Stock prices fell by 90%, and United States Securities lost $26 billion . Stock prices dropped by 90% and U.S. Securities lost by more than 90% .
 Thousands of smaller banks and insurance companies went bankrupt, and people who had been millionaires, were now broke . People who had made millionaires, now broke. People had to go from being millionaires .
 From 1929 to 1933, the Reserve began to reducing the money flow by one-third . To prolong the depression after the crash, from 1929 to 1932, the reserve began to reduce money flow . The Reserve reduced money flow in 1929 to reduce the amount of money flowing .
 The Great Depression, as it became known, was engineered by the Illuminati to take money from the people, and to make them dependent on the Government through the subsequent New Deal programs of Roosevelt . The Illuminati engineered the Great Depression to make people dependent on government .
 To a limited extent, this method was used to create minor ""depressions"" in 1937, 1948,1953,1956,1960,1966,1970, and 1979 . The same method was also used in 1937 and 1948 .
 This would be a good time to mention another contributing factor to Wilson's election to the Presidency, and how the Illuminati controls the American electorate today . The Illuminati controls America today .
 Delegates to the Constitutional Convention in 1787 thought that the general public lacked insight and judgment necessary to elect a President . They enacted the Electoral College to do the job .
 The President and Vice-President are the only public officials in the country who are not elected through a direct vote of the people . The president and vice-president are the most senior members of the Cabinet .
 Each party, in every state, has a slate of electoral candidates, based on the number of representatives it has in Congress . Each party has an electoral slate of candidates for each state .
 Technically, a candidate wins all of the state's electoral votes, if he wins a majority of the popular votes . Technically a candidate can win all the electoral votes in a state, but a majority is needed to win majority of popular vote .
 Chapter Three candidate has the largest popular vote, but doesn't obtain the necessary electoral votes, he doesn't win the Presidency . Chapter 3 candidate has largest popular votes but not enough electoral votes to win presidency .
 If no candidate has a majority, the House of Representatives chooses a President from the three highest candidates . All Representatives from each state combine to cast one vote for each state . The House chooses the President from three candidates .
 If a Vice-Presidential candidate receives no clear majority, the Senate chooses from the top two, with each Senator casting an individual vote . Each Senator casts individual vote in the Senate .
 Candidate's objective is not to win majority of popular vote, but majority of electoral votes . Therefore, the candidate's . objective is to win a majority of the electoral votes, not just a majority .
 "That's why you see a concentration of effort in these states at election time. That's why I see a lot of effort," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 With the Illuminati controlling the media in these large population centers, it is not a difficult task to alter public opinion and sway votes to the candidate they choose . The Illuminati control the media and sway voters to sway votes .
 The bottom line is, that the people's right to choose a President has practically been taken away, and without the financial resources necessary to fight it, there is nothing that can be done .
 When Weishaupt founded the Order of the Illuminati, he adopted the All-Seeing Eye symbol of Masonry to be the symbol of the organization .
 It is the Great Pyramid of Cheops, with the capstone missing, and replaced with an eye . The capstone has been replaced with a new eye .
 The All-Seeing Eye can be traced back to Chaldea as the Solar Eye, the Eye of Jupiter or Apollo . The Eye of Providence was known as the All- Seeing Eye, or the Sun of Providence .
 Hieroglyphics in ancient Egypt identified the name of the chief Sun God Osiris with a human eye . The name was identified by hieroglyphic artworks in the ancient Egyptian city .
 On July 4,1776, Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and Ben Franklin, were appointed by a Committee of the Continental Congress to prepare the Great Seal of the United States . The 13 states had united in an act of independence .
 William Barton submitted an Eagle on the pinnacle of a Doric column, the All-Seeing Eye, and the stars . After some preliminary work by another, Barton submitted a Eagle .
 Barton's second design pushed the All-Seeing Eye to the reverse side, and moved the eagle up to the crest, and placed a phoenix rising from the flames at the column's summit . The phoenix was to indicate the revival of the new out of the old . Barton's
 Chapter Three referred to Charles Thompson, the Secretary of Congress on June 13th . Chapter Three refers to Thompson, who is the secretary of Congress . Chapter 3 referred to Thompson .
 The final version, approved by an act of Congress on June 20,1782, was the result of a series of committee meetings . It combined ideas from Barton, Thompson and Jefferson, who placed a triangle around the eye .
 Within weeks, a brass plate of the face of the Great Seal was produced, but not the reverse side . The reverse side of the seal was produced .
 A second engraving of the seal was ordered by Secretary of State Daniel Webster in 1841 . When the original wore out, the original drew out, and a second was ordered .
 Throop, had many subtle differences, such as six, rather than thirteen arrows . Throop had six arrows instead of thirteen arrows, as well as 13 arrows .
 The fourth engraving, under Secretary of State John Hay, engraved by Max Zeiler, and cut by Baily, Banks & Biddle; were both consistent with the design passed by law in 1782 . The design was consistent with law passed by the law .
 A die for the reverse side of the seal would not be produced and used as an official seal . A committee appointed by Frelinghuysen, consisting of Justin Winsor, Charles Eliot Norton, William H Whitmore , John Denison Chaplin, Jr. and James Horton White
 Vice President Henry A Wallace was impressed enough with the significance of the reverse side of the Great Seal to lobby Treasury Secretary Morganthau to have it put on the back of the one dollar bill in 1935 . Vice President Wallace was ""fascinated"" by the occult, and was impressed
 The reverse side displays a pyramid, with an eye in the capstone and a Latin inscription around it . It is the first time a pyramid has been found to be found in the world .
 This seems to be a continuation of the masonic symbolism found on the front of the book . The book was released in September 2013 .
 The number thirteen is displayed prominently, and is thought to have referred to the thirteen colonies . The number 13 is believed to have been a reference to 13 colonies .
 The number thirteen was a mystical number to the Egyptians and Babylonians, and also the Masons . However, the number 13 was a mystic number to both Egyptians and the Egyptians .
 There are thirteen leaves in the olive branch, thirteen stripes on the shield, thirteen feathers on the eagle's tail, thirteen arrows, and thirteen stars . There are also 13 leaves, 13 stripes, 13 feathers, 13 arrows and 13 stars .
 Which refers to the protection of Providence, ""whose eye never slumbers nor sleeps,"" which alludes to the ""Big Brother"" system of constant surveillance .
 To the Illuminati, it represents the eye of Satan, who its members worship . The Illuminati's members worship Satan, and the Illuminati are said to worship it .
 The pyramid represents the organizational structure of the Illuminati . The capstone containing the eye, represents the House of Rothschild, who control the group, and have perpetuated the goal of one-world government .
 The phrase 'Annuit Coeptis' is translated as ""he favored our undertakings"", and comes from Virgil's 'audacibus annue coeptis', which refers to the ""golden age during which the ""Saturnian"" kingdom shall return . Notice
 The date 1776, found at the base of the pyramid in Roman numerals, doesn't refer to July 4th, the date of the country's independence . But May 1st, when the Illuminati was founded, is May 1th, when it was founded .
 May 1st is also an international holiday for all workers, known as May Day . May Day was established in 1889 at the International Socialist Congress .
 A forerunner of this group was the London Mercers Company, and earlier than that, the London Staplers . The group was a forerunner to this group .
 The organization traced their lineage back to the ancient commercial groups involved in trading between the Mediterranean and India .
 The company chartered in 1606 to establish the Virginia Plantation on a communistic basis . They were closely related to the Levant Company, and the Anglo-Muscovy Company .
 It was mainly organized for trading, but soon became an agent for British imperialism . It was mostly organized for trade, and soon became a British agent for imperialism .
 They traded in cotton, tea, silk, silk and salt peter . They were accused of dealing with opium and participating in the slave trade .
 They virtually monopolized all trade from South India, the Persian Gulf, Southeast Asia and East Asia . The trade monopoly was based in South India and the Persian Persian Gulf .
 Indian policy was influenced by the company from 1757 to 1773, when their power was broken by the 1773 Regulatory Act, and Pitt's India Act of 1784 . The company finally ended their monopoly in 1813 .
 When they ceased to exist in 1873, many of its shareholders were major financiers . Many of the shareholders of the company were major financial backers .
 The principals of this group perpetuated their elitist goals by establishing the Fabian Society . The principals, this group of this elitists, were the Fabians .
 On October 24,1883, in London, a group of 17 wealthy Socialists gathered to discuss a 'Fellowship of the New Life' The society was based on the writings of scholar Thomas Davidson, who hoped to start some sort of monastic order .
 Israel Zangwil 1, a Jewish playwright and novelist, wrote the play The Melting Pot in 1910 . H Cole, Harold Laski and Israel Cohen also wrote plays about discrimination against Jews and Jews .
 Some of these people were also members of the Society for Physical Research, an organization dedicated to spiritualism research, which was founded in 1882 . Some of the spiritualists were members of this organization .
 He was a disciple of John Stuart Mill, who served as the Secretary of the British East India Company . He was the son of Mill, and was disciple of Mill .
 On January 4, 1884, one of the factions established a group known as the Fabian Society . However, they split into two factions, and one of them established a new society .
 At a time when there were 30,000 Socialist voters, after a few weeks, they had only 20 members . The Socialist Party was founded by the Socialist Party of Germany in 1968 .
 In May, journalist George Bernard Shaw joined, and soon became the leading figure of the Fabians . Shaw would win the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1925 .
 In March, 1885, Sidney Webb, then a clerk from the Colonial Office, joined; and in 1886, so did Graham Wallas . In March of 1885 and March of 1886, both Webb and Wallas joined; in March of that year, Webb joined .
 The other faction, known as ""The Fellowship", continued for 15 years under Davidson, with members such as J Ramsey MacDonald, Edward Carpenter, and Havelock Ellis .
 Their pamphlet Facts for Socialists in 1887, maintained that any . person who knew the facts of Socialism, had no other choice but to be one .
 They had 74 local chapters in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa, Spain, Denmark, Denmark and Germany .
 In 1899, The Fabian Essays was written by seven influential members of the Society, and edited by Shaw . Shaw edited the work, which was the most noted work on socialism .
 It became the blueprint for socialistic legislation, and was later reprinted in 1908,1920,1931, and 1952 .
 Fabian leaders were drawn to Herbert George Wells' ideas of the ""New Republic" which he described as a sort of outspoken Secret Society . Wells described the society as a society made up of the educated class, whose common goals would lead to the creation of a new world state . Wells
 Wells would give the Fabians the notoriety they needed . Known as the 'Prophet of Our Time' because of writing about many things before they came to be, in books like The Time Machine .
 In his first lecture after joining, he said that the World State was a necessity . The World State is a necessity, he added .
 In his 1905 book, A Modern Utopia, he wrote of the World State taking control and creating a ""sane order" The World State maintained a central records system in Paris, which they used to keep track of every person on Earth, and aided the state to eliminate the unfit
 Wells was unimpressed with the Fabians, and called for expansion, by raising money, getting new offices, appointing a new staff, and relaxing the guidelines for membership . Wells called for a relaxed membership policy, relaxing the rules for members .
 His views were not shared by the Fabian inner circle, and in September, 1908, he handed in his resignation .
 Blueprints for a World Revolution was an elaboration of ideas from his 1926 book The World of WiiSiam Clissold . It was a seven-point program for the development of the ""new human community"
 Chapter Four ideas had been fleshed out in 1897 short story A Story of the Days to Come and his 1901 book .
 It is not a project to overthrow existing governments by insurrectionary attacks, but to supersede them by disregard . It's not an overthrow of existing governments, it's a project of disregard .
 It does not want to destroy them or alter their forms, but to make them negligible by replacing their functions . It wants to replace functions by making them negligible .
 The Open Conspiracy was Wells' perspective of his New Republic, which represented a classless World State that controlled everything . Wells' New Republic was based on the New Republic . Wells's New Republic represented the classless world state .
 The revolution was to begin through the ""formation of small groups of friends, family groups, groups of students and employees" " meeting and conversing frequently in the course of normal occupations"
 Chapter Four: A multitude of overlapping groups, but now all organized for collective political, social and educational as well as propagandist action . Chapter 4: The group is now organized to organize for collective social and political and educational purposes .
 It will have become a great world movement as widespread as socialism and communism . It will be as widespread and evident as socialism or communism, it will become a world movement . It is not only a movement but a movement that will become widespread in the world .
 Wells included the international banking houses in Clissold's ""open conspiracy" through a three-point program that would by-pass governments by negotiating agreements stabilizing the currency, adjusting credit availability to control the fluctuation of business, and withdrawing credit to governments or armament industries who inst
 Wells either based his writings on the actual plans of the Fabian elitists, or used his knowledge of what they had already done in order to formulate a theory of the future . Wells either used the knowledge of their plans to formulate what they were going to do in the future,
 Since he did quit, were these writings meant to be an expose or warning? Or was he just stating facts, daring people to try and stop them? "I don't think he did it," he said .
 "We don't know his intent, but what we do know, was that he was incredibly prophetic in his description of their methods," he said . "We do know that he described them as incredibly prophetic"
 It would indeed be a ""blueprint" for the manner in which the Illuminati would entrench itself in our governmental affairs . It would be a 'blueprint' for the way the Illuminati entrench themselves in our government .
 "These tools would be fully utilized to begin the destruction of America," says President Obama .
 The secret goal of the Fabian Society, was to create a godless, classless, socialistic society that was dedicated to the ultimate victory of Socialism, which really meant Communism . The Fabian society, was created by the Fabians, in the hope of Communism .
 In 1891, they became affiliated with the Second Socialist International . They helped establish a Democratic Socialist state in Great Britain . They became affiliated to the International Socialist Party .
 Ruskin based his views on those of Socialist Robert Owen . Ruskin was a teacher at the Working Men's College, a professor of Fine Arts at Oxford .
 In his work, The Republic, he outlined his ideal society, which was an aristocratic society ruled by the elite . The Republic was based on The Republic .
 It included the elimination of marriage and the family, and introduced selective breeding by the government, who would destroy all inferior offspring . The government would eliminate marriage and eliminate the family and destroy inferior offspring.
 In Plate's utopia, sexual equality dictated that women would fight alongside the men in times of war . Plate: Women would be able to fight alongside men in the war .
 The name originated from the Roman Consul, General Quintus Fabius Maximus, the Cunctator . During the early phases of the Second Punic War, he enabled the Roman army to regroup and defeat Hannibal's stronger Carthaginian army .
 The Fabians were working towards a new world, by indoctrinating young scholars who would eventually rise to power in various policy-making positions throughout the world . They were infiltrating educational institutions, government agencies, and political parties .
 Their strategy was called the ""doctrine of inevitability of gradualism,"" which meant that their goals would be gradually achieved . The strategy was known as the "dictrine of immediability of gradualism"
 The entertainment industry has been slowly and methodically taking bolder steps in the content of their programming . Ever since Bible reading and prayer has been taken out of schools, the entertainment industry is taking bold steps .
 "We are seeing things being televised, which would have never been considered thirty years ago," says CNN.com.com's John Defterios.com .
 Nudity done in ""good taste", or done in culturally or historically accurate, is acceptable in the U.S. It is acceptable to show nudity in the UK .
 Obscene language is tolerated if it is an essential part of the plot . Obscene is tolerated in the film, but it is not required to be censored .
 Even though the level of sex and violence is increasing, the rate of complaints to the television networks is decreasing . The level of complaints is decreasing to the networks .
 This was done to brainwash our children to constantly bombard them with trash that would influence them, and turn them away from God . This is done by brainwashing our children .
 Music videos have been shown to ferment rebellion in young people . This is so evident with the concept of music videos, which have been able to combine sex and violence .
 Dewey would later serve as its Vice-President, and in 1941, its President . Dewey later served as the President of the United States .
 Shaw called for ""wire-pulling" the government in order to get Socialist measures passed . Shaw called on the government to 'wire pull' the government .
 In 1931, the New Fabian Research Bureau was organized, joining the Fabian Society in 1938 to form a reorganized group . In 1938, the group was reorganized into a group of researchers .
 In 1940, the Colonial Bureau of the Fabian Society was established; and in 1941, the International Bureau was formed, which catered to international issues . The Fabian International Bureau also was formed in 1941 .
 In December, 1942, the Fabians published the Beveridge Report, written by Sir William Beveridge . Beveridge promised the Britons the world, if they would accept his package of social reforms .
 In 1945, Fabian Socialists took control of the House of Commons on the strength of the Report and the Parliamentary Reforms . The Report was published eleven years earlier by Sir Ivor Jennings .
 Within a few years, British industries and services were nationalized and put under government control . The Rothschilds were able to control more, because now, all banks were forced to use Bank of England notes, instead of their own .
 At its peak in 1946, the Fabian Society had 8,400 members in 80 local chapters . At the peak of 1946, there were 8,000 members . The Fabian society had 80 chapters in 80 countries .
 Today, from their headquarters at 11 Dartmouth Street, London, they spread their ideas among teachers, civil servants, politicians, union officials, and other influential people .
 They also hold meetings, lectures, conferences, and seminars; do research in political, economic, and social problems; and publish their findings in magazines and books .
 Cecil Rhodes was able to control the diamond mines of South Africa with his DeBeers Consolidated Mines Limited by buying out the French Diamond Co. and merging with the Barnato Diamond Mining Company . He eventually controlled the production of diamonds throughout the world .
 His Consolidated Gold Fields, was also a prosperous gold mining operation . He was also the owner of Consolidation Gold Fields .
 In 1877, while still studying at Oxford, he wrote the first of seven wills, in which each became a separate and legally binding document . Each of his seven wills became legally binding documents .
 Scholarships provided a two-year program for young men, and later, women, from the United States, United Kingdom and Germany, to carry on the Illuminati conspiracy . The Scholarships .
 Brig. Richard Celeste, Supreme Court Justice Byron ""Whizzer"" White, Charles Collingwood, Howard K Smith, George Jerome Goodman(writer known as ""Adam Smith""), Brig. Richard Celeste . White was the Supreme Court justice for the United States .
 Pete Dawkins, Pat Haden, Kris Kristofferson and Rep. Pete Dawkins will perform at the event . The event will be held in Los Angeles, California .
 The Rhodes fortune has been used to promote the concept of globalism and one world government . The Rhodes Scholarship Fund has been set up to fund the idea of globalist globalism .
 Rhodes talked about starting an organization to preserve and extend the British Empire . Rhodes talks about starting a group that preserves and extends the British empire . Rhodes: "I want to be able to continue to be part of the world's most successful empire"
 It was this mentality that fueled his desire to unite the world under one form of government, he said . It was that he wanted to unify the world with one government .
 Using Jesuits and Masons as organizational models, Rhodes, Rothschild agent Lord Alfred Milner joined together to form a secret group, on February 5,1891 . The group was led by social reformer and journalist William T Stead .
 There was an Inner Circle, known as the ""Circle of Initiates"", led by Rhodes . The Executive Committee included an Executive Committee with Stead, Brett, and Milner, the chief Rhodes Trustee .
 Their goal was to eventually establish a one-world government, which would be controlled by the international banking community, under the cloak of socialism . They wanted to establish a world government, controlled by banking community . The world's first socialist government would be under the influence of international banking .
 English-speaking world, which would be controlled by them . Chapter Four: The world of the world, controlled by the U.S., would be under control of them .
 In 1897, British and American elitists met in order to come up with ways to accomplish Rhodes' plan to consolidate their respective governments, which would pave the way for a one-world government . Rhodes wanted to consolidate the governments of both Britain and America .
 On July 24,1902, a secret organization known as the Pilgrim Society was started in London . The Pilgrim Society is a secret group of secret members of a secret society .
 Milner recruited young men from Oxford and Toynbee Hall to help run his Administration . Milner was Governor-General and High Commissioner of South Africa from 18971905 .
 With his backing, they were able to get jobs in influential positions in government and finance, where they became a dominant force in England's domestic and foreign policy . With their backing they became dominant forces in the country .
 The membership consisted of men who not only had a vast amount of political clout, but some who served in the highest levels of the British government . The membership of the group included some of the highest level of government .
 Rhodes, Alfred Beit, Sir Abe Bailey, and the Astor Family formed the core of their financial support . Most members had private fortunes, or were known financiers, however .
 Morgan, Rockefeller and Whitney families, and associates of Lazard Brothers Bank and Morgan, Grenfell and Company. The Rockefeller, Whitney, Whitney families were among those involved in the scandal .
 Lionel George Curtis advocated British imperialism, and the establishment of a World State . Curtis was the British High Commissioner to South Africa and Secretary to Sir Alfred Milner . Curtis advocated a world state in South Africa . Curtis wrote a book called The World State of Imperialism .
 Institute for International Affairs in the Netherlands, the Netherlands and the Norwegian Institute for Foreign Affairs in Norway . The Institute of International Affairs is one of the leading institutes in the world .
 From June, 1918 to April, 1919, they held a series of dinner meetings on a variety of international matters, but soon disbanded . They held a number of dinners in London between 1918 and 1919, but disbanded .
 In the fall of 1917, a group called 'The Inquiry' was assembled by Col. Col. George Washington . The inquiry was led by the former President of the United States .
 Edward M House to negotiate solutions for the Paris Peace Conference in Versailles . Edward M. House negotiated solutions to the Paris peace conference . House was invited to meet with the French President of France . House died of a heart attack in 1918 .
 They worked out of the American Geographical Society doing historical research, and writing position papers . They worked for the Society .
 The Inquiry was formed around the inner circle of the Intercollegiate Society, which was a group of American socialist-oriented intellectuals . It was formed by the group of socialist intellectuals .
 Chapter Four establishes ""socialism as dreamed by Karl Marx,"" and the creation of a one-world totalitarian government . Chapter Four establishing ""socialist as envisioned by Marx" and creating a one world totalitarian government.
 The book also discussed the graduated income tax, and tax-free foundations .
 They met again on June 5,1919, and decided to have separate organiaations, each cooperating with the other . They decided to split up their organizations and have separate organizations .
 The Council on Foreign Relations and Institute of International Affairs strongly supported the League of Nations . The Council of Foreign Relations was founded by Wilson .
 The Council on Foreign Relations was incorporated on July 21, 1921 . It was formed from members of both groups who had participated in the 1919 Paris Peace Talks .
 The Council on Foreign Relations became the American headquarters for the Illuminati . The Illuminati was founded by the Council of Foreign Relations . The Council is now the headquarters of the Illuminati in America .
 Elihu Root, Paul D Cravath, Archibald Cary Coolidge, Isaiah Bowman, Norman H Davis(NY banker, former Undersecretary of State), John H Finley(associate editor at the NewYork Times) , David F Houston, and Otto Kahn.
 This gave them the ability to slant the news in a way which would reflect their views, and thus begin the process of molding America to suit their needs . This is how they began the process to mold the American public to suit them needs .
 Between 1938 and 1940, Francis P Miller organized these mini-Councils with funding from the Carnegie Corporation, to better influence thinking across the country . The Carnegie Corporation funded the mini councils to influence thinking .
 Albuquerque, Atlanta, Billings, Denver, Omaha, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Portland, Providence, Rochester, Rochester and St. Louis .
 St. Paul-Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Santa Barbara, Seattle, Tampa Bay, Tucson, Tulsa, Wichita, and Worcester .
 From the beginning, their goal was to infiltrate the government, and that was done. From the start, they said, "from the beginning of the government" "That was done," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Today, the CFR practically controls both domestic and foreign policy . Today, they are so successful, they were so successful that today, they have control of foreign policy. The CFR is so successful they now have control over foreign policy and domestic policy .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt had Henry Wallace and Louis Douglas work with a CFR study group on national selfsufficiency . The Export-Import Bank and Trade Agreements Act of 1934 came out of the study group .
 Hamilton Fish Armstrong and Walter H Mallory met with Assistant Secretary of State George S Messersmith after the start of World War II in 1939 . The Council established a study group concerning the war and a plan for peace .
 They proposed to do research, and make informal recommendations in areas regarding national security and economics .
 War and Peace Studies Project was initiated with funding from the Rockefeller Foundation . The Rockefeller Foundation gave grants of $300,000 over a 6 year period . Secretary of State Cordell Hull and Undersecretary of State Sumner Welles liked the idea .
 Research Secretaries from the War and Peace Studies were brought into the State Department as consultants to the corresponding subcommittee of the Advisory Committee . In order to formulate a closer liaison between the CFR and the advisory committee, the War & Peace Studies researchers were brought in .
 The Committee had their last general meeting in May, 1942, and all work from then on occurred at the subcommittee level . The Committee was disbanded in May 1942 .
 In December, 1943, the CFR began to outline their proposal for the United Nations . The CFR proposal was presented at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference .
 Allen Dulles, former President of the CFR, was appointed director of the CIA . John Foster Dulles became Eisenhower's Secretary of State .
 Arthur K Vandenberg, a leading Republican, and a CFR member, traveled around the country to drum up support for the creation of the United Nations . Vandenberg is a member of the CFR .
 He was instrumental in getting the Republican-controlled Congress to go along with Truman's CFR-controlled foreign policy . He was also instrumental in . getting the GOP-controlled . Congress to back Truman's foreign policy.
 In 1925, Lionel Curtis established the Institute of Pacific Relations in 12 countries, in order to steer America towards Communism . The Institute was established by Curtis in 1925 .
 The IPR dominated the Asian Affairs section of the State Department . Men from the IPR were placed in important teaching positions, and dominated the teaching positions .
 After a four-year battle, their tax exempt status was revoked from 1955-1960 . After four years of fighting, they were able to reclaim their tax-free status .
 Their publications used by the armed forces, colleges, and close to 1,300 public school systems . Their publications were used by armed forces and colleges, including 1,000 public schools .
 The magazine Amerasia was published by the FBI who found 1,700 secret documents from various government agencies, including the Army and Navy, that were either stolen, or given to them by traitors within State Department .
 The Senate Subcommittee concluded that the American policy decision which helped establish Communist control in China was made by IPR officials acting on behalf of the Soviet Union .
 Laughlin Curry, Alger Hiss, Joseph Barnes, Philip Jessup, and Harry Dexter White, as Communist sympathizers, were identified as Soviet agents by J. Edgar Hoover .
 While he was Assistant Secretary of Treasury, Harry Dexter White provided Russia with the means of printing currency . White was Secretary of State at the time of the Soviet Union .
 He became Director of the International Monetary Fund in 1946, but resigned in 1947, when Whittaker Chambers accused him of being pro-communist . He denied the accusation, which he denied .
 In November, 1948, after White's death, Whittaker produced five rolls of microfilmed documents, which included eight pages of United States military secrets which had been written by White .
 After World War II, the CFR was able to expand its study programs with grants of $1.1 million from the Ford Foundation, $500,000 from the Rockefeller Foundation, and $500k from the Carnegie Endowment . The CFR received $1 million in grants from Ford Foundation
 Pro-communist Cyrus Eaten, Sr., a recipient of the Lenin Peace Prize, established the ""Joint Conferences on Science and World Affairs" in 1945 to gather intellectuals from across the world to push America towards disarmament .
 The group was financed by the CFR, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Ford Foundation . The group is based in New York City .
 In 1959, a disarmament proposal developed by the CFR, and discussed at the Conference, became the basis for Kennedy's disarmament policy in September 1961 .
 They advocated secret negotiations with Russia concerning disarmament, and increased foreign aid to China . They also advocated secret talks with Russia regarding disarmament .
 The career of Richard M Nixon began in 1946, when, backed by Eastern Establishment money, he came out of obscurity to defeat incumbent Congressman Jerry Voorhis in California, who was anti-Federal Reserve .
 Nixon was rewarded by being selected as VicePresident, while Warren was named to the Supreme Court . Warren was also named to Supreme Court.
 A subsequent news release indicated that Rockefeller had requested the meeting, when it was Nixon had . A subsequent press release indicated Rockefeller had asked Nixon to meet, but Nixon had.
 After losing to Kennedy, Nixon ran for Governor in California, but lost to Pat Brown in 1962 . Nixon also ran for President in California .
 Nixon was a CFR member from 1961-65, and it was during this time that Nixon rebuilt his political career .
 At the top was John F Kennedy's picture, and a list of reasons for the accusation . At the bottom of the list was an accusation of sexual assault .
 It was later discovered that it had been drafted at a Pepsi-Cola ""convention"" in Dallas, by lawyers of the Rockefeller law firm of Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, and Alexander, to be used as an attack on Kennedy .
 There is more than one Kennedy Assassination researcher who feels that Nixon had prior knowledge of Kennedy's shooting . No hard evidence has ever come to light that Nixon knew of the shooting .
 There has never been a single group pinpointed as the mastermind of such a plan . Kennedy's death is widely accepted that there was a conspiracy behind his death .
 The complexities involved in such a cover-up, certainly point to the Illuminati, because they are the only group in the world, operating behind the scenes, who would be able to influence and control all the elements necessary to pull off something like this .
 His murder was carried out publicly, because they wanted the political leaders in this country to know who was in control . His murder is carried out public, as they wanted to be able to see who is in control of the country .
 There has been a phenomenal amount of research done on the case of President Kennedy's murder . It almost seems that when he died, the tide changed in this country, says CNN.com .
 The forces behind the assassination of Kennedy were able to change the course of history at will, and with the new-found confidence at their success, the power they gained, literally allowed them to exert complete control over American government . The assassination of JFK Kennedy was the result of the assassination .
 One fact that linked the Illuminati to the Kennedy conspiracy, was the oil connection . The oil connection was a link between the Illuminati and the JFK conspiracy .
 Kennedy wanted to end American involvement in the war, and in October, 1963, he recalled 1,000 so-called advisers . However, Kennedy wanted the end of American involvement .
 After Kennedy was eliminated, the U.S. government escalated the war in Vietnam . After Kennedy's assassination, the war was escalated to Vietnam .
 Using a federal statute, Kennedy was going to force J Edgar Hoover, the aging Director of the FBI, to retire, because he wanted somebody who better represented his New Frontier .
 President Lincoln intended to circumvent the Federal Reserve by issuing nearly $5 million in non-interest bearing U.S. bank notes . The order was Executive Order #11110 .
 President Obama signed a limited nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviets . He also signed a deal with Russia over Cuba and signed a nuclear test test ban .
 Kennedy's agenda was contrary to the plans for a New World Order . Needless to say, Kennedy was not on the agenda of the New Order .
 Robert F Kennedy promised an honorable end to the Vietnam War, and with Martin Luther King, Jr. delivering the Black support, Kennedy would have been easily elected President . Kennedy would be easily elected .
 The Illuminati wanted Nixon to be President, because he represented the instrument that would perpetuate their goals . That however, did not fit into the plans of the Illuminati, who wanted to prolong the war .
 There is plenty of evidence that points to a conspiracy in the assassinations of Bobby Kennedy, and King . Bobby Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The likelihood that the same forces were involved is evident, as again, because again, the course of the nation was altered to fit into their plans . The likelihood is that they were involved in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 The Illuminati didn't want Nixon elected in 1960, and to insure that he wasn't, Eisenhower told the country that he couldn't think of a single thing that Nixon had done to help, during the eight years of his Administration . The Illuminati wanted to ensure that Nixon wasn't elected in
 The comment, and his haggard appearance during the debates, were the two things that kept him from being elected .
 In 1968, the responsibility of moving the country closer to socialism was put upon his shoulders .
 Former Secretary of the Navy, William Mittendorf, Finance Chairman of Nixon's 1968 campaign, said that at 5:30 AM on the morning after Nixon's election victory, Nelson Rockefeller and William Rogers went to Nixon's room to help select his Cabinet .
 He appointed Mitchell, his campaign manager, to be his Attorney General . Mitchell was Mitchell's campaign manager for his election campaign .
 He appointed Henry Kissinger to be his Secretary of State, even though Kissinger's views were the complete opposite of his own . Kissinger was appointed to be the secretary of state of state .
 Kissinger appointment was urged by Nelson Rockefeller, so the Illuminati could control U.S. foreign policy . Kissinger appointment urged by Rockefeller to be made so he could control world affairs . Rockefeller wanted Kissinger to control foreign policy so that he could get control of the world .
 At the beginning of each of his terms, Nixon offered the post of Treasury Secretary to David Rockefeller, but he refused it . Rockefeller was the Treasury Secretary at the time of Nixon's presidency .
 In February, 1972, he signed Executive Order #11647, which gave the government the power to accomplish that division . Three days later, he announced that the country was being divided up into ten federal districts .
 The Ten Regional Councils, a direct extension of the Executive Branch, have been getting control of local, county, and state governmental functions, through federal loans . Since 1972, since 1972, they have been controlling local, state and federal governments .
 Nixon was basically saying that he was a Socialist . Even though his policies had already indicated it, Nixon was saying he was Socialist . Nixon's policies were already indicated, but his policies indicated it .
 As more and more facts come out, it is quite obvious that Watergate was a move by the Illuminati to get rid of an uncooperative President . The Illuminati was behind the move to oust President Richard Nixon from office .
 Watergate actually can be traced back to 1956, when Nixon's brother, Donald, received a secret loan from Howard Hughes . Watergate actually began when Nixon received a loan from Hughes from the Hughes .
 It proved embarrassing when it surfaced during the 1960 Presidential election . It proved to be embarrassing .
 James W McCord, Jr. was the security chief for the Committee to Re-elect the President . He was accused of being a double agent used to bring Nixon down by sabotaging the Watergate Hotel break-in .
 There is evidence to believe that the police had been tipped off on the night of the breakin . There is also evidence that police had to be tipped off .
 Carl Shoffler, and three other officers, who usually went off duty at midnight, just happened to stay on for the next shift, and were parked just a minute away from the hotel complex . Carl and three others were parked in a minute from the complex .
 McCord entered the Watergate while it was still open, and put some tape on one of the doors so it wouldn't lock . McCord had put tape on the door to prevent it from locking .
 The tape was put on horizontally, so that it could be seen between the doors . The tape is put on horizontal, so it can be seen through the doors between them .
 When the ""plumbers"" arrived hours later, instead of the doors being open, they were locked, which indicated that the piece of tape had been discovered . The doors were locked when they were discovered, indicating that the tape was discovered .
 They left, since there was no longer any assurance of a successful operation . "They left," they said, "because of no assurance of any successful operation"
 McCord told them to go back and pick the lock, since the police had not been called . McCord said they would have to pick up the lock and go back .
 E Howard Hunt and his Cuban accomplices, did this, and left tape on the door for McCord to get in . Hunt and Cuban accomplice, who left the door open, taped the door to McCord . Hunt left tape in the door, but McCord was able to
 He was supposed to remove the tape from the door, but he didn't, however, he told the other ""plumbers"" that he did . He told the others that he had removed the tape, but not the door .
 He also instructed them to shut-off their walkie-talkies, so the static wouldn't be heard, so they were inside the office without being able to hear any outside communications taking place .
 Wills discovered the door taped for a second time . They were caught, when Wills found it taped for the second time. The door was taped twice more than a year ago .
 On March 19, 1973, McCord wrote a letter to Judge John J Sirica that turned the Watergate affair into a national crisis . McCord said Attorney General John Mitchell was involved, that campaign money was used to pay the ""plumbers" and that the White House was trying to
 Nixon probably had no prior knowledge of the break-in, says historian John Avlon . Nixon probably didn't know about Watergate, Avlon says . Nixon was likely unaware of Watergate, says Avlon.
 Nixon may very well have survived the scandal if it weren't for the discovery of the Watergate tapes . Chapter Four: Nixon may have survived if he hadn't been caught up in the Watergate scandal .
 Alexander M Haig, Jr., Jr., a aide to National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger, controlled the vault where the tapes were kept, and secretly made copies of the transcripts available . Haig later became Nixon's Chief of Staff .
 Haig became Cyrus Vance's(CFR member, Secretary of the Army, later Deputy Secretary of Defense under Robert McNamara, who was also a CFR member) assistant under McNamara in 1962 . Haig is a CFR CFR member .
 After a tour of duty in Vietnam in 1966, he was decorated for bravery . He was made a full colonel in 1968 after a tour in Vietnam .
 Andrew Goodpaster recommended Haig to Kissinger in 1969 . Haig was put on the National Security Council . Kissinger put Haig on the NSC in 1969, and Haig became a diplomat .
 In less than a year, he was promoted to general, and in two more years, to major-general . He has been promoted to major general in less than two years .
 Although he had served only four months as a battalion commander, in 1972, he was given four stars . He was nominated for Army Vice Chief of Staff .
 He resigned in 1979 because he was critical of Carter's defense and foreign policies . He resigned because of his criticism of the president's foreign policy .
 Reagan was Reagan's Secretary of State for 18 months . He went on to become the chief operating officer of United Technologies . He returned to government after leaving the company .
 John Dean claimed that Alexander Haig was the man who leaked information to Bob Woodward of the Washington Post . John Dean also claimed that ""Deep Throat"""", the man he claimed to have leaked information, was Haig . Haig is believed to be Haig's former
 Woodward had claimed that he didn't meet Haig until 1973, however, it has since been revealed that prior to Woodward becoming a reporter, he was a lieutenant in the Navy, and as a special briefing officer, had contact with Haig at the National Security Office in the White House
 In addition to the economical changes, Kissinger infuriated Kissinger by bombing North Vietnam without consulting anyone . The bombing of North Vietnam was the first time Kissinger had bombed North Vietnam .
 Kissinger was the Illuminati's man in the White House, and his job was to control Nixon, so he was running the show . However, Kissinger was Nixon's man, and Kissinger was in charge of the Illuminati . Kissinger's job is to run the show, and Nixon's job was
 Documents indicated that after World War II, Russia established an ODRA spy ring in Poland to infiltrate British and American intelligence . The documents indicated that Russia established a spy ring after WWII .
 The GZI, Polish Intelligence, discovered that one communist agent, code-named ""Bor"", had worked with another agent, Ernst Bosenhard, a clerk at the U.S. Intelligence Headquarters in Oberammergau, Germany, who had been sending secret documents
 He became a consultant on security matters during the Administrations of Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson . He was a consultant during the administrations of Eisenhower and Kennedy .
 His book, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, in 1957, established him as the leading authority on U.S. strategic policy . In 1957, his book, nuclear weapons and foreign policy, was published .
 There should be little doubt where his allegiances are in regard to his support of one-world government, says CNN.com .
 In 1965, former CIA Chief of Research and Analysis, Herman E Kimsey, used fingerprint, dental and medical records to reach a conclusion that Goleniewski was actually Aleksei Romanoff, the son of Nicholas II, who survived the alleged Communist massacre of the Russian Royal family
 The Bolshevik government claimed to have captured the seven members of the Russian Imperial family . The Czar, his wife, son, and four daughters, were murdered in Ekaterinburg . The bodies were dumped in an abandoned mine .
 In 1970, documents revealed that President Wilson backed a secret mission to Russia that resulted in the rescue of the Czar and his family . They were smuggled out of Russia in the back of trucks and taken by ship to Europe where they have lived since 1918 .
 The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was said to also contain a codicil that guaranteed that the Romanov's would not be harmed . It was signed on March 3,1918 to end hostilities between them .
 The Russian people were to continue believing that they were dead, so the communists could replace the monarchy . The communists were to replace the Russian monarchy with the communists .
 It had been hoped that the Bolshevik government wouldn't survive, so they could return, but it never happened . It had hoped that they would be able to return to Russia .
 Nixon angered the Illuminati because of his choice of Vice Presidents . He also angered them because he chose to name Vice Presidents instead of Vice President .
 Establishment insiders had urged Nixon to appoint Nelson Rockefeller after Spiro Agnew resigned because of income tax evasion charges . Establishment insiders wanted Rockefeller to replace Agnew . Rockefeller died of a heart attack at Rockefeller's Washington, DC, home .
 If Rockefeller would have been appointed, he would have become President after Nixon was destroyed . Rockefeller would become President if he had been appointed . Rockefeller was appointed to replace Nixon .
 Lynette ""Squeaky"" Fromme would attempt to shoot Ford on September 5,1975; and on September 22,1975, Sara Jane Moore would also attempt to shot Ford . Later, Lynette "Squaky" Fromme attempted to kill Ford in September 1975 .
 In a June, 1976, Playboy interview, she said that there is a ""part that I don't think I can talk about" In the same interview she said: "There is a part that I can't talk about."
 "I just haven't figured out a way to talk about it and protect everyone," she says . She says she's not sure how to deal with the issue .
 I'm not just saying that there are other thingswhich means there is other people, though not in terms of a conspiracy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There are other people who are involved in a conspiracy"
 This certainly gives some serious overtones to the attempts on Ford's life, and if they were actually meant to elevate Rockefeller to the Presidency . Rockefeller was assassinated by the assassination attempt in 1953 .
 Nixon was hoping to follow in the steps of Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D Roosevelt who were virtual dictators, and began acting on his own to bring about change . With the Illuminati hoping to have world control by 1976, Nixon hoped to follow the footsteps of Wilson and Roosevelt .
 It is likely that the plan to get rid of Nixon was beginning to take shape at this time . Nixon was likely to be ousted from office at the time of Watergate .
 In October, rumors surfaced that Nixon may be considering a military coup to stay in office . Then in October, came the rumor that Nixon might have considered a coup . Nixon was elected to office in 1972 .
 Watergate Special Prosecutor Leon Jaworski warned the grand jury, that if they decided to indict Nixon, he may use force to remain in office . Watergate special prosecutor Leon Jaworki said he could use force if he was indicted .
 He felt it would be led by General Robert Cushman, the Marine Representative on the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who had been loyal to Nixon ever since he had been his military aide while he was the Vice President under Eisenhower .
 Schlesinger, in July, 1974, believed the Washington contingent of Marines to be the probable force used in a coup attempt, began developing a strategy to bring in the 82nd Airborne Division from Fort Bragg .
 On August 2,1974, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger admitted that General Haig had informed him that Nixon was considering the idea of surrounding the White House with troops . Kissinger said that he had been told by Haig that Nixon had considered the idea .
 The limited scope of any coup attempt would have prevented its success, officials say . Pentagon officials knew that, and Pentagon knew that .
 Rather than a plot by the Illuminati to militarily take over the government, it seemed to be more of an attempt by Nixon to keep from getting pushed out of office by the powers that actually run this country . Instead of a plot to take over, Nixon was more of a bid to
 The CFR's ""1980's Project"", evolved from a Council Study Group on International Order, which had met from 1971-73 . Chapter Four THE CFR AND THEIR GOALS THE CFR's 1980's Project .
 They sought to duplicate the success they had achieved with the War & Peace Studies . Their concentration was to be on creating a new political and economic system that would have global emphasis .
 In the fall of 1973, the 1980's Project was initiated, and to accommodate it, the CFR staff was expanded, and additional funds raised, including $1.1 million in grants from the Ford, Lilly, Mellon and Rockefeller Foundations .
 The Coordinating Committee had 14 men, with a full-time staff; plus 12 groups, each with 20 members . Other experts and advisors acted as consultants to the project .
 Some of the Project's strongest supporters went to the White House to serve in the new Administration in 1976 . Cyrus Vance, Michael Blumenthal, Marshall Shulman, and Paul Warnke were among those who supported the project .
 In 1979, the Project was discontinued for being too unrealistic, which meant it was too soon for that kind of talk . It was discontinued in 1979 for being unrealistic .
 They are a semisecret organization whose 1966 Annual Report stated that members who do not adhere to its strict secrecy, can be dropped from their membership .
 On the national level, the Business Advisory Council and the Pilgrim Society are groups which form the inner circle of the CFR . On the international level, it's the Bilderbergers .
 They have used the prestige that their wealth and social position, and their education have given them to lead their country towards bankruptcy and military debacle . They have led their country to bankruptcy and a military debacle, writes CNN.com .
 The nation's right-to-know machinery, the news media, usually so aggressive in exposures to inform our people, remain conspicuously silent when it comes to the CFR, its members and their activities . The news media is silent on CFR's activities .
 Phyllis Schlafly and Rear Admiral Chester Ward wrote in their 1975 book Kissinger on the Couch that the CFR's ""purpose of promoting disarmament and submergence of U.S. sovereignty and national independence into an all-powerful oneworld government is the only objective revealed to about
 The published accounts of CFR activities greatly understate their power and influence in national and foreign policy . CFR activities understate the extent of their influence in foreign policy and national policy .
 Besides their involvement in the government, they hold key positions in all branches of the media . They include control or ownership of major newspapers, magazines, publishing companies, television and radio stations .
 From 1928-72, nine out of twelve Republican Presidential nominees were CFR members . Nine out of 12 Republican presidential nominees were members of the CFR .
 During three separate campaigns, both the Republican and Democratic nominee was, or had been, a member of a political party .
 Since World War II, practically every Presidential candidate, with the exception of Johnson, Goldwater, and Reagan, have been members of the group .
 The position of Supreme Allied Commander have usually been held by CFR members, like Gen. Gen. David Cameron .
 CFR members have held almost every key position, in every Administration, from Franklin D Roosevelt to George Bush . CFR members hold key positions in almost every Administration from FDR to Bush .
 Every Secretary of State, with the exception of Cordell Hull, James F Byrnes, and William Rogers, have been members of the group .
 Every Secretary of Defense, from 1958, up to 1992, with the exception of Melvin Laird, have been members .
 Dean Acheson, Robert Lovett, John McCloy, George Kennan, Charles Bohlen, W. Averill Harriman, W Averll Harrimans, W J. A. Harrimn, WAverill and W. H. A
 When JFK took office, 63 of the 82 names on his list of prospective State Department officials were CFR members . CFR members were among those on Kennedy's list of potential officials .
 Dean Rusk, C Douglas Dillon, Adlai Stevenson, Adm. Stevenson, John McCone(CIA Director), W Averell Harriman, John J McCloy(Disarmament Administrator), Gen. Gen. John J. McCloy, Gen. Dean Rus
 Robert McNamara, Robert Kennedy, Robert F Kennedy, Paul Nitze, Charles E Bohlen, Walt Restow, Roswell Gilpatrick, Henry Fowler, Jerome Wiesner, Angier Duke (Chief of Protocol), Thomas Finletter, George Ball (Under Secretary of State for
 Nixon had resigned from the CFR in 1962, when it became an issue in the California gubernatorial primary campaign . Nixon later rejoined the CFR after resigning from the organization in 1962 .
 Foreign Affairs published in October, 1967 edition of Foreign Affairs . He wrote that he would have a new policy towards Red China . Yet he wrote in the same article that he had a new foreign policy .
 Nixon accepted an invitation by Premier Chou En Lai to go to China, where the groundwork for trade relations was established . Even after a July 15,1971 statement on Radio Peking in China that called for the ""people of the world, unite and defeat the United States aggressors and
 Arms Control and Disarmament Agency member of U.S. delegation for talks with Russia on SALT . Dr. Peter Bergen is the senior member of the U. S. delegation .
 Arthur Burns(Chairman of the Federal Reserve), C Fred Bergsten , C Douglas Dillon(General Advisory Committee of the U.S, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency), Richard N Cooper, Gen. Richard Cooper and Gen. Arthur Burns . Arthur Burns is the chairman of the
 Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Richard Gardner( member of the Commission on International Trade and Investment Policy), Sen. Sen. Richard Gardner, Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Sen. Tom Coburn all support the U.S. effort .
 Peter Peterson, James Lynn, Paul McCracken, Charles Yost, Harlan Cleveland, Jacob Beam, David Kennedy. David Kennedy . David Kennedy is the author of a new book, "American History of the World"
 Walter Mondale, Zbigniew Brzeznski, Cyrus R Vance, W Michael Blumenthal, Harold Brown, Stansfield Turner, Gen. Gen. George S. Eisenhower, George W. Bush, George H. Eisenhower and others have died .
 In 1970, as Ambassador to the UN, he pushed for Red China to be seated in the General Assembly . He pushed for the country to have a seat in the United Nations' General Assembly in 1970 .
 Alan Greenspan is the former Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights . Greenspan was also a director of the U.S. Information Agency . He was the President of the United States' first Secretary of State Department .
 The Council accepts only American citizens, and has a membership of about 2,900 . It includes influential bankers, corporate officers, and leading government officials .
 It is believed that the hierarchy of this inner circle includes descendants of the original Illuminati conspirators . They have Americanized their original family names in order to conceal that fact .
 It later passed to the control of Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who was also a CFR member . The CFR was later taken over by the Rockefeller Foundation .
 Time(founded by CFR member Henry Luce, who also publish Fortune, Life, Money, People, and Sports Illustrated) Newsweek (owned by the Washington Post), Business Week, U.S. News & World Report, Saturday Review, National Review, Atlantic Monthly, McCall's
 G Gordon Liddy, former Nixon staffer, now talk show pundit, laughs off the idea of a New World Order . Liddy: There are so many different organizations working toward their own goals of a one-world government that they cancel out .
 You have seen that their tentacles are very far reachingas far as the government and the media . You have also seen that they have very much of an impact on the media and the government .
 CFR has a heavy cross membership with many groups; as well as a cross membership among the directorship of many corporate boards . This is a good indication that their efforts are concerted. However, as I will outline below, you will see that the CFR has .
 Macy, Federated Department Stores, Gimbel Brothers; Gimbel brothers; Sears, Roebuck & Co. Macy and Macy's stores . Macy's Macy's, Macy's and other department stores are among stores in the U.S.
 This highly influential magazine has been the leading publication of its kind, and has a circulation of over 75,000 . This is the first edition of the magazine to have been published in the UK .
 Reading this publication can be highly informative as to the views of its members . Reading this is highly important to the members of the society .
 The Spring, 1991 issue called for a UN standing army, consisting of military personnel from all the member nations, directly under the control of the UN Security Council . For instance, the Spring issue of the Spring 1991 issue, called for the standing army .
 They publish books and pamphlets, and have regular dinner meetings to allow speakers and members to present positions . They also award study fellowships to scholars, promote regional meetings and stage round-table discussions .
 The Council on Foreign Relations was able to infiltrate our government, it is no wonder that our country has been traveling the course that it has. Being that our government has been infiltrated by the group, it's no wonder why our country is traveling the way it has been .
 The moral, educational and financial decline of this nation has been no accident, says President Obama . The moral decline of the U.S. is no accident. The nation's moral decline is no excuse, he says .
 It has been due to a carefully contrived plot on the behalf of these conspirators who will be satisfied with nothing less than a one-world government . The plot was due to an attempt to create a 'one-world' government, according to the author .
 As each year goes by, the momentum is picking up, and it is becoming increasingly clear, what road our government is taking, says David Cameron . The momentum is growing, says Cameron .
 Chapter Four that is that, is that they feel it is too late for their plans to be stopped . Chapter Four: 'They feel it's too late to stop their plans for their own purposes' Chapter Four is that the government feels it is 'too late'
 "They have become so entrenched in our government, our financial structure, and our commerce, that they probably do control this country, if not the world," says President Obama . "They probably control the world. They have become ... entrenched in ... our government," he says .
 In light of this, it is only a matter of time before their plans are fully implemented . The plans are already in place, according to reports .
 It purported to be an outline for the control of the world by the Jews, with the help of the Masons . The Masons were involved in the creation of the plot .
 The document has been used to prove that the Illuminati is an exclusively Jewish plan for world domination, and has put the Jewish race in a bad light .
 Even though many influential Jews were part of the Illuminati's inner circle, that is no reason to indict the entire Jewish race . The Illuminati's founders were Jewish, but that's not the case . Even though the Illuminati founders are Jewish, that's no reason for indicting them .
 The Bible identifies the Jews as God's chosen people, so it is highly unlikely that they are behind such a Satanic plot . It is unlikely that the Jews are behind the Satanic plot, says Rabbi David Perry .
 One only has to look at the history of Israel, and see how they have been able to miraculously survive, to see that this is nothing but anti-semetic rhetoric . Israel is a nation that has survived in spite of the fact that it has survived .
 It is not race, which is the common denominator here, it is money and greed, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Money and greed are the common causes of the problem"
 "For the most part of the conspiracy has been dominated by the Europeans," the author says . "It has been perpetuated by the Englishspeaking countries of the world," he says .
 No one is quite sure about this notorious document, and how it fits into the puzzle of the one-world government conspiracy . The document is believed to have been written by the U.S. government .
 We know that its influence was taken advantage of, by the Illuminati, however, as to the actual origin and its purpose, we may never know for sure, because portions of it are highly accurate in its revelations .
 If it is a forgery, it most certainly was based upon a factual document, it was based on a historical document, says author .
 It may contain some clues about the early stages of the Illuminati conspiracy, and the people behind it . Whatever the case, it is included in this book because it contains some clues .
 In 1848, Hermann Goedsche forged letters indicating that Benedic Waldeck was conspiring to assassinate Frederick William IV, the King of Prussia . The letters were forged by a German postal official who forged them .
 After it became known that they were forgeries, he was removed from his job, and he began writing under the pseudonym, Sir John Retcliffe .
 One of those novels, Biarritz, contained a chapter titled, ""In the Jewish Cemetery in Prague"", in which the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel met with Satan to tell him of their plans to control the world . The heads of Israel meet with Satan in order to
 Two men dedicated their lives to fighting the Satanic Jewish plot . However, the covert proceeding was witnessed by two men, who then dedicated lives .
 In 1872, Russian antisemites printed the chapter in a pamphlet, as fiction based on fact . In 1871, the chapter was printed in a Russian pamphlet . The chapter was published in 1872 .
 In July, 1881, the story was published in the French paper Le Contemporain as fact, and all of the speeches by each tribal head was consolidated into a single speech . The speech was supposedly made by a chief rabbi in a secret meeting of influential Jews .
 Its authenticity, again, was supported by the fictional Sir John Readclif . Its authenticity was again supported by a fictional Sir .
 La Vielle France said there was a striking analogy between the Protocols of the Elders of Zion and the discourse of Rabbi Reichhorn, pronounced in Prague in 1869, over the tomb of the Grand Rabbi Simeon-ben-lhuda .
 The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion seems to be a conglomeration of many anti-Jewish publications during that period . The document seems to have been compiled by anti-Semitic publications in the 1930s .
 In 1869, Gougenot de Mousseaux wrote a book that said that the world was being taken over by a group of Satan-worshipping Jews . Out of that group, a man would emerge whom the Jews would worship as their returned Messiah .
 In 1840, a meeting of eminent Jewish leaders was held in Cracow, Poland, to discuss the expansion of Judaism over the entire world . Osman-Bey wrote in World Conquest by the Jews that in 1840, an eminent Jewish leader was held .
 Joseph Schorst, a Jew who was a member of the Mizraim Lodge, stole the document and sold it for 2,500 francs to Justine Glinka, daughter of a Russian General .
 She gave the French document and a Russian translation to Gen. Gen. Vladimir Putin . She also gave the document and translation of the Russian document .
 Glinka was later arrested, returned to Russia, and exiled to her estate in Orel . Schorst was killed in Egypt, while Glinka returned to Orel and exiled .
 Glinka had given a copy to Alexis Sukhotin, a law enforcement official in Orel, who then showed them to two friends, Stepanov, and Professor Sergei Nilus, a religious mystic . It has also been reported that Glinka gave a copy of the document to
 Nilus showed them to the Czar in 1903, who believed them to be fraudulent, and ordered that all copies were to be destroyed . All copies of Nilus were destroyed .
 Nilus may have altered the text to be more intense then they originally were . Nilus was banned from the Court after he was banned by the court .
 "representatives of Sion, of the 33rd degree" would not have altered this and any other in-kind references . However, as far as the mysterious references to the 'representatives' of the '33rd degree' he would not know what this meant .
 The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion first appeared, in a shortened form, in an August, 1903 edition of the Kishinev newspaper, in the Ukraine . Then in 1905, it appeared in the appendix of a book by Nilus called The Great in the Small
 A copy was received by the British Museum in London, in 1906, where it was translated by English journalist Victor Marsden, who published it in 1921 .
 Marsden said that he couldn't work on the translation for more than an hour at a time, because of the evil he felt while reading it . Marsden: "I'm working on a translation of the Bible for the first time"
 In 1905 edition, he said that Protocols had been given in 1902-03 . However, in 1905 edition he said he had given Protocols in 1902/03 .
 Being illegal to criticize the Monarchy, he fictionalized it, making Napoleon the character of Machiavelli, to explain the Emperor's underlying motives . Being illegal for criticizing the monarchy, he made Napoleon the . character of the . Napoleon . to explain his underlying motives, Machia
 Joly had it printed in Belgium, then attempted to have it smuggled over the French border . Joly attempted to smuggle it over the border to France, but was denied .
 It was seized by the police, who confiscated as many copies as they could, then banned the book . The book was then banned by the authorities .
 The police traced the book to Joly, who was then tried on April 25,1865, and sentenced to fifteen months in prison . Joly was sentenced to 15 months in jail .
 At the Berne trials, a witness for the prosecution tried to prove that Joly was a Jew, and that his book was a coded version of the Jewish plan for world domination . Joly's book was published in 1939 and sold for $100,000 .
 The only major change, is that it was changed from the past, to the future, says the author . "Only major change is that the only major . change is the change of the future," she says .
 Who could have forged the Protocols isn't known, if in fact it is a forgery .
 Elie de Cyon, a Russian journalist living in Paris, was probably responsible for the leak . He was probably an opponent of Sergey Witte, the Russian Minister of Finance .
 When Witte took office in 1892, he began to modernize Russia by doubling steel, iron, and coal production . Witte also doubled the production of railroads and built railroads in Russia .
 He caused inflation by abandoning the gold standard in 1898 because of an economic slump . The gold standard was abolished in 1898 due to a slump in the economy .
 Protocols say that such economic depressions are caused by the Elders to gain control of the money . The gold standard has ruined every country that has adopted it, says Protocols .
 Chapter Five economic and financial data could have been extracted from Joly's book, and applied to Witte, in order to present him as a tool of the Elders of Zion . Witte is a member of the Council of Zion, and a tool for Zionists .
 Cyon allegedly forged and translated the Protocols, expanding them as a satire on Witte . The Protocols were allegedly forged by Cyon and translated into a parody of Witte's character .
 His writings resembled the style used in the Protocols; and he was known to have used another French satire on a dead statesman, by changing the names .
 Pyotr Ivanovich Rachkovsky, head of the Russian Secret Police, broke into Cyon's villa at Territet, Switzerland, to look for additional written attacks on Witte .
 It is believed that Rachkovsky discovered the Protocols there, and used it for a dual purpose . The Protocols are believed to have been discovered in the early 1900s .
 He could use it against the Jews, claiming it was part of a Jewish conspiracy; and he could reveal that it was written by a Jew, which Cyon was, thus destroying Cyon . He could then use it to destroy it .
 In 1921, Count Alexandru du Chayla said that Nilus revealed to him in 1909 that the Protocols were fraudulent, and had been sent to him by Gen. Gen. Nilus . The Protocols are fraudulent, he said .
 During the 1934 trial of two Swiss Nazis in Berne, a group of Jews accused them of distributing the Protocols . The historian Vladimir Burtsev and a professor, Sergey Svatikov, testified that Rachkovsky and other Czarist officials had a hand in
 In 1891, Rachkovsky sent a letter to the Police, and announced his intentions to oppose the Jews . In the same letter, he wrote to the police, and said he would oppose Jews .
 This was followed up by a book that stated his views about the Jews, and how, as a result of the French Revolution, they controlled Europe . This was then followed up with a book about how Jews controlled Europe and how they controlled the continent .
 It is quite possible that he added to Cyon's manuscript to produce the Protocols, and then gave it to Sergei Nilus to publish in his book .
 On May 14,1935, the Court of Berne ruled that the Protocols were not of Jewish origin . The Protocols are now known as the Protocol Protocols .
 Montesquieu and Rousseau published in Berlin, in 1850, also contain passages very similar to the Protocols . The Protocols were published in 1850 .
 Standard Oil allegedly had the Protocols distributed in Russia to create a tense situation between the Czarist Russian government and the Jewish-owned Royal Dutch Co. who had oil distribution rights in Russia . The Protocols were intended to create tension between Standard Oil and the Royal Dutch .
 The document was also used in the late 1800's to instigate pogroms against the Jews so they would migrate to the United States . The document also instigated pogoms against Jews in the 1800's .
 Once they were in America, they were registered to vote Democratic, and greatly contributed to Wilson's election in 1912 . Once they arrived, they contributed to the 1912 election .
 During the Russian Civil War from 1918-20, Bolsheviks distributed the Protocols, and in the subsequent pogroms, over 100,000 Jews were killed .
 Eventually the Protocols were distributed all over the world, and it gave the anti-semetic people of various countries an excuse to persecute the Jews . The Protocols are distributed around the world . The anti-Semitic people in various countries were an excuse .
 In 1920, U.S. industrialist Henry Ford supported them in a series of articles in his newspaper The Dearborn Independent and eventually in his book The International Jew . Henry Ford published in 1921, which he later published in his own book .
 "They are sixteen years old, and they have fitted the world situation up to this time. They are 16 years old," says the BBC's new chief executive .
 Ford supported Hitler, who was seen as fighting against the international Jewish conspiracy . Ford supported the Nazi leader, who supported Hitler in the war .
 In 1927, he renounced his belief in them after his car was sideswiped, forcing it over a steep embankment . He renounced their belief in the religion after a car accident forced his car over a hill .
 In 1938, Father Charles E Coughlin printed them in his weekly paper Social Justice . In 1938 they were printed by various semi-religious organizations .
 The Illuminati had drafted a master plan that diverted attention away from the Illuminati, and directed it towards the Jewish Revolutionary movement in Russia . The plan was worded in such a way, that it diverted attention towards the Jews .
 The plan would appear to be a Jewish plot to achieve world control through political Zionism, when in fact it represented the future plans of the International Bankers of the Illuminati . Now their plan appears to be an attempt to achieve the world control .
 The Protocols do reflect some of the views of Weishaupt, and the writings of various Socialists on Bolshevism . Because of that, they were not easily dismissed .
 Let us direct our attention not to what is good and moral, but what is necessary and useful . Let us, however, in our plans, direct our . attention not . what is moral, as well as what is needed and useful. Let us not to focus on moral but what
 Our power in the present tottering condition of all forms of power will be more invisible than any other, because it will remain invisible until the moment when it has gained such strength that no cunning can any longer undermine it .
 We must not stop at bribery, deceit, and treachery, when they should serve towards the attainment of our end. Chapter Five . Chapter Five.
 State must bear in mind that any agreement against us would be unprofitable to itself . This is the reason why there is one State which would anywhere receive support if it were to raise its arm .
 All news items are received by a few agencies, in whose offices they are focused from all parts of the world . Even now this is already attained by us inasmuch as we already have a few news items received by .
 After reading these words, you probably have the same feeling of uneasiness that I had when I read them for the first time . After reading this article, I think you have a similar reaction to reading them again .
 The Protocols do elaborate on the Illuminati program for world takeover, that would not have pertained to the world at the time the Protocols were alleged to have been written . Seemingly, the protocols are not the only ones to elaborate .
 Because of the depth of information given on the various aspects of the plan, I believe that they were written by, or based on the writings of someone who had an intimate knowledge of the future plans and inner workings .
 In the past few years, another theory has come to light in regard to the Protocols . Chapter Five Chapter Five: The Protocols.
 The document was forged with the intent of being an indictment against all Jews, it would not just pinpoint a small group of individuals . The document would not be just pinpointing a small number of individuals, but would be aimed at all Jews .
 Eliphas Levi assisted Charles Nodier to sift through the Vatican documents taken by Napoleon . Levi had joined a Martinist-affiliated Masonic lodge, which later merged with the Memphis and Mizraim Lodges .
 These strange references have been linked to a little known organization known as the Prieure' de Sion . This is linked to the organization, which will be discussed later today .
 As a youth, Adolf Hitler fled Austria, and went to Germany to escape the draft . World War II AND THE RISE OF HITLER: The Rise of Hitler and the rise of the Nazi Party .
 This was the man that the Illuminati would choose to further their goals . The Illuminati would have chosen this man to help them further their aims .
 As a puppet of the Illuminati, he was used to set the stage for the conflict which would eventually lead to the establishment of the United Nations, a major step towards one-world government . He was also used to shame the world into allowing the State of Israel to be established .
 The Power of the Coming Race is about a super-race of white Aryans that took control of the world . The book tells the story of a race that took over the world from a race of Aryans .
 TheLast of the Roman Tribunes was adapted into a major opera by German composer Richard Wagner . Richard Wagner's opera was adapted from the work of the composer .
 History shows that Hitler ordered the death of six million Jews during the Holocaust in Europe . The Holocaust was the largest Holocaust in the world .
 Why he did, has become a mystery, since it really hasn't been established that he had an intense hatred for Jews . Why he chose to do so has not been established .
 Hitler lived in an apartment owned by a Jewish landlady because of his financial situation . Landlady even moved out of her apartment so that Hitler and a friend could have more room . Hitler was forced to pay a nominal rent .
 A Jewish used-clothing dealer gave him a long black overcoat, which he wore constantly . The overcoat was given to him by a Jewish used clothing dealer .
 Hitler was awarded the Iron Cross during World War I, a rare honor for a soldier of such low rank, who hadn't really done anything to deserve such a distinction . When he was a lance-corporal during WWI, Hitler was a soldier who didn't really do anything
 On one occasion, when it was suggested that he get rid of her, he became furious . He became furious when suggested that she should be taken away .
 Eduard Bloch, a Jewish physician, had been the Hitler family doctor since Hitler was a child . Bloch was the family doctor of Hitler, who died in 1945 .
 Hitler's father, Alois, was illegitimate, and the identity of his grandfather had never been established . Hitler's identity of Hitler's grandfather was also never established .
 During Hitler's rise to power, his half-brother's son threatened to reveal that Hitler was of Jewish ancestry . Hitler's son's son was Jewish and Hitler was Jewish .
 Hitler's grandfather had been the son of a Jewish family called Frankenburger, in Gratz, who employed Hitler's grandmother, Maria Anna Schicklgruber, as a maid . One investigation discovered that Hitler had been employed by the family .
 She had become pregnant by their son, while she was working in their home . She became pregnant while she worked at their home in the summer .
 The family sent her money for a year and a half to help support the child . The girl's family sent the money to support her for the past two years . The child's mother says she is proud of her daughter's success .
 Hitler's grandfather was employed as a servant in the home of Baron Rothschild . Another investigation said that Alois was conceived in Vienna, where he was a servant .
 In Hitler's War, David Irving revealed that Hitler didn't order the Jewish massacres, and didn't find out about it until late in the war . In 1977, Irving wrote that Hitler found out about the massacres late in WWII .
 There is no record of Hitler ever visiting a concentration camp, although he did watch films and see photographs . Hitler did visit the camp, but he did visit films and photographs .
 So what turned Hitler against the Jews, if indeed he was; or was there someone else making decisions for him? Or was there another making decisions?
 He attributed the weakness of the German economy to the Jews, and considered the Treaty of Versailles, a Jewish document, to the treaty . He also considered the treaty of VersAilles, the Jewish document .
 The Secret Diaries of Hitler's Doctors revealed that Hitler had taken 75 different medications . One clue was revealed in 1983 by David Irving, written in 1983 .
 He was given strychnine and belladonna, cocaine and adrenalin, amphetamines, painkillers, and sedatives, including Eukodal, including morphine .
 Hitler wrongly identified as Jewish bankers as the forces that he wrongly identified . Were they being given to him for the sole purpose of making him mentally unstable, he said .
 There may also be a more sinister reason which contributed to Hitler's state of mind . Hitler may also have been in a state of state in his mind, according to the historian .
 Hitler and some of his officers had been linked to various occult groups . The use of the swastika gave evidence of that, according to the historian .
 In its normal usage, it is a sign of the power of light; but in its reverse form, as used by the Nazis, it represents darkness . The Nazis used it as a symbol of darkness in their propaganda campaign .
 As a youth, Hitler had been influenced by George Lanz von Liebenfels, an Austrian magician who in 1907 founded ""The Order of the New Templars"", which used the swastika as its emblem . Hitler was influenced by the Order, which in 1907 had used the
 Hitler joined a secret group in 1919, called the Thule Society, which practiced black magic and worshipped Satan . Hitler joined the group, which practised black magic, in 1919 . Hitler was a member of the group .
 They wanted to form a political party to rally the people against communism . The party was formed to rally against communism and rally against it .
 I have initiated him into the 'Secret Doctrine', opened his centres in vision and given him the means to communicate with the Powers . I have also opened the centres of his vision in vision, opening his centres of vision .
 Hitler grew to fear those around him who practiced the black arts . Along with Jews, Masons and occult practitioners were also killed and imprisoned in the concentration camps .
 Some of the reported book burnings were actually the confiscation and destruction of Masonic libraries . Masonic libraries were actually confiscated and destroyed .
 Hitler was influenced by the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche, from whose name came the word Nazi . Hitler was also influenced by Nietzsche's writings .
 Because of Hitler's failed November revolt, he was jailed on April 1,1924, sentenced to five years, but was released after eight months . Hitler was released to build up to national prominence so he could be built up to be national .
 The Illuminati made sure the book was well circulated, and it became the springboard for Hitler's political career . Hitler's career was the result of the book's popularity in Germany .
 The depressive economic situation in Germany at the time, created by the Versailles Treaty, made it possible for Hitler's leadership to take root . Hitler became Chancellor in January, 1933, after becoming Chancellor .
 Since 1924, the Dawes Plan flooded Germany with a tremendous amount of American capital, which enabled Germany to build its war machine . Germany's war machine was built by Germany in order to win the war .
 German company became largest corporation in Europe, and the largest chemical company in the world, after a $30 million loan from the Rockefeller's National City Bank after World War I .
 Several Germans on this Board were found guilty of war crimes at Nuremburg . Several Germans were found to have been involved in war crimes . Several of the board members have been convicted of crimes .
 Hitler received support and financing from the aristocracy and elite of Germany, including Gustav Krupp, Carl Duisberg, Ernst Tengelmann, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther Luther . Hitler was assassinated by the Nazis at the age of 16 in 1941 .
 The du Ponts have their allies in Germany that are aiding in the armament business . The duPonts have a long history of armoring .
 The International Harvester Company President told me their business here rose 33% a year but they could take nothing out of it . He said their business grew 33% but they were able to take nothing from the company .
 General Motors Company and Ford do enormous business here through subsidiaries . They take no profits out of their operations . General Motors and Ford make no profits from their operations in America .
 Germany's two largest tank producers were Opel, a subsidiary of General Motors . Opel and Ford A G. G. were German subsidiaries of both GM and Ford .
 International Telephone and Telegraph held a substantial interest in Focke-Wolfe, an airplane manufacturer who produced German fighter aircraft . The company's interest in the company led to the collapse of the FOCke-wolfe factory .
 Hitler indirectly received financing from the Krupps, Kennedys, and the Rothschilds . Hitler indirectly funded Hitler's rise to power by the Krupp, the Kennedy family, the Rothschild family and the Krups . Hitler's assassination was the first assassination attempt by the Nazis .
 The liaison between Hitler and Wall Street was Hjalmar Horace Greely Schact, the President of Reichsbank, who aided in the rebuilding of Germany . Schact helped rebuild the country .
 The Holocaust had begun with the Jews being stripped of their German citizenship . From 1939-45, Hitler's death camps claimed the lives of six million Jews, or about 1/3 of the entire Jewish race .
 Another reason for World War II, was to make it possible for Russia, our ally at the time, to gain strength and receive recognition as a world power, says President Roosevelt . The war was meant to help Russia gain strength, he says .
 Although they were our ally, they were still still a Communist nation, with growing designs on world domination . The U.S. was still an ally of the Soviet Union in the Cold War .
 There is an incredible amount of evidence that indicates the willingness of our government to allow the spread of Communism, because of the efforts of Communists . Communists who had been employed and were acting on behalf of the Illuminati .
 In May, 1943 the Allies had pushed the Germans out of Africa, invading Sicily in June, and in September, pushed their way through Italy, on the way to Southern Germany, their weakest point .
 The U.S. withdrew troops from the invasion force so they could be used in a later invasion of France . However, the U. S. withdrew soldiers from the force to avoid being used in the invasion .
 Eisenhower: German advance was spread out, which allowed the Russian forces to advance . Eisenhower: "The Russian forces were able to advance. They were spread out" Eisenhower: The Russian forces had to be spread out .
 Was this intentional move on the part of the U.S. to allow the Russians an opportunity to pursue their ulterior motives? Was this an intentional move?
 A faction within the German Secret Service was prepared to assassinate Hitler, and surrender, on one condition that the Soviets would not be allowed to advance into Central Europe . In the spring of 1943, a faction of the German secret service prepared to kill Hitler, but the Soviets were not allowed to
 Roosevelt refused to accept, and postponed a planned European invasion, in order to give the Russians more time to advance, and occupy more land . Roosevelt refused and postponed the planned invasion .
 Eisenhower allowed the Russians to get to Berlin first, before the Americans, which eventually allowed part of the city to fall under Communist control . The city eventually fell under communist control .
 Russia was able to come away from 1945 Conference in Yalta with so much, because Roosevelt believed that the Russians were ""perfectly friendly" Roosevelt thought that Russia was a friendly .
 Russia walked away from the bargaining table with Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, eastern Poland, east and central Europe, N Korea, the Kuril Islands, and the northern part of Sakhalin . Russia walked out of the deal .
 Before resigning his Commission, he died after an automobile accident forced him to be hospitalized . However, before resigning, he resigned from his Commission .
 In 1979, a former Secret Service agent for the Office of Strategic Services revealed that he was ordered by the Director 'Wild Bill' Donovan to kill Patton in 1944 .
 Patton was killed with cyanide at the hospital he was taken to after the accident . Patton says he knows who killed Patton, but not who killed him . Patton was taken seriously seriously seriously in a car accident .
 In 1949, upon waiting to be released from a Detroit hospital, he died of a heart attack . He died in 1949 .
 James Forrestal was appointed Secretary of the Navy in 1944, then Secretary of Defense in 1947, till Truman asked him to resign in 1949 . Forrestal, a partner and President of Dillon, Read and Company, was asked to resign from post in 1949.
 After the War, he became dedicated to destroying Communism, because it seemed as though the U.S. was constantly yielding to them .
 His personal diaries, consisting of 15 loose-leaf binders, about 3,000 pages, were removed from his office at the Pentagon, and held at the White House . The diaries are now being held in the National Security Council .
 Forrestal had told a friend that he was being followed, and that his phone was tapped . Forrestal said he had been followed and his phone had been tapped . Forrestal had said he was followed and that he had his phone tapped .
 He noticed the beginnings of the Korean War, fifteen months before it actually started, 15 months before the war actually started . The Korean War began in 1950s and 1950s, but never ended .
 On May 22,1949, Henry Forrestal decided to take his brother for a ride into the country . Forrestal's brother was killed by a plane crash in May 1949 .
 That same day, James Forrestal, jumped from the 16th floor of the hospital . Forrestal jumped to his death on the same day .
 The cord of his bathrobe was tied around his neck, and the hospital released a statement that he committed suicide, even though there was not enough evidence to prove that he had .
 Forrestal is still labeled as being insane, and the cause of his death remains unknown . The cause of Forrestal's death is still unknown .
 Joseph McCarthy showed him an FBI report detailing the Communist penetration of the State Department and other government spy networks . McCarthy had to show him the report to him . McCarthy: "It's a good thing that you can do"
 A Special Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee was established to investigate where there were disloyal people employed at the State Department . The committee is looking into disloyal State Department employees .
 Anti-McCarthy sentiment swept the country after McCarthy was accused of sexual misconduct . McCarthy was investigated by McCarthy after a wave of allegations against him . McCarthy is accused of being a serial sex offender in New York .
 Sen. McCarthy accused of smearing the reputation of innocent people . McCarthy was accused of accusing innocent people of slander . McCarthy died on July 30, 1954, in a landslide .
 The speech by Flanders was written by the National Committee for an Effective Congress . The committee was created by Arthur Goldsmith, who compiled the charges against McCarthy . Flanders' speech was written for the committee .
 He was originally charged with 46 counts, but after hearings, only two remained . The Senate voted only to ""censure"" him, which is a milder punishment than ""condemning"" him .
 No autopsy was ever performed, leading many to believe that he was killed because he was closer to the truth the most people ever dreamed . Many believe he was murdered because of the truth .
 Of the 81 security risks that McCarthy said was in the State Department, by November, 1954, they had all been removed, either by dismissal or resignation . McCarthy said in 1954, all of the 81 State Department security risks had been removed .
 The invisible forces at work within our government used World War II as a means of promoting the Russian goal of conquest, and allowed the spread of Communist propaganda .
 In the Pacific Theater, the stirrings of World War II actually began years before . The first World War War I began in the Pacific in 1942 .
 China had allowed Japan to drill for oil in several provinces, because Standard Oil's price for kerosene was too high . Standard Oil had agreed to allow Japan to drilling for oil because it was too expensive for Standard Oil to produce .
 Through contacts in the Chinese government, Standard Oil had been able to keep anyone from drilling . The Japanese came and developed huge fields .
 Standard Oil pushed them out, but the Japanese vowed to return, even going as far as saying that they would seize China to recover their oil investments . Standard Oil was pushed out of China by Standard Oil, but has since recovered its oil investments in China .
 When the Japanese invaded China in the 1930's, one of their first acts was to destroy Standard Oil property, because they had been responsible for their ouster . Standard Oil was responsible for the ouster of Standard Oil in China .
 In 1931, Henry L Stimson, the Secretary of State, met with President Herbert Hoover, on behalf of the Illuminati, to make a deal . Stimson met with the President to secure a deal with the Illuminati .
 The International Bankers promised to end the Depression if Hoover would declare war on Japan, and send in the military to protect Standard Oil property . Hoover declared war against Japan in 1941 . The war would end the depression .
 Hoover refused to negotiate with the Bankers . Even though Hoover accommodated many of them, this was one deal that he refused . Hoover refused .
 Stimson pitched the idea to Governor Delano Roosevelt, who was indebted to them because of his philanthropic operation at Georgia's Warm Springs . Roosevelt has a dozen U S Presidents in his family tree . Stimson was the first President of the South .
 Wilson appointed Assistant Secretary of the Navy by Wilson in 1913 . He was appointed on orders from Col. Col. Wilson . Wilson died in 1918 .
 Roosevelt was James Cox's running mate in the 1920 Presidential election . The Democratic team suffered from the mistakes of the Wilson Administration, and lost miserably to the Harding-Coolidge ticket .
 The Illuminati put all their political power behind Roosevelt to get him elected . Stimson appointed Stimson to the post of Secretary of War, even though he was a Republican .
 Wilson advisor Bernard Baruch became the liaison between Roosevelt and the Bankers . That role was filled by another Wilson advisor, Baruch, who became a liaison .
 FDR's uncle, Frederic Delano, was a member of the Federal Reserve Board, and in 1925, became the Chairman of -the League of Nations Committee . Frederic was also a Federal Reserve member .
 In 1934, he was appointed as Chairman of the National Resources Planning Board . In 1936, he became chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank in Richmond, Virginia .
 Roosevelt was a 32nd degree Mason, a Knight Templar, and a member of the Shrine . Roosevelt was also a 32th degree Mason and Knight Templar . Roosevelt died at the age of 92 .
 Butler chose to expose the plot, rather than lead it, supposedly because of his patriotism . Butler chose not to lead the plot because he was patriotic, but to expose it . Butler exposed the plot to expose himself, but not lead it .
 Or was it because he recognized their true aim, which was for Roosevelt to impose a dictatorship during a national emergency, so the government could take complete control? Roosevelt's true aim was to impose an emergency, he says .
 When the planned revolt didn't materialize, other plans were developed . Other plans were also developed to prevent the revolt .
 Future plans called for the government to be moved towards Fascism, and government control without a revolution . Future plans also called for a government-controlled government .
 Chapter Five meeting in 1933: "The new President again turned to the possibility of war in Japan" Chapter Five of the meeting was held in Tokyo, Japan . Chapter Five met in 1933 .
 Roosevelt wanted Japan to withdraw, not only from Indo-China, but also China . Roosevelt wanted to withdraw not only but also from China .
 To enforce his demands, he froze all Japanese assets in this country, and cancelled a 1911 commercial treaty . He also cancelled a commercial treaty with Japan in 1911 .
 He cut-off supplies of fuel and placed an embargo on 11 raw materials which were necessary for their military . The embargo was imposed on fuel supplies and other raw materials necessary for the military .
 In England, Winston Churchill, and later the Dutch government, followed suit . Winston Churchill followed suit. In the Netherlands, the government of the Netherlands followed suit with a similar policy .
 On November 26,19~1, Roosevelt sent an ultimatum, insisting that the Japanese withdraw all their troops . Roosevelt sent the Japanese troops out of the U.S. on November 25,19,1 .
 He refused any negotiations with Prince Kenoye, the Japanese Prime Minister, even though Joseph Grew(CFR member, and Rockefeller agent), the Ambassador to Japan, said that such a meeting would prevent war with the Japanese .
 On September 28,1940, Japan, Germany, and Italy signed the Tripartite Treaty . The treaty declared that if any of the three were attacked, all three had to respond .
 If Japan attacked the U.S., and the U S. would declare war against Japan, they would also be at war with Germany and Italy . So if the U .S. went to war with Japan, it would also go on to attack Italy and Germany .
 Roosevelt and Churchill were already working on a plan to get America to enter the war in Europe . Churchill and Roosevelt were working on the plan to enter Europe in 1940 .
 Hitler told his naval commanders in July, 1941, to avoid confrontation with the United States while his Russian campaign was in progress . Roosevelt planned for such a provocation in the Atlantic, but Hitler wanted to avoid it .
 Grew used his post as Ambassador to encourage the Japanese to enter a state of military preparedness . Grew encouraged Japan to become more prepared for the military .
 Institute of Pacific Relations funded communist spies who were to help induce the Japanese to strike back at the U.S. Institute funded spies through a $2 million grant . The Institute was funded by the Institute of Asian Relations through a grant .
 On December 7,1941, the Japanese attacked the U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor, instead of attacking Russia, as they originally intended to do . The U S. fleet was attacked by the Japanese in 1941 . The Japanese attack was intended to attack Russia .
 On January 1,1942, the 25 allied nations who went to war against Germany and Japan, signed a ""Declaration by the United Nations"", which indicated that no one nation would sign a separate armistice, and Gen. Gen. Eisenhower signed a "Declaration"
 Douglas MacArthur was appointed as the ""United Nations Commander of the South Pacific" He was the Commander-in-Chief of all armed forces in the Pacific Theater . MacArthur was the United Nations commander of the Pacific .
 Since then, it has become common knowledge that the attack was not the surprise it was claimed to be . The attack was the first to be claimed to have been a surprise .
 Congressman Martin Dies collected evidence that the Japanese were planning to attack Pearl Harbor . Dies was Chairman of the House Committee on Un-American Activities .
 The Committee was in possession of a strategic map that clearly indicated their plans to attack Pearl Harbor . The map was prepared by the Japanese Imperial Military Intelligence Department .
 Army Intelligence officer in the Far East discovered the plan for the Pearl Harbor attack . He sent three separate messages to Washington detailing the plan .
 Documents declassified by the National Security Agency in 1981 . America had broken the Blue and Purple secret codes of the Japanese . America knew all the details of the attack, and the whereabouts of the fleet .
 The State Department knew on November 20th, that a naval force, which included four of the largest Japanese aircraft carriers were heading towards Hawaii, and this information was passed on to Pearl Harbor on November 27th .
 Army Intelligence knew that diplomats at the Japanese Embassy in Washington had been ordered to destroy all codes, and to return to Japan . Diplomats at the embassy in Washington were told to destroy their codes and return home .
 The U.S. Navy conducted tests at Pearl Harbor which indicated that it was vulnerable to an attack from sixty miles away without being able to detect it . The tests indicated that the U.N. Navy had conducted tests that indicated that .
 Admiral J O Richardson, Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific fleet, wanted the fleet withdrawn to the west coast of the U.S. because they were inadequately manned for war, and because the area was too exposed . Admiral Richardson wanted to withdraw the fleet from the West Coast
 Roosevelt wanted him to create a naval blockade around Japan, to provoke them into a response, so the U.S. could declare war . It was later revealed that Roosevelt wanted to provoke a response from Japan . The United States declared war on Japan in 1941 .
 Rear Admiral Robert A Theobold, USN, Retired, is author of The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor . Col. Col. Robert A. Theobolds says Pearl Harbor was a major success for the U.S. Navy .
 Curtis B Dali, the son-in-law of FDR, admitted that they knew about the Pearl Harbor attack before it occurred . Dali was FDR's son in charge of his family .
 Theobold, the Commander of all the destroyers at Pearl Harbor, said in his book, that Roosevelt knew about the attack 21 hours before it happened . Roosevelt knew of the attack before the attack .
 The aircraft didn't have a reverse gear, making it difficult for them to get out of the circle, and up in the air . So the result of this positioning of the aircraft, made it . It was difficult for the aircraft to get into the air, because they didn’
 The Pacific fleet had consisted of nine battleships, three aircraft cruisers, and some smaller ships . The fleet consisted of 9 battleships and 3 aircraft cruisers .
 The aircraft carriers, and smaller, more mobile ships, were moved prior to the attack . Roosevelt knew they would be needed for a war at sea .
 Admiral William F Halsey sailed to Wake Island with the carrier Enterprise, three heavy destroyers and nine small destroyers . On December 5th, the Lexington was sent to Midway, and the Saratoga went to the Pacific Coast .
 The other battleships were considered dispensable, because they had been produced during and prior to World War I, and were viewed as old and obsolete . Other battleships had been seen as dispensable because of their age .
 The attack on Pearl Harbor resulted in the deaths of 2,341 American soldiers, and injury to 1,143 more . The attack was the first Pearl Harbor attack to hit the U.S. in the world .
 All of this is just to create an anti-Japanese sentiment in the country, and justify American action against Japan . All of the U.S. actions were done to create anti-Japan sentiment in Japan, the author says .
 With the Japanese prepared to surrender in February, 1945, the war was prolonged in order to destroy much of the industrial areas of Japan with a devastating air attack of incendiary atomic bombs .
 This allowed the ground to be cleared for the Illuminati to rebuild Japan with new industries so they could use cheap labor to flood the U.S. market with cheaply manufactured goods . The Illuminati was able to flood Japan with cheap labor .
 This would turn the U.S. into a nation that consumed more than it produced, creating unemployment and financial instability . This would create unemployment, financial instability and instability .
 Chapter Five of Eastern Europe, promoted Communism, paved the way for the United Nations, and the creation of the nation of Israel . Chapter Five was published in 1968 in the United States .
 At a cost of about $400 billion, the War raised our National Debt to $220 billion, and pushed us deeper into the clutches of the Illuminati's International Bankers . The War raised the National Debt by about $40 billion, raising the U.S. debt to $
 World War II was probably the most costly event in American history . Because of all the intricate angles involved in this conflict, it would not be an understatement to say that it was the most expensive .
 Goldsmith's decision would later be confirmed by Communist officials in Russia . Communist officials confirmed the decision in Russia later that day .
 Socialistic ideas can be traced back to Plato's Republic and Sir Thomas More's Utopia in 1516 . The Utopia was created by Thomas More in 1515 .
 Plato envisioned a society where marriage would be eliminated, all women would belong to all men, and all men would be men . Plato envisioned marriage being eliminated and all women being given all rights to men .
 There would be a tri-level society consisting of the ruling class, the military class, and the working class . The ruling class would be the military, working class and ruling class of the workers .
 Private property would be eliminated, and intellectuals would determine what was best for the lower classes . The intellectuals would decide what best for lower classes, the author says . Private property was eliminated and the intellectuals would take over .
 Mennonites who came to Pennsylvania, from Germany, in 1683, established communes . The Mennonite came to the state from Germany and established communs .
 As they moved westward, they left behind a splinter group, called the Amish . The Amish developed a society based on the private ownership of property .
 Followers of a Frenchman, Jean de Labadie, immigrated to Maryland in 1683 . They were followers of a Frenchman .
 Religious persecution forced them to America, where they practiced celibacy, equality of sexes, common ownership of property, and public confession of sins .
 Their numbers declined after the Civil War, and they finally broke up in the 1940's . Their numbers dwindled after the war .
 Francois Emile Babeuf, was a member of the llluminati . Babeuf's social views reflected those of Weishaupt's . As such, Babeuf was a socialist .
 He formed a masonic-like association of disciples called Babouvistes . They advocated violence as a means of achieving reform . He was the leader of a group of disciples who advocated violence .
 The location of the building, which was near the Pantheon, led to the name of the Order as Pantheonistes . The Pantheonists were named after the Order .
 Vanish the revolting distinctions of rich and poor, of great and small, of masters and servants, of master and servant, of governors and governed . Vanish at last, revolting . distinctions of . masters, servants, masters, governors and . governed. Vanish .
 Since all have the same needs and the same faculties, let there be only one education, one kind of food . Let's only have one education: One kind of education and one kind food .
 Under his plan, workers wouldn't be paid in money, since the owning of personal property would be abolished . Personal property would also be abolished, he says .
 These products, stored in communal warehouses, would be equally distributed . These products would be distributed to the public .
 Children would not be allowed to bear the name of their father, unless he was a man of great importance . Another notable aspect of his plan, was that children would be not allowed to carry the name .
 Knowing that the people would never allow such a communistic system, they never fully revealed their plans . Knowing that such a system would never be allowed to exist, the people never fully reveal their plans. Knowing that they would never let such an event take place, they kept quiet .
 Their propaganda centered on ""equality among men"" and ""justice of the people,"" while they criticized the ""greed"" of the government . Instead of their propaganda, they focused on equality among men .
 In August, 1796, Babeuf and 45 leaders of his movement were arrested . Babeuf was arrested after the government found out they were making preparations to lead a revolt against them .
 They were put on trial in a proceeding that lasted from February to May, 1797 . The trial lasted between February and May, and lasted between 1797 and May .
 On May 28,1797, Babeuf was hung, and many of his followers were deported . Babeuf's followers were also deported, and Babeuf followers were killed .
 Those who have studied the Russian Revolution have observed that there is little difference between Babouvism and Bolshevism . Babouevism is little different from Bolshevistism, says historian .
 The Third Internationale of Moscow in 1919 traced its descent from Babeuf to Babeuf . Babeuf was the founder of the Third International of Moscow .
 The earliest advocate of the movement, later to be known as Socialism, was the English millowner Robert Owen . Owen was the founder of the first socialist movement .
 At his Scotland textile factory, he was known as a model employer because of reforms he instituted, even enacting child labor laws . He was known for his reforms at his Scotland factory, where he instituted child labor .
 Owen bought several thousand acres from George Rapp's pietistic Harmony Society, in Posey County, Indiana . A colony established along those lines in Ireland failed, so in 1824, Owen sailed to America . Owen's first colony was established in Ireland .
 Other settlements like this were started in America and Scotland, and communism was born . Communism was born in Russia and the USSR .
 Owen was a weak leader, had few skilled workmen, and had to put additional duties on the few competent workers that he had, in an attempt to insure success . However, Owen was not a strong leader, and his workmen had to do additional duties .
 Owen had failed to take into account human nature, something he had fought so hard for in earlier years . Owen had fought for better housing for workers, better education for children, and the elimination on unhealthy conditions . However, Owen had not taken into account that human nature was a problem .
 He failed in an attempt to merge all the trade unions into a ""Great Trades Union" Even though he failed, his reforms completely transformed the town of New Lanark, Scotland .
 In 1817, a group of German separatists settled near the Tuscarawas River in Ohio . They named their society after one of the few Biblical plain cities that escaped the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah .
 All property was held in common; factories and shops managed by an elected Board of Trustees . Factory and shops were managed by a Board of trustees .
 Zoar established the town of Zoar, having over 10,000 acres, and $1 million worth of assets . Zoar was established during the 1850's, establishing the town, having $1million worth of property .
 After Bimeler's death in 1853, interest declined, and the town was dissolved in 1898 .
 Other communistic settlements, such as Harmony, PA; Nashoba, TN; and the Cooperative Store at Toad Street, failed . The Cooperative Society of Oldham was set up by the Rochdale Pioneers .
 He believed a form of communal Christianity existed during the time of the Apostles . He believed that a communal Christianity was possible .
 Noyes went to Canada in 1879 after threats of prosecution, and the colony discontinued their unusual sexual practices . The colony went into Canada after threats from prosecution .
 They reorganized as a joint stock company, which is still operating today .
 Amana, Iowa, is the name of Amana . Amana was established in 1855 . It was the first community to be established in the area .
 It eventually expanded into seven villages, with farms, stores, sheds and factories . It eventually grew to seven villages with farms and stores .
 The commune still exists today, with its factories producing various appliances .
 Comte Henri de Saint-Simon was the grandson of the author of King Louis XIV's memoirs . He was a French nobleman, philosopher and socialist . He died in 1883 .
 He was considered by some to be mentally unbalanced, because of an infliction inherited from his insane mother . Some believed he was mentally unstable because of the infliction .
 His philosophy, known as the ""New Christianity"", advocated the placing of all property and people under the State's control to insure that the exploitation of the poor would end . His philosophy was called the New Christianity . He advocated placing all property under the state's control .
 He declared that the existing social system was dead and should be done away with . The social system should be abolished, he said .
 He called for the merging of scientific and technological knowledge towards industrialism in order to have the elite rule . Called for merging scientific knowledge with industrialism .
 His followers, known as ""The Family" instituted a political program, calling for the public control of industrial production, abolition of inheritance, and equal rights for women . His followers were known as 'The Family'
 In 1836, one of Simon's disciples, Philippe Joseph Benjamin Buchez, attempted to combine Socialism with Catholicism, with something called Christian Socialism . The Socialist Party was founded by Simon in 1836 .
 This was a continuation of Weishaupt's efforts to identify Christianity with the Illuminati, in order to draw members of the Illuminati . This was the attempt to identify Christian Christians with the organization .
 Peaceful revolution was to be carried out through the principles of Christian love and brotherhood, with Jesus being represented as a Socialist . Jesus was represented as Socialist. Peaceful Revolution was carried out by Christian love, brotherhood .
 The group published a labor newspaper called L'Atelier . The paper was written and edited by the workers themselves .
 Workers barred from belonging to secret organizations . They warned against the use of violence to obtain social change .
 The Council for Promoting Working Men's Associations started in 1854 . In 1854, the College started in London . The College was started in the same year as the Council .
 As Christian Socialism developed, it was promoted by saying that Socialism was the ultimate goal of Christianity . Christian Socialism was developed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In America, prominent Protestant clergymen, such as Washington Gladden, Walter Rauschenbush, Lyman Abbott, Josiah Strong, and Charles M Sheldon, called for better working conditions for women, the elimination of child labor, and a sixday work week .
 These principles were later adopted by the Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America in 1908 .
 The Society of Christian Socialists advocated a cooperative society based on the teachings of Christ . The society was organized by ministers, and economist Richard T Ely .
 Endicott Peabody, founder of the Grotan School, spoke of such reform to the capitalist system .
 Chapter Six Buchez' followers soon grew dissatisfied with the equal payment plan . The organization split into several factions, one professing Christianity, and the other, calling for revolution .
 Fourier planned out model communities in which people would live in a pleasurable atmosphere and work at their own pace at jobs they like . Francois Marie Charles Fourier, a French philosopher, planned out a model community .
 In his communities, called 'phalanxes', everyone was to live in the same building . In his community, people were to live together .
 In 1832, he failed in an attempt to set up such a commune at Versailles . Jobs were assigned, and workers received a nominal wage .
 His followers founded about 30 communal settlements in the United States, such as Brook Farm . The Brook Farm was the first communal settlement in America .
 In 1844, they instituted a constitution, making it a co-op based on the scientific division of labor advocated by Fourier . The constitution was instituted in 1844 and instituted by the company .
 They published a journal, The Harbinqer, which was edited by Ripley . It featured such writers as James Russell Lowell and John Greenleaf . Ripley edited the journal .
 Ralph Waldo Emerson, Horace Greeley, and Henry David Thoreau established another Fourier commune at Red Bank, New Jersey, in 1843 . Members picked their jobs and were paid according to the repulsiveness of their work .
 Fourier disciples, Elizabeth Peabody, Parke Goodwin, and William Henry Channing, also began communes . Fourier communes were established in France in the 1930s .
 Louis Blanc, a Mason, developed a Workingman's Association, but his was to be under State control . Louis Blanc was a Mason who developed the Association . The Association was under state control .
 He called for the establishment of labor organizations in the form of national workshops, with the workers electing their management . The workers elect their management, he said .
 He despised all religion, and eliminated the idea of Christianity . Buchez was criticized for being too sentimental . He despised Christianity .
 In France, during the 1840's, Louis-Auguste Blanqui espoused a form of radical socialism that was based on democratic populism . In the 1840s, he espoused the idea of 'radical socialism' in France . The French revolutionary was born in France and died in
 He said capitalism was unstable and would be replaced by cooperative institutions . He said he would replace capitalism with cooperative institutions like cooperatives .
 Etienne Cabet, the son of a barrelmaker, went to England in 1834, where he became a convert of Robert Owen . Etienne was a convert to Owen's teachings .
 When he returned to France in 1839, he laid out a plan for a communistic settlement in the Red River region of Texas . He established the settlement in 1847 .
 His 69 followers were called ""Icarians" after his 1840 novel Voyage en Icaria . The society was based on a society where all property was held in common . Products were distributed according to need .
 Locke, Montesquieu, Mably, Rousseau, and other 18th century philosophers . Locke and Mably were philosophers of the French Revolution . Rousseau was a French philosopher of the Enlightenment .
 He claimed that the communists were the disciples, imitators, and continuers of the philosophy of Jesus . The communists are the disciples of Jesus, he said .
 Hancock County area had been a Mormon community of about 15,000 people . After the death of Joseph Smith in 1844, Joseph Smith went to Salt Lake City, Utah, with Brigham Young .
 By 1855, Nauvoo had farms, a running mill, a distillery, a theater, a printing press, and a school . By the time of 1855 it had a theater and a theater . The city had farms and distillery .
 They eventually grew restless because of Cabet's autocratic leadership, since they didn't have a voice in their own affairs . Cabet was an autocratic leader who ruled out dissent .
 As time went on, only a few diehards remained, until the commune finally broke up in 1888 .
 Cabet started a ""true Icaria"" in Cheltinham, Missouri, but soon after, died of apoplexy . Meanwhile, Cabet died soon after .
 Some followers of Cabet also started communes at Corning, lowa, and Cloverdale, California . Cabet communes were set up by Cabet followers .
 Heinrich Karl Marx was born of wealthy parents . Much of his personal life has never been revealed . The rise of Karl Marx is the rise of the world's richest man .
 He joined the Satanist Church run by Joana Southcott, who is said to be in contact with the demon Shiloh .
 His early writings mentioned the name ""Oulanem"", which was a ritualistic name for Satan . The name was the name of Satan . His writings mention the name "OulAnem"
 His published attacks against the German government, caused him to be ejected from the country . He was ejected from Germany after publishing his attacks on the government .
 He received a Doctorate in Philosophy in 1841, but was turned down for a teaching position, because of his revolutionary activities . He was refused a teaching job because of those activities .
 In 1843, he studied Economics in Paris, where he learned about French communism . He learned about communism from communism in France .
 In 1844, he wrote the book A World Without Jews even though he was Jewish . He wrote it despite being Jewish .
 Engels joined the ""Young Germany" group in Switzerland in 1835 . Engels had joined the group established by Giuseppe Mazzini in Switzerland .
 In 1842 he was sent to England to manage the family's mill in Manchester . He was sent back to England in 1842 to manage his family's mills .
 Engel's philosophy established the basis for the ideas which Marx developed by Marx . Engel set up the foundation for Marx's ideas in Marx's work . Engel's work established the foundations of Marx's Marxist theories .
 The League, formerly known as the League of the Just, was an off-shoot of the Parisian Outlaws League . The League was founded by Illuminati members who fled from Germany .
 The League was made up of rich and powerful men from different countries who were behind much of the turmoil that engulfed Europe in 1848 . Wealthy men from various countries were behind the turmoil .
 The Manifesto was described by Marxians as ""The Charter of Freedom of the Workers of the World,"" and it was the platform of the Communist League .
 It called for the workers to revolt and overthrow capitalism, and for the government to own all property . It was, basically, a program for establishing a ""perfect"" state, and it called for a workers revolt .
 Marx felt that by controlling all production, the ruling power could politically control a country . After the communist regime would take over, the dictatorship would gradually ""wither away"" and the result would be a non-government . Marx, felt, that by controling all production would allow the
 The final stage of communism, is when the goods are distributed on the basis of need . The goods will be distributed on a need basis, according to the Communist Party .
 The purpose of this was to divide the people of the world into opposing camps with differing ideologies, the author says . The purpose was to 'divide people into opposing ideologies'
 Although the Nazis, in quoting from Nietzsche, considered themselves to be the Master Race, Nietzsche did not . The Nazis thought they were the master race, but did not.
 Marx hammered away at the bottom, concentrating on the lower class and working people . Nietzsche tried to stir things up at the top of the social order, while Marx focused on the working class .
 Marx wanted to neutralize the elite, and pushed for the rights of the people . Nietzsche wanted to keep the uneducated in a state of slavery, while Marx wanted the elite to be neutralized .
 Engels is reported to have written several articles by Engels . Engels is famous for his work in Engels' work in Germany . Engels' articles are often written by Engels himself . Engels was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Marx wrote a few articles for the New American Cyclopedia in 1857 and 1858 . Marx also wrote articles in 1858 and 1857 .
 Marx and Engels founded the International Workingmen's Association on September 28,1864, at St. Paul's in Paris, France .
 The personal secretary of Mazzini was a member of the group . The statutes they adopted were similar to his views . Wolff was a former personal secretary to Mazzinis .
 The Illuminati did in fact control the growing communist movement, but not to deal with the problems of workers and industry, but to instigate riot and revolution . Again, we find evidence that the Illuminati did not deal with workers' problems, but with revolution .
 Marx didn't practice what he preached, and therefore didn't really believe in the movement he was giving birth to . It is obvious that Marx didn’t practice . Marx’s lack of belief in his ideas, he says .
 Nathan Rothschild had given Marx two checks for several thousand pounds to finance the cause of Socialism . Rothschild had also given Marx a check to pay for his work .
 The checks were put on display in the British Museum after Lord Lionel Walter Rothschild, a trustee, had willed his museum and library to them . The checks are now on display at the museum in London .
 Marx felt that as workers achieved various reforms, there would be a possibility for the peaceful evolution towards socialism . Marx felt, that as the workers achieved some reforms, the possibility for a peaceful evolution of socialism towards socialism would be possible .
 Marx' beliefs were gleaned from the writings of Weishaupt, Babeuf, Blanc, Cabet, Owen, Ogilvie, Hodgkin, Gray, Gray and Roosevelt . Volume two appeared after Marx' death, edited by Engels from Marx' notes, in 18
 Engels supported Marx with income from his father's cotton mills in England . Engels' father was a cotton mill owner in England and supported Marx . Engels was born in Russia and Engels supported his father in cotton mills .
 It grew rapidly, despite the effort of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck to break it up through the enactment of anti-socialist legislation . It grew despite the efforts of Chancellor Bismerck to try to break up it .
 Second International was formed in 1889, with their headquarters in Brussels, Belgium . In 1889, the Second International became the world's largest international organisation .
 "Their main responsibility was to create some sort of unity within its ranks," says the president . "They were there to create unity within their ranks," he says .
 During his teenage years, he admired Mikhail Bakunin, a follower of Weishaupt's principles, and a Satanist, who was the driving force behind the initial effort to organize Communism . Bakunin was also a member of the Satanist movement .
 In the early 1900's, he said that socialism could only be achieved by mobilizing workers and peasants through revolution, since trade unions were not able to bring about any change . He said that the only way to achieve socialism was through revolution .
 By 1907, he only had 17 members, but he would soon have over 40,000 . The movement was slow to catch on, and by 1907, it had only 17 members .
 He received financial support from the Fabians, including $15,000 from Joseph Fels, an American soap manufacturer and a Fabian .
 Lenin was an advocate of the Populist doctrine, which had been developed by author Aleksandr Herzen during the 1860's . Lenin was a proponent of the 'Populist' doctrine, developed by Herzen .
 He felt that the peasant communes could be the socialist society of the future . He called for Russian Socialism to be based on the ancient peasant tradition .
 In 1881, they succeeded in assassinating Czar Alexander II, and continued to function as a conspiratorial organization . The group continued to work as conspirators until 1881 .
 Lenin wanted to use the Populists to overthrow the government and introduce socialism . Lenin wanted the government to overthrow it and bring socialism to Russia .
 He added two Marxist elements to the Populist theory the notion of a class struggle, and the need for Russia to pass through a stage of capitalism .
 He led the people to believe that the purpose of his movement was to help the working class . He led people to think that he was trying to help them, but he was assassinated .
 With their slogan, ""The people against the tycoons,"" they fought for an increase in currency circulation, free silver, labor reform, a graduated income tax, and government ownership of the railroads .
 He wanted to end control of government and industry by private monopoly . He wanted public control of natural resources, public ownership of railroads and a reduction in taxes .
 Their platform included civil rights legislation, and called for negotiations with the Russians . They called for the Russians to join in negotiations .
 They also provided support for the effort which eventually gave women the right to vote . They also supported efforts to get women to vote in the US .
 Many of their goals were achieved during the Administration of President Franklin D Roosevelt . Many of them were achieved in the Roosevelt administration .
 In 1905, while Russia was engaged in the Russo-Japanese War, the communists tried to get the farmers to revolt against the Czar, but they refused . The Czar's Czar died in the war, but the farmers refused .
 Czar Nicholas ll was dethroned in March after a series of riots . Prince George Lvov was a liberal progressive reformer who wanted to set up a democracy .
 He made an effort to strengthen the Russian Army to prevent any future revolts, but ended up resigning . Kerensky, a democratic Socialist, was allowed to take over and form a coalition government .
 He issued amnesty order for communists who had been exiles after the aborted Red Revolution in 1905 . He kept the war with Germany going, and issued amnesty for communists .
 Morgan, Olaf Aschberg and William Boyce Thompson contributed $1 million to fund the project .
 The Rockefellers had given their financial support after the Czar refused to give them access to the Russian oil fields . Standard Oil was already being pumped by the Royal Dutch Co., owned by the Rothschilds and the Nobel brothers, who was giving Standard Oil plenty of competition .
 Rockefeller had $15,000,000 in bonds from the Royal Dutch Co. and Shell . Rockefeller helped to finance the Revolution so that he would be able to get Standard Oil firmly established in Russia .
 The Illuminati had never been able to control the affairs of Russia, so they had to get rid of the Czar, so he couldn't interfere with their plans . As the Congress of Vienna had shown, the . Illuminati had . never been . able to . control the . affairs of
 He had an expensive apartment and traveled around town in a chauffeur-driven limousine . He also traveled around the city in a limo . He lived in a luxury apartment .
 Trotsky was given $20 million in Jacob Schiff gold to help finance the revolution . The money was deposited in Warburg bank, then transferred to the Nya Banken in Stockholm, Sweden .
 Kristianiafjord was chartered by Schiff and Warburg, on March 27,1917, with communist revolutionaries . At Halifax, Nova Scotia, on April 3, the first port they docked at, the Canadians seized Trotsky, and his men, taking them to the
 The Canadians were concerned that if Lenin would take over Russia, he would sign a Peace Treaty and stop the fighting between Russia and Germany, so that the Germany Army could be diverted to possibly mount an offensive against the U.S. and Canada .
 The British government and American government urged them to let Trotsky go . Trotsky was assassinated in October 1918 .
 Wilson said if they didn't comply, the U.S. wouldn't enter the war . Wilson said that if they hadn't comply they wouldn't be allowed to enter . Wilson: "The U. S. won't enter"
 Trotsky was released, given an American passport, a British transport visa, and a Russian entry permit . Trotsky was given a British passport, an entry permit, and an American transport visa .
 Wilson knew what was going on, because accompanying Trotsky, was Charles Crane of the Westinghouse Company, who was the Chairman of the Democratic Finance Committee . It is obvious that Wilson knew .
 Lenin had been able to infiltrate the Democratic Socialist Republic established by Kerensky . Meanwhile, Lenin had infiltrated the D.S. Republic established .
 Lenin negotiated with the German High Command, with the help of Max Warburg, head of the Rothschild-affiliated Warburg bank in Frankfurt, to allow him, his wife, and 32 other Bolsheviks to travel across Germany, to Sweden, where he was to pick up the money being
 He was put in a sealed railway car with over $5 million in gold from the German government . Upon reaching Petrograd, he was joined by Stalin and Trotsky . He was then sealed in sealed train car with $5million in gold .
 He told the people that he could no longer work within the government to effect change, that they had to strike immediately, in force, to end the war, and end the hunger conditions of the peasants . He said he could not work within government to change the situation .
 He led the revolution, and after seizing the reins of power from Kerensky on November 7, 1917, replaced the democratic republic with a communist Soviet state . He seized power in 1917, overthrowing the Soviet republic .
 Most members of the Provisional Government were killed, possibly because of the general amnesty he extended to the communists exiled in 1905 . He kept his word and made peace with Germany in February, 1918, and was able to get out of the war .
 Chapter Six Elections were held on November 25,1917, with close to 42 million votes being cast, and the Bolshevik Communists only received 24% of the vote .
 On July 18,1918, the People's Congress convened, having a majority of anti-Bolsheviks . This indicated that communism wasn't the mass movement that Lenin was claiming . Lenin's "mass movement" wasn't a mass movement .
 Lenin was sent into Russia...in the same way that you might send a vial containing a culture of typhoid or of cholera to be poured into the water supply of a great city, and it worked with amazing accuracy . Lenin was . sent into . Russia in the same
 This conspiracy played a definitely recognizable role in the tragedy of the French Revolution . The conspiracy was a major part of the revolution in France .
 It has been the mainspring of every subversive movement during the nineteenth century . Now at last this band of extraordinary personalities from the underworld of the great cities of Europe and America have gripped the Russian people by the hair of their heads .
 There is no need to exaggerate the part played in the creation of Bolshevism and in the bringing about of the Russian revolution by these international and for the most part atheistical Jews . It is certainly a very great one; it probably outweighs all others .
 Russian General Arsene DeGoulevitch wrote in Czarism and the Revolution that the ""main purveyors of funds for the revolution, however, were neither crackpot Russian millionaires nor armed bandits on Lenin"
 Frank Vanderlip, President of the Rockefeller-controlled First National Bank, compared Lenin to George Washington . Vanderlip: Lenin was George Washington. Lenin was compared to Washington .
 A man is at the wheel and seems to lead it, but the car does not drive in the desired direction . A man seems to be leading the car, but it is not driving in the direction of the car .
 Lenin organized the Red Army to control the population, and secret police to keep track of the communists . That same year, Lenin organized a secret police in order to keep the population under control .
 The Third lnternational had its first Congress in 1919 in Moscow, where they established that Russia would control all of the world's communist movements . The Third World Communist Party Congress was held in 1919 .
 Hopes of world revolution ran high, as they hoped to ""liberate" the working class . Hopes were high, and hoped to enable them to break away from the reformist democracy they sprung from .
 The revolutionary activities had to be discontinued so they could develop trade relations with capitalist countries, to strengthen their own . But, he added, that the revolutionary activities must be discontinued .
 The name of the country was officially changed to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . The country became known as the Soviet Union of Russia in the early 1950s .
 From 1916-21, famine swept through Russia, with close to five million dying, because industry was shut down . The famine killed close to 5 million people in Russia .
 President Herbert Hoover received a plea from famous Russian writer Maxim Gorky . Relief services began in Russia on September 21,21, after President Hoover received the plea from Gorky.
 The United States appropriated $20 million for the country, with $8 million spent for medical supplies . The U.S. also spent $9 million on medical supplies in Afghanistan .
 As it turned out, the United States was actually supporting the Communist Civil War, which ended in 1922 . The U.S. supported the communist Civil War .
 American and European industrialists rushed to the aid of the Russians . The Russians were defeated by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 The International Barnsdale Corporation and Standard Oil got drilling rights . Stuart, James and Cook, Inc. reorganized the coal mines . General Electric sold them electrical equipment . Westinghouse, DuPont and RCA, also aided the Communists .
 Standard Oil of New Jersey bought 50% of their huge Caucasus oil fields . Standard Oil built a large refinery in Russia in 1927 . In 1927, Standard Oil bought a large part of the oil field .
 Standard Oil, with their subsidiary, Vacuum Oil Co., made a deal to sell Soviet oil to European countries . Standard Oil even arranged to get them a $75 million loan to buy them .
 Rockefeller's Chase National Bank helped establish the American-Russian Chamber of Commerce in 1922 . The first President of the chamber was Reeve Schley, a Chase Vice-President .
 In 1925, Chase National and PromBank developed a complete program to finance the Soviets raw material exports to the U.S. and imports of United States cotton and machinery . The program was developed by Chase National, PromBank and Chase National .
 Chase National and Equitable Trust Co. were the dominant forces in Soviet credit dealings . Chase National was the dominant force in the Soviet credit market .
 Lenin said that the capitalists would do business with anyone, and when Russia was through with them, the Communists would take over the world . Lenin had said that Russia would take control of the world when it was finished with them .
 In reality, the Illuminati was completely financing the entire country of Russia, in order to transform them into a world power with principles completely opposite to that of the United States . The Illuminati was funding the entire Russian government to transform the country into a powerful world power .
 When he died in 1924, supposedly from syphilis, the country's leadership was taken over by Joseph Stalin . After a bitter fight with Trotsky, Stalin took over the Soviet Union after a bitter battle with Trotsky .
 "My nightmare is to have the feeling that I'm lost in an ocean of blood from the innumerable victims," she says . Her nightmare is that she is lost in a "ocean of blood" from the countless victims .
 To save our country, Russia, we would have needed men like Francis of Assisi, says Putin . To save Russia, Russia would have had to have a strong Catholic faith, Putin says .
 Stalin hoped that Lenin would pass the torch of leadership to him . In 1924, Stalin wrote The Foundations of Leninism . Stalin hoped for Lenin to pass on the torch to him in 1924 .
 Those who refused to cooperate with the communist government, were starved to death . Those who did not comply with the government were starved .
 Between 1932-33, it is estimated that between three and seven million people died as a result of Stalin's tactics . Between 1932 and 1933, between 3 and 7 million people were killed in the conflict .
 Stalin admitted that two-thirds of Russia's industrial capability was due to the assistance of the United States . Stalin later admitted that . Russia's . industrial capability . was due . to the help of the U.S.
 He eventually did away with the ""withering away" concept, and developed a fanatical, rigid, and powerful police state . The police state is now a powerful and fanatical state .
 Stalin said that the goals of Communism was to create chaos throughout the world, institute a single world economic system, prod the advanced countries to consistently give aid to underdeveloped countries, and to divide the world into regional groups, which would be a transitional stage to a one-world government .
 In 1933, the Illuminati urged FDR to recognize Russia in order to save them from financial ruin . A number of European countries had already done so .
 On November 17,1933, the United States granted diplomatic recognition to Russia . Russia became the first country to recognize the country in 1933 .
 They became a member of the League of Nations in 1934, but were thrown out in 1939 because of their aggressive actions toward Finland . They became the first to be thrown out of the league of Nations because of aggressive actions .
 Hugh Cooper, creator of the Mussel Shoals Dam, planned and built the giant hydroelectric plant at Dniepostrol . Cooper built the plant in the 1930s . Cooper was the man who built the dam .
 Because of a treaty with Poland, France and England were forced to declare war on Germany . The treaty was a result of a war between France and Germany .
 Hitler had said publicly, that he didn't want war with England, but now was forced into battle with them . Hitler had publicly said publicly that he did not want war . Hitler was forced to battle with England .
 By the end of May, the Netherlands and Belgium had fallen, and France followed in June . The Netherlands, Belgium and France had also fallen, but France followed .
 In 1940, Russia moved against Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and half of Poland, and this sort of worried Hitler . In 1940s, Russia's actions worried Hitler, who was worried about the situation .
 In England, the llluminati-controlled press attacked Prime Minister Chamberlain, because they felt their war against Germany was too mild . Chamberlain was attacked by the press because he felt the war was too harsh . In England the press attacked the war because of the war's mildness .
 A year later, the German High Command, unknown by Hitler, sent Rudolph Hess to England to meet with Lord Hamilton and Churchill to negotiate a Peace Treaty . A year after the war, Hitler's High Command sent Hess to Britain to negotiate peace .
 The German generals offered to eliminate Hitler, so they could join forces to attack Communist Russia . Hitler was eliminated by the Nazis in 1945 . The German general offered to kill Hitler to join forces with Russia .
 He was later tried and convicted at the Nuremberg war crime trials . He was given a life sentence, which was served out at the Spandau prison .
 Shortly after their failure, the German High Command convinced Hitler to attack Russia, which he did . Shortly after the failure, Hitler was convinced to attack the Soviet Union .
 American communists urged the world to mount an immediate united effort to help Russia . U.S. communists called for a united effort .
 Nazi advance was swift and savage, with the German army barrelling deep into the Ukraine with one victory after another . The Nazi advance in the Ukraine was swift, savage and savage .
 Foreign Policy experts predicted the defeat and collapse of the country . Foreign Policy Experts predicted the collapse of Iraq .
 In October, Kiev fell, and Hitler announced there would be a final effort to take Moscow and end the war . Hitler announced in October that he would make a final attempt to end the conflict .
 Hitler planned on waiting until the winter was over before he made his final attack . On October 24, with his army 37 miles from Moscow, Hitler planned to wait until winter had passed . Hitler's final attack was on October 24 .
 Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, and the United States entered the War . The U.S. entered the war against Japan in 1941 .
 They kept 84 cargo ships, some of which were used to supply North Vietnam with equipment during the Vietnam War . For instance, they kept 84 ships .
 Russians, after the War, became the foundation upon which the Soviet industrial machine was built . Chapter Six Russians were the foundation of the Soviet Industrial machine .
 Henry Kissinger negotiated an agreement with Henry Kissinger to pay back $722 million of the $11 billion . The Russians agreed to pay about 74 on the dollar . The agreement was negotiated years later by Henry Kissinger .
 In 1975, after paying back $32 million, they announced they were not going to pay the remainder of the Lend-Lease debt . They announced in 1975 that they would not pay the rest of the debt they owed .
 After the War, in 1946, America turned over two-thirds of Germany's aircraft manufacturing capabilities to Russia . Russia dismantled the installations, and rebuilt them in their country, forming the initial stage of their jet aircraft industry .
 Congress had passed legislation forbidding shipments on non-war materials . Pro-Soviet officials and Communist traitors in key positions openly defied the law and made shipments .
 In 1944, Harry Hopkins, Henry Morgenthau, Averell Harriman, and Harry Dexter White, supplied material needed for Russia to print occupation currency .
 The Russians set up a printing facility in a Nazi printing plant in Leipzig and began to print currency which the U.S. couldn't account for . The Russians then set up the printing facility and began printing currency . The United States was unable to account for the currency .
 Russia refused to redeem the currency with rubles, therefore the United States Treasury had to back the currency . The U.S. Treasury backed the currency because of the refusal of Russia to redeem it .
 The Russians were using these newly printed Marks to sap the German economy, and take advantage of the United States . The U.S. had lost $250,000,000 because of redeeming, in United States dollars, marks which were issued in excess of the total amount of marks
 The $18,102 charge for the plates and printing material, was never paid .
 Half of all the uranium and technical information needed to construct such a bomb, was secretly sent to Russia . In 1943, a Congressional investigation revealed, that even before the U.S. had built its first atomic bomb, half of the uranium was sent to Moscow .
 This included chemicals, metals, and minerals instrumental in creating an atomic bomb, and manufacturing a hydrogen bomb . This included metals, metals and minerals that helped create the atomic bomb .
 In 1980, James Roosevelt, the son of President Franklin Roosevelt, wrote a novel, A Family Matter . The novel detailed how his father made a decision to share the results of the Manhattan Project with the Soviet Union .
 Air Force Major Racey Jordan, was a Land-Lease expediter and liaison officer for the Russians in Great Falls, Great Falls . Great Falls was the primary staging area for the massive Lend-Leases supply operation to the Soviet Union .
 In his diaries, he said the United States built the Soviet war machine by shipping all the materials needed to construct an atomic pile, including graphite, cadmium metal, thorium, and uranium .
 Chapter Six and sealed with red wax, said to be of a diplomatic nature, were to be sent to Moscow . Chapter Six sealed in red wax and sealed in a diplomatic way, sealed with wax .
 Jordan decided to sneak away from the Russian base with an armed sentry . Jordan was suspicious of their friendliness, and suspicious of the Russians .
 Two Russian couriers from Washington had arrived and had procured a plane bound for Russia, to take about 50 cases . He discovered that two couriers had arrived from Washington and had arrived .
 He detained the flight, and discovered that the shipment was being sent to the Institute of Technical and Economic Information in Moscow . The shipment was going to be sent to a director in Moscow, Russia .
 Maps identified the names and locations of all industrial plants in the U.S. and classified military sites . Maps were found in 18 of the cases . Maps identified industrial plants, military sites and classified sites .
 Roosevelt was giving the Soviets the instructions and the material to build nuclear weapons, Roosevelt says . Roosevelt's Administration of Roosevelt gave the Soviets instructions to build nukes, he says .
 Jordan reported all of this to Air Force Intelligence, but nothing ever happened . Jordan reported the incident to the U.S. Air Force intelligence .
 The Russian's ability to establish their space program, was also provided by America . The Russian space program was established by the Soviet Union .
 General Patton captured the towns of Peenemunde and Nordhausen, where German scientists had developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets . Patton was moving eastward through Germany, capturing the towns .
 Dwight Eisenhower ordered him to turn over the two towns over the Russians . The Russians dismantled the facilities and shipped them to Russia, along with the scientists .
 Braun was prepared to launch history's first satellite, long before Russia developed one . Eisenhower would not authorize it, because it was to be made to appear that Russian technology was superior to ours .
 It would add to the facade being developed that Russia was stronger than we were, and therefore should be feared . It would be a sign that Russia is stronger than us were, so we should fear it, says David Cameron .
 As recently as 1978, it is believed that Russia still had not been able to construct a singlestage rocket capable of placing large payloads in orbit .
 American researcher, Lloyd Malian, called the Soviet's ""Lunik"" moon landing a hoax, since no tracking station picked up its signals, and that Alexie Leonov's spacewalk on March 18,1965 was also staged .
 The United States donated two food production factories, a petroleum refinery, a repair plant for precision instruments, and 17 steam and three hydroelectric plants . The U.S. donated 17 steam, 17 hydroelectric power plants .
 Dressier Industries built a $146 million drill plant at Kuibyshov, to produce high quality drill bits for oil exploration . The plant was built by Dressier to make high quality drilling bits for exploration purposes .
 Allis-Chalmers built a $35 million iron ore pelletizing plant in Russia . The plant is one of the world's four largest . It is the largest in the world .
 We have sent the Russians, computer systems, oil drilling equipment, pipes, and other supplies . We have also sent computers, computers and other equipment to the Russians .
 The ball-bearings used by Russia to improve the guidance systems on their rockets and missiles were purchased in 1972 from the Bryant Grinder Co. in Springfield, Vermont .
 The reasoning behind it, was to allow Russia to increase their industrial and agricultural output to match ours, because by bringing the two countries closer together, hostilities would be eased . Russia would be able to increase its industrial output to meet ours .
 Russia, as early as 1920, was conspiring against China . Russia's anti-China policy was based on anti-Chinese sentiment . Russia was conspiring to oppose China .
 By 1924, the Chinese armed forces were reorganized along the same lines as the Soviet army . They began to infiltrate the government in 1922, and by 1924, they were reorganizing the armed forces .
 Chapter Six Kai-shek was the Commandant, and Chou En-lai was in charge of Political Affairs . Chapter Six was Chapter Six Commandant and Chapter Six Commander of Chapter Six .
 Michael Borodin, Chiang attacked Shanghai, robbing the Rothschild-affiliated Soong Bank . Chiangai attacked Shanghai bank, robbing Rothschild-linked Soong bank . Borodins attacked Shanghai Bank, robbing Soong branch .
 Soong negotiated with Chiang, offering him $3 million, his sister May-ling as a wife, and the presidency of China for life, if he would change sides . Soong offered Chiang a wife and family, even though he had a wife .
 Seeing the Russians as a threat to his country, he had them ejected, and had many communist advisors arrested . Many communist advisors were arrested, and many were arrested .
 Mao Tse-tung fled, fled, and hid out in the northern provinces, when he began training rebels for a future insurrection . Mao fled to the north of China, where he hid out and began to train rebels .
 In 1937, Japan attacked Shanghai, and coupled with the growing Communist insurgency, created a two-front war . The war began in 1937, with Japan attacking Shanghai and the Communist insurgency in China .
 China was the last country to get military aid, which came in the form of a $250 million loan in gold to stabilize their economy . China's plea was brushed off, and they were the last nation to receive military aid .
 Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Harry Dexter White, was in charge of making sure China got the money . Over a period of 31/2 years, he only sent $27 million to China .
 In 1945, Congress voted a second loan of $500 million, and Dexter made sure they didn't get any of that, which resulted in the collapse of their economy . Dexter was the president of the U.S. Senate in 1945 .
 George C Marshall and Patrick J Hurley were sent to China to meet with Chiang Kai-shek . Marshall had knowledge of the impending attack on Pearl Harbor, but didn't inform the commanders in the Pacific . Hurley and Marshall were sent there to meet .
 They urged him to give the Communists representation in the Chinese Government, and for the Nationalists to have a coalition government . They felt that the Russians weren't influencing the Chinese Communists .
 Marshall recommended that all American aid be stopped, and an embargo enforced . However, Chiang would not accept any kind of Communist influence in his government . The embargo was enforced .
 There was no fuel for Chinese tanks and planes, or ammunition for weapons . There were no fuel or ammunition to be used for weapons or fuel .
 Russia gave the Chinese Communists military supplies they had captured from Japan . Also diverted some of the American Lend-Lease material to them .
 Mao began making his final preparations to take over the government . Mao was making final preparations for his takeover of China . Mao's government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Institute of Pacific Relations members falsified documents to indicate that the Chinese Communists were farmers who were pushing for agricultural reform . Harry Dexter White and Owen Lattimore, who were members of the Institute, planned to destroy the Chinese economy, falsified the documents .
 Mao Tse-tung was made to appear as an ""agrarian reformer" while Chiang was blasted for being a corrupt dictator . Chiang died at the age of 60 in 1953 .
 In 1945, Lattimore sent President Truman a memorandum suggesting a coalition government between the Communists and the National Government . In 1945 he sent a memorandum to President Truman suggesting a government in a coalition .
 Truman based his China policy on December 15, 1945 . John Carter Vincent of the IPR elaborated upon that memo, and it became the basis of Truman's policy .
 It was alleged that Russia sent China a telegram, saying that if they didn't surrender, they would be destroyed . Russia sent the telegram to China, it is alleged . It is alleged that it was said that Russia told China they would destroy them .
 They were requested to send ten technicians to see the bomb that would be used . The bomb was requested to be seen by technicians at the scene .
 They were sent, and saw an atomic bomb with the capability of destroying a large city . They saw it with the power to destroy large cities . The bomb was the first atomic bomb to be seen in the world .
 As the story goes, Chiang sent a telegram to President Truman, asking for help . The story goes that Chiang asked for help from President Truman .
 In 1948, Congress voted to send China $125 million in military aid, but again the money was held up until Chiang was defeated . Congress voted in 1948 to send the money back to China .
 Mao Tse-tung, who announced in 1921 that he was a Marxist, took over as China's leader . Peking was established as the new capital, and Peking became the capital of China .
 On February 14,1950, a thirty-year treaty of friendship was signed with Russia . The treaty was signed in 1950 . Russia signed the treaty on the same date .
 In March, 1953, Mao proposed to the Soviet Union, a plan for world conquest, in which every country, except the United States, would be communist-controlled by 1973 . Mao's plan was based on a plan that every country except the U.S. would be Communist-
 First phase was to be completed by 1960, and called for Korea, Formosa, and Indochina to be under Chinese control . First phase called for the first phase of China's takeover of the region .
 In 1971, Communist China was seated as a member country of the United Nations . Yet it was Nixon who opened the dialogue with China, and in 1971, the Republic of China was thrown out of the U.N.
 Relations between China and the U.S. were almost as good as they were when they were allies in 1937 . Nixon and Kissinger visited China in 1971, on up to Reagan in 1984 .
 The American government recognized the Communists as the official government of China . Chapter Six: The Communists were recognized by the U.S. government as the Communist Party Party . Chapter Seven: The Communist Party of China was recognized as the Chinese Communist Party .
 From 1910, until 1945, Korea was part of the Japanese empire . Korea was once part of Japan's imperialistic empire .
 The victorious World War II allies agreed that Korea should be made an independent country . Until negotiations could take place, the United States took charge of the area south of the 38th parallel . The Soviets occupied the northern half .
 An officers training school, and a small arms plant were set up by the U.S. An officer training school was set up .
 South Korea gave the country $100,000,000 worth of military hardware to arm the 96,000 soldiers of the South Korean armed forces . The South Korean government also gave the South Korea military hardware .
 The North Koreans considered Acheson's statement an invitation to attack, in order to unify the country under communism . North Korea was heavily equipped by the Russians, and considered the attack an invitation .
 John Foster Dulles of the State Department went to 'investigate' and covered up the activity he viewed at the 38th parallel . Charles A Willoughby, that North Korea was preparing for an invasion, was told by John Foster .
 On June 24,1950, the North Koreans swarmed across the 38th parallel, and proceeded to overrun the country . North Korea invaded the U.S. in June 1950 .
 Rhee appealed to the United States, and the United Nations for help, as the communists closed in on the South Korean capital of Seoul . The U.S. and the U.N. supported Rhee's efforts .
 Truman called for an immediate meeting of the United Nations Security Council, who convened the next day . Truman called the attack a ""breach of the peace,"" ordering the North Koreans to withdraw .
 Security Council called upon UN members to furnish assistance . Two days later, the UN called upon the Security Council to provide assistance .
 The U.S. sent in ground troops and began air strikes in Syria . Immediately the United States began to send in ground forces .
 Chapter Six troops are at the disposal of the United States, under the UN command of Gen. Gen. John H. Eisenhower . Chapter Six forces are deployed in the U.S. under the command of U.N. troops .
 After MacArthur's amphibious assault on September 15, at Inchon Bay, UN forces were able to recapture Seoul, and began to push the North Koreans back across the border .
 In October, they captured the North Korean capital of Pyongyang, and many communists retreated into Manchuria and Russia .
 The Chinese, thinking that the security of their country was being threatened, stormed across the border on November 26,1950, and stopped the UN army at the Yalu River . The Chinese thought that the U.S. army was threatening their country .
 With the UN being involved in the war, all U.S. battle plans had to be submitted for approval, in advance, to the Under Secretary of the Political and Security Council Affairs .
 Secret agreement made by Secretary of State Edward Stettinius in 1945 was to always be filled by a Communist from an eastern European country .
 It was later revealed, that Russian military advisors were actually directing the North Korean war effort, and one of those advisors, Lt. Lt. Vladimir Putin, was behind the North Korea invasion .
 Alexandre Vasiliev was the Chairman of the UN Military Staff Committee and Under Secretary for Political and Security Council Affairs, who was responsible for all UN military action . He was also responsible for the attack .
 Vasliliev had to take a leave of absence from his position, to command the communist troops . The former Soviet leader was forced to take the leave of his position .
 Russia was able to receive vital information concerning troop movements within the UN forces in Korea, which was passed on to the North Koreans and Chinese . So, what it boiled down to was that the Communists were controlling both sides of the war .
 Truman warned Chiang Kai-shek not to make an attempt to recapture his homeland . The Taiwan government was planning to move against China, Truman said .
 Truman ordered the American Seventh Fleet into the Strait of Formosa to prevent any type of invasion . Truman also ordered the U.S. Seventh Fleet to prevent an invasion .
 Chiang then offered to send an advance force of 33,000 troops into North Korea . The State Department refused to accept the offer . Chiang's offer was rejected by the State Department .
 They were a member of the UN, yet the United States would not let them fight . The United States wouldn't let the U.S. fight, says CNN.com correspondent .
 The Korean War, Korean Conflict, or Police Action, developed into a stalemate of broken cease-fire agreements . MacArthur made plans for a massive retaliation against China .
 He wanted to bomb the ammunition and fuel dumps, the supply bases, and communication lines to China, and to blockade the Chinese coast . The Chinese coast was also wanted to be blocked .
 MacArthur insisted that there was no substitute for victory, and that the war against Communism would be either won or lost in Korea . He was relieved of his command, on April 11,1951, by Gen. Gen. MacArthur .
 "You do not get in war to stand still and lose it and we were required to lose it," says President Obama . "We were required by losing it," he says .
 First I was forbidden ""hot"" pursuit of enemy planes that attacked our own. First I had to be forbidden "hot" pursuit by enemy planes . Second I was allowed to pursue 'hot' pursuit .
 Manchuria and Siberia were sanctuaries of inviolate protection for all enemy forces and for all . purposes, no matter what depredations or assaults might come from there . Siberia was a sanctuary for all enemies .
 Then I was denied the right to bomb the hydroelectric plants along the Yalu River, he says . Then he says he was denied a right to attack the plants in the region .
 Most incomprehensible was the refusal to let me bomb the important supply center at Racin, which was not in Manchuria or Siberia, but many miles from the border, in forwarded supplies from Vladivostok .
 Walton complained to me that operations were known to the enemy in advance through sources in Washington... information must have been relayed to them assuring that the Yalu River bridges would continue to enjoy sanctuary and that their bases would be left intact . Walton: "Walker continually complained to him that
 Over 33,000 American lives were lost in a war that they were not allowed to win . Chapter Six Chapter Six: The war is over .
 North Korea was supported by China, Russia and the Eastern Europe communist bloc countries . North Korea built up its military strength, and made enormous economic gains .
 During the late 1960's, they began a dialogue for the reunification of Korea, and bilateral talks were held in 1972 . The Communists attempted to take over with diplomacy .
 As information about communist agents occupying high cabinet posts surfaced, the American people took out their frustrations at the polls . The American people turned out to vote against President Obama's policies .
 Eisenhower's plan made even more concessions to the Truman Plan . Even though the 1952 Republican Platform called it "ignominious bartering with our enemies,"" in reality the plan made more concessions .
 Eisenhower's tough rhetoric on communism ushered in a renewed patriotism in America . Eisenhower's 'tough rhetoric' on communism ushered in a new patriotism .
 Hungarian freedom fighters forced the Russians to leave their homeland, ending Soviet occupation . People behind the Iron Curtain were inspired, and in the fall of 1956, the Russians were forced to leave Hungary .
 Khrushchev sent Russian troops back into Hungary to retake the country . Hours after receiving the telegram on November 4,1956, he sent troops back in .
 Eisenhower initiated foreign aid programs to the communist governments in Poland and Yugoslavia . By 1961, almost $3 billion in food, industrial machinery, jets, and other military equipment was received .
 In June, 1956, John Foster Dulles said that if the U.S. discontinued their aid to Marshal Tito, Yugoslavia would be driven into the Soviet fold . The United States withdrew their aid from Yugoslavia in 1956 .
 Tito Tito announced his full support of the Soviet foreign policy on September 17, 1983 . Tito declared his support for the Soviet policy in a speech in Moscow .
 Yugoslavia began their own foreign aid programs to spread communism among the world's underdeveloped nations . Meanwhile, United States aid continued, even after 1961, when Yugoslavia began its own foreign assistance programs .
 When Eisenhower's two terms came to an end, the amount of economic and military aid to communist and 'neutralist' countries came to $7 billion . The aid was given to communist countries during Eisenhower's second term .
 As the communists moved forward with their plan for world domination, Southeast Asia was to be the next target . Vietnam was the focus of the Vietnam War .
 The U.S. was pulled into Vietnam, where the conflict was to become the longest in United States history . They moved on to the Vietnam War, where they were pulled into the longest conflict in American history .
 American intervention actually began in 1954 with economic and technical assistance, after the Geneva Accords ended the Indo-Chinese War . U.S. intervened in 1954 after the war ended in 1954 .
 Kennedy increased the military budget, and escalated the War just for the purposes of impressing the Russians after being embarrassed and humiliated by the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . The Russians were embarrassed by the failure to invade Cuba .
 In 1964, with a possibility that Barry Goldwater might win the presidency, a coalition of liberal forces, under the guidance of Illuminati advisors, worked for the election of former Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who had taken over after Kennedy's assassination in 1963 . Vietnam escalated into a major War
 Johnson was urged to pursue ""peace at any price,"" but the Illuminati didn't want peace . Johnson further escalated the War with the Illuminati .
 At the height of the War, there were about 543,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam . At the time of the Vietnam War, about 541,000 American soldiers were in Vietnam.
 On July 25, 1965, President Johnson told an American television audience that the military build-up was to administer ""death and desolation"" to the communists . Yet he made agreements to provide the Soviet Union, and her communist satellite countries, with millions of dollars worth of food, computers
 Supreme Court ruled that communists could teach in our schools, and work in our defense plants . Senate and State Department allowed them to open diplomatic offices in major American cities . FBI Director J Edgar Hoover warned that their embassies were part of an espionage network .
 Averill Harriman made a 22-day, 12-nation peace tour for President Johnson in 1966 . A TV reporter asked how the Russians felt about the Vietnam War, and Harrimans said they were "embarrassed by the war"
 The Russians were shipping guns, ammunition, missiles, and MiG fighters to the North Vietnamese . A brilliant piece of propaganda .
 Thieu agreed to sign after Nixon and Kissinger promised that the U.S. would ""respond vigorously"" to any Communist violations of the agreement . Thieu signed the agreement after Nixon promised to "respond vigorously" to any violations .
 The treaty specified that the Vietcong was to have equal recognition with the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon . The treaty also stipulated that the Vietnamese capital should be given equal recognition .
 The cease-fire didn't hold, and after the American pullout left over $5 billion worth of military equipment, the communists were given a free hand in southeast Asia . The U.S. pulled out of the region in 1991, leaving over $4 billion in military equipment .
 On April 30, 1975, the government of South Vietnam fell to the communist regime, and on July 2, 1976, the country of Vietnam was officially unified as a Communist state .
 Fulgencio Batista, in 1934, had overthrown the government of Cuba, which hampered the social reform that had been begun by four separate Presidents .
 Castro bribed many military leaders with financial backing from Russia . With financial backing of Russia, he bribed military leaders . Castro also bribed some of the world's most prominent politicians .
 'He got a substantial amount of support from the intellectual and working class, who knew nothing of his communist intentions,' he said .
 President Kennedy in a speech, compared him to South American patriot Simon Bolivar . President Kennedy compares him to the South American patriot Simon Bolvar .
 The American Ambassador to Cuba declared that Batista was no longer supported by the U.S. government, and that he should leave . Batista's government was overthrown by Batista .
 Cuban intelligence hand-carried Castro's dosser to Washington in 1957, delivering it to Allen Dulles, head of the CIA, which revealed that Castro was a Communist . The member of the Intelligence section of the Cuban army .
 Major Pedro Diaz Lanz, of the Cuban Air Force, toured the U.S. in July, 1959, and revealed that he had first-hand knowledge that Castro was a Communist . He toured the United States and said he knew Castro was Communist .
 The truth of the matter, was that the State Department was purposely covering up Castro's communist connections, the fact that his supporters were trained by Russia, and that he was carrying out a communist revolution . The truth was that Castro's supporters were training by Russia .
 Smith was briefed by Herbert Matthews instead of Herbert Gardner . Smith had been briefed by Gardner, instead of Gardner, Matthews .
 These individuals include Robert McNamara, Theodore C Sorenson, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Roy Rubottom, McGeorge Bundy, William J Fulbright, and Roger Hilsman . The list of those who have served in the U.S. includes Robert McN
 Castro took control of the country in January, 1959 . Batista was asked to abdicate, by Eisenhower, by leaving office on December 31,1958 .
 Castro revealed his alliance with Russia, nationalized all business and industry . Soon, Castro revealed that he had been in talks with Russia . Castro nationalized business, industry and nationalized industry .
 Chapter Six an invasion force was organized, financed, and trained in Florida and Guatemala, by the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency . The force recruited from thousands of Cubans who had fled to the U.S. to get away from Castro . Chapter Six was organized and trained by
 On April 17,1961, an anti-Castro force of 1,400 landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba to begin the invasion . The invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba since 1961 .
 Within striking distance, were two United States carriers, five World War li Liberty ships, and other support vessels, whose decks were loaded with planes .
 The invasion failed, because it was not able to launch the attack at the alternate site which had an airfield nearby and was more suitable for the unloading of troops and supplies, plus, there were nearby mountains to hide in . The alternate site had a nearby airfield which was more
 Russia tried to build missile sites on the island, but the U.S. threatened Russia with possible military action if they weren't removed . Russia, realizing the potential of Cuba's location, tried to locate missile sites in Cuba .
 The Soviets were still able to bolster the Cuban military by providing advisors, troops, aircraft, submarines, and military bases . After a blockade was imposed, the missiles were removed, however, the Soviets still provided advisors and troops to Cuba .
 The objects identified as "missiles" in government photos were no larger than pencil dots . The objects were not classified as ballistic missiles, and it was impossible to concretely label them as missiles .
 It is believed that empty crates were removed from Cuba, in exchange for an agreement by the United States to remove missiles from Russia's borders, and for a guarantee that the U.S. would not support an anti-Castro invasion . The incident is believed to have been created by
 Mao Tse-tung, and the Chinese Communists went out of their way to proclaim their loyalty to the dead leader . Mao's death was the first of Mao's assassination . The Chinese Communists were loyal to the late leader .
 When Enver Hoxha, the Communist ruler of Albania refused to follow Khrushchev's lead in condemning Stalin, Russia canceled all economic and technical aid, and recalled all Soviet personnel . Russia recalled Soviet personnel in Albania .
 China then sent in their own advisors, praising Albania for their stand . Albania has been criticized by China for its stance on the issue .
 China was upset because Russia failed to support them during a recent military action, and were suspicious of Khrushchev's policy of ""peaceful coexistence"" with the United States . China was angry because they were upset because they failed to back them in a military action against Russia .
 Since 1961, world communists have split into either pro-Soviet or pro-China factions . Since 1961 the world communists split into pro-Chinese factions . World communists split between pro-Russian and pro-Japanese factions .
 Russia boasted, that within a generation, the whole world would be communist . Russia boasted that within the next generation, within a decade, the entire world would become communist .
 China had their own thoughts of world domination . The two communist giants had a major rift developed between them . The rift developed because of China's ambitions for world domination.
 China became angry over Russia's refusal to give them nuclear weapons . After 14 years, Russia ceased all aid to China after 14 years . China was angry over the refusal to have nuclear weapons, so Russia stopped all aid .
 So astonished was I, for I had given strict orders not to be disturbed, that it was some moments before I had found language to inquire the cause of the visit . I was so astonished that I had . given strict instructions not to . be disturbed that it .
 "I would have risen but the riveted gaze of the being before me rendered volition impossible," says the author . "It would have been possible to rise but I would have refused to rise."
 "I assayed once more to speak, but my tongue had become useless, as if paralyzed," he said . He assayed again to speak but his tongue remained useless, unable to speak .
 "A new influence, mysterious, potent, irresistible, took possession of me," she writes . "A mysterious, powerful, irresistible" influence took possession, she says . "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to my life," she says.
 Everything about me seemed to rarefy, the mysterious visitor also becoming more airy and yet more distinct to my sight than before . Everything about myself seemed to seem rarefy . The mysterious visitor seemed to become more distinct than before.
 "I began to feel as one dying, or rather to experience the sensations which I have sometimes imagined accompany death," says the author .
 I now beheld a heavy white vapor at some distance rising fold upon fold. It now seemed like a heavy, white vapor rising folds upon fold . The vapor was rising slowly up fold upon folds .
 Before me lay, spread out in one vast plain, all the countries of the world . Europe, Asia, Africa, and America were spread out across the globe .
 "I saw rolling and tossing between Europe and America the billows of the Atlantic and between Asia and America lay the Pacific," says the author of the book .
 Dipping water out of the ocean in the hollow of each hand, he sprinkled some upon America with his right hand, while with his left he cast some over Europe . With his left hand, the president of the United States sprinkled some of the water over Europe with the left .
 A cloud arose from these countries, and joined in mid-ocean . Immediately a cloud arose, it formed a cloud .
 For awhile it seemed stationary, then it moved slowly westward, until it enveloped America in its murky folds . For awhile, the U.S. seemed stationary .
 I cast my eyes upon America, and beheld villages and towns and cities springing up one after another until the whole land from the Atlantic to the Pacific was dotted with them . I cast myself upon America .
 The inhabitants of the inhabitants presently set themselves in battle array against each other . The inhabitants set themselves to battle against each another .
 From each of these continents arose thick black clouds that were soon joined into one . The clouds formed from the continents of each other . They then formed a thick black cloud that merged into one, forming a giant cloud of clouds .
 Throughout this mass there gleamed a dark red light by which I saw hordes of armed men. And throughout this mass of armed people, I said, "Gloria Drexler said .
 These men, moving with the cloud, marched by land and sailed by sea to America, which country was enveloped in the volume of the cloud . These men marched on land, sailed by ship to America .
 At the same moment the angel upon whose head still shown the word 'Union,' and who bore our national flag in one hand and a sword in the other, descended from the heavens attended by legions of white spirits . The angel on his head still showed the word "Union," and who
 As the voice ceased, the shadowy angel for the last time dipped water from the ocean and sprinkled it upon America .
 This also disappeared, and I found myself once more gazing upon the mysterious visitor, who, in the same voice I had heard before, said, 'Son of the Republic'
 At its peak, communism controlled 14,000,000 square miles of territory, or about 1/4 of the inhabited land in the world; and 1/3 of the world's population . A red light was indeed moving towards America .
 The communist menace swept through Russia, Mongolia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Bessarabia, Bukovina, Moldova, Ukraine, Yugoslavia, Outer Mongolia, Manchuria, Karafuto, Kurile lslands, Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, East Germany,
 Keegan Jr. said that our government had been covering up the evidence of an imminent Soviet attack on the United States . Keegan, Jr. claimed that the U.S. government was covering up evidence of a Soviet invasion of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Russia has been preparing to mobilize their forces against the free world . Keegan, a former Assistant Chief of Staff for the Air Force Intelligence Unit, said that Russia had been going through extensive preparations to mobilize forces .
 We shall begin by launching the most spectacular peace movement on record . So we shall begin . So far, we have launched a spectacular peace campaign .
 The capitalist countries, stupid and decadent, will rejoice to cooperate with their own destruction, writes Julian Zelizer . "The capitalist countries will rejoice," he says. "They will rejoice"
 "I can prophecy that your grandchildren in America will live under socialism," says George W. Bush . He predicts that his grandchildren will be under socialism .
 During the 1980's, statements coming out of Russia, continued to be of a threatening nature . During the 80's, Russia continued to make threatening statements .
 International security officers estimate that at least thirty thousand undercover subverters, paid by Moscow and Peking, are responsible for undermining Western democracies .
 In 1921, he came up with the idea of spreading communism through trade unions, youth organizations, cooperatives, and other associations . In 1921 he proposed spreading communism in trade unions and youth organizations .
 The organizations were developed by Willi Munzenberg, a German communist . The organizations are developed by the communist leader .
 Their aim was to further the cause of Soviet communism, and act as a cover, if communism was illegal, in order to spread propaganda . The aim of the group was to help spread propaganda in the Soviet Union .
 It will operate first in the most advanced capitalist countries, and later in other countries, it will operate . The company will operate in most advanced countries, including Russia and China, it says .
 These comrades will operate undercover, as do our intelligence officers and spies who are working abroad . Intelligence officers and spooks will operate under the influence of the British government, says the PM .
 The objective of this fighting force is to speed up the development of revolutionary situations . The aim is to spread awareness of how unrest, public disturbance, disorders and industrial dissatisfaction can bring about a breakdown of the capitalist system .
 They will operate simultaneously in all the countries of the capitalist world . They will be operating simultaneously in every country of the world .
 In each capitalistic country one undercover subverter network will be composed of tried and trusted communists who are nationals of that country . The network is composed of people who are known to be communists .
 Their activities will be directed by Comrade Suslov who will be responsible to the Politburo . The Russian state news agency says the group will be in charge of the Communist Party of Russia .
 This network of undercover subverters will comprise men and women of ability and intelligence, especially selected for these qualities . The network of subversters will be selected for intelligence, ability and ability to be selected . This network will be comprised of men, women and men .
 "They will be called upon to join and operate within organizations and societies that are bourgeois and opposed to communism and the Soviet Union," he says . The Soviet Union was founded by the Soviet republic republics in 1968 .
 The second network of undercover subverters will consist of operators of Soviet nationality . The network will be set up in Russia, Russia and Ukraine .
 Chapter Six comrades will be under direct orders from our Secret Service Headquarters . Chapter 6 comrades will not be under orders from the Secret Service .
 Red ""fifth column"" was instituted in order to infiltrate the West . While appearing to be anti-communist, by going to church, getting involved in charities, and voting conservatively; they were secretly attending training centers to learn techniques of sabotage, terrorism and subversion .
 The recruits would then be sent to the Lenin Technical School at Verkhovnoye, which is spread out of over seven square miles in a desolate area . It is a complex spread out to over seven sq miles in the desolate area, spread out over 7 square miles .
 During the time they were here, their family, and friends, did not know their whereabouts .
 The training lasted 12 months, and consisted of survival techniques, hand-to-hand combat, handling firearms and heavy combat equipment . The training included how to make and deactivate explosives, methods of electronic surveillance, and the use of poisons .
 If the recruit passed, they would be sent on a vacation, during which they'd be arrested by the Secret Police as a foreign agent . If they passed, the recruit would then be sent to a vacation . The recruit would be arrested and arrested if they passed .
 This final test subjected the candidate to brainwashing, torture and interrogation, to see if they would break under the pressure . The candidate was subjected to a range of brainwashing and torture .
 If they passed, they would be sent to one of the Soviet Ace Spy Schools . The training could last for up to ten years .
 The northern sector was for Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, and Finland . The southwestern area was for the Netherlands, the southern area for Austria and Switzerland . And the southeastern area for Germany was for Germany .
 At the Stiepnaya Ace Spy School, near Chkalov, along the northern border of the Kazakh Soviet Republic, the northwestern section was for France; the northern area for Spain; the northeastern section for Italy; and the southern end for Portugal, Brazil, Argentina and Mexico
 Chapter Six Khabarovsk was for Asian and Middle East countries; and the Novaya Ace Spy School, near Tashkent, was for African countries . Chapter Six was for Asia, Middle East, and Chapter Six for Asia and Africa .
 In the United Kingdom section, the candidate would live in actual Britishstyle homes, hotels, and apartments, which were full-size replicas of actual English buildings, on actual English streets .
 There were British banks, restaurants, theaters, and a Post Office, all in a sixty square mile area . The area was a British colony of British citizens .
 The recruit ate British food, wore British clothes, rode London buses, and received a weekly salary dispensed in British currency .
 The recruits were given English names, and ordered to speak only English . They were given five years to master the language, which they had to master . Recruits were given their names and were given only English names .
 During the second five years, they memorized unbreakable codes, and were taught how to assemble and dismantle radio receivers and transmitters . They also learned how to use photographic equipment to reduce blueprints and records into microdots .
 After intensive training, the recruit was, in almost every way, British . After this intensive training she was, she was almost completely British .
 Each agent was smuggled into the country of their training, which in this case was England . The agents were smuggled into England to learn their training .
 They would be given actual identification and 'cover' documents from people who were dead or missing, so that a background check couldn't reveal their true identities . The 'cover documents' would be used to hide their identities from background checks .
 Within their new identity, they became involved in public life, working to undermine the government as a representative of the communist government of the Soviet Union . They became involved with the government in the 1980s and 1990s . They were involved in the anti-communist government .
 China had similar schools, but their training period was only ten months . Spies were recruited mainly for Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist China, and other countries within Asia .
 To infiltrate the West, the Chinese recruited people from all over the world, and smuggled them into China to undergo training . The Chinese recruited them from around the world to train in China .
 Donovan recruited OSS personnel from Communist ranks . Donovan didn't see anything wrong with Communists, and recruited them . Donovan recruited Communist members of the OSS .
 After the war, the OSS became known as the Central Intelligence Agency . In 1952, the head of the CIA, Gen. Gen. George S. Eisenhower, became the CIA chief .
 Three high-level Soviet KGB defectors say they believe there are Communist spies in the U.S. intelligence community . Three defectors said they believed that there were Communist spies .
 Comrades working in armament factories or nuclear establishments must memorize all charts, blueprints, production lists, etc. that they come upon through their employment . They must also memorize blueprints and production lists from their jobs .
 If the well publicized launchings of a space rocket results in a failure, this is of tremendous propaganda value . This is of great propaganda value for the U.S. State Department .
 The class enemy must be discredited, hit often, and where it hurts the most, writes David Frum . "The class enemy is the class enemy," he says .
 "The people that the Kremlin sends over here are, to a man, trained agents of Soviet policy," he says . The Kremlin sends people over to the U.S. are trained agents, he adds .
 Some of them are spies, seeking information; all the others are trusted carriers of Communist propaganda . Some of the spies are seeking information seeking information, the author says . All the spies, all of them seek to carry out Communist propaganda, he says .
 "Their assignment is not to convey a true image of the Soviet Union, but a false image," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "They are not to be satisfied with the image of Soviet Union. They are to be happy with it"
 During the Johnson Administration, 66 Senators voted for the Consulate Treaty . The treaty opened up the country to spies and sabateurs, who would be protected with diplomatic immunity .
 Lenin wrote his Instructions to Revolutionaries in 1905, which indicated how important it was to concentrate on young people . In 1905, Lenin wrote about the importance of concentrating young people in Russia .
 The disturbances must occur on such a large scale that they cause deep concern to the population . Strike strikes of key workers in important industrial centers must be encouraged, says President Obama .
 Every effort must be made now to encourage students to demonstrate, and if possible, to riot on the largest possible scale . Students should be encouraged to demonstrate and riot on a large scale .
 Subtle undercover tactics must be adopted to ensure these demonstrations culminate in rioting and street fighting . The demonstrations will culminate into rioting, street fighting, says Simon Tisdall .
 Red China's agents were instructed to ""seize every opportunity to speed drug addiction,"" and all sorts of drugs were smuggled into the West . Soviets were calling for more strikes, wildcat strikes, and more trade union obstruction to smooth working of industry .
 Nassar, in 1966, of his plans to turn our American soldiers into drug addicts: ""The more troops they send to Vietnam, the happier we shall be," he said . Nassar: The more troops the government sends, the more they send, we will be happier . Nass
 Organized communism began in the United States when Socialist Eugene V Debs ran for the Presidency in 1900,1904, and 1908 . Debs was a member of the Socialist Party .
 They joined the Comintern, which is the world Communist organization run by the Soviet Union . They were the first members of the Communist Party in the world .
 To aid the local parties, there were hundreds of 'front' organizations established to defend Soviet policies and attack its opponents . Hundreds of front organizations were set up to aid local parties .
 Communist parties functioned through the media, local Communist parties, and other small organizations . They functioned as a result of the Communist Party .
 American Friends Service Committee, Arms Control Association, Center for Defense Information, Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy, Council on Economic Priorities, National Lawyers Guild, Citizens Committee for a Sane World .
 British-Soviet Friendship Society, Britain-China Friendship Society and Britain-Lndia Friendship Society . Society for Friendship with the Peoples of Africa is based in Africa .
 On top of all of this support, Communism also had its apologists and representatives in our government, such as Sen. Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz: "Communism is a form of fascism"
 He believed that once Russia caught up to the U.S. in technology, relations would improve between the two countries .
 He advocated increased aid, and compromises to avoid direct confrontation . He also advocated increased cooperation with Russia .
 He felt the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba did not endanger our national security . He felt that the presence was not a threat to the U.S. National Security .
 Johnson Administration sent them 700,000 tons of American wheat, 92,000 bales of cotton, and gave them a loan for $175 million to aid their economy and industry . Later, the Johnson Administration gave them $175million to help their economy .
 I cannot understand it just baffles me why the Soviets these last few years have behaved as they have. It just baffes me why they have behaved so badly, I said . I cannot see why the Soviet Union has behaved as it has done so far .
 Many of our country's leaders have become soft on communism, because they are no longer perceived as a threat . Many of them have become softer on communism because it is no longer a threat to the nation, writes Andrew Hammond .
 They will employ force, murder, lies, flattery, subversion, bribery, extortion, and treachery, they say . They will use force, . murder, . lies, . subversion and subversion to subvert .
 "Everything they stand for and believe in is a contradiction of our understandings of the nature of men," says the author of the book .
 The campaign for nuclear disarmament was directly linked to the International Department of Specific Activities in the Kremlin . After World War II, the ""Ban the Bomb" movement was born, because the United States was the only country to have nuclear capabilities .
 The Soviet Union organized and financed the World Peace Council, a well known 'freeze' group, to influence public opinion and government policy in nonCommunist countries .
 On September 20,1961, the United States and the Soviet Union announced an agreement for general disarmament that included the dismantling of military forces and eliminating weapon stockpiles . The agreement included the elimination of all weapon production, and eliminating all weapon stockpile .
 No treaty was signed, because they could never agree on all points . However, no treaty was ever signed, and no agreement was reached .
 Russia wanted the U.S. to dismantle all foreign bases and destroy nuclear weapons, but this would have given Russia an edge in conventional weapons . For instance, Russia wanted to dismantle nuclear weapons and destroy all foreign military bases .
 The Disarmament Committee of the United Nations, composed of 18 members, also failed to come up with an adequate agreement between the two countries .
 President John F Kennedy promised to close the missile gap in order to reestablish our military strength . Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, wanted to allow our defense program to decline until Russia was equal to us .
 The move towards unilateral disarmament began when McNamara announced that Russia wouldn't sign an arms limitation agreement until they caught up with the U.S. in strategic offensive weapons .
 The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks originated from the discussions between President Lyndon B Johnson and Soviet Prime Minister Aleksei N Kosygin, in 1967 .
 These conferences developed into the SALT I Agreement, signed by President Richard M Nixon and Soviet Premier Leonid I Brezhnev, in 1972 . The agreement was the result of a series of conferences held in the 1970s .
 The number of U.S. strategic missiles had been frozen at the 1967 level . The Soviets had continued to build, matching that amount in 1970 . In 1970, the number of United States strategic missiles was frozen .
 By 1972, Russia had a 3-2 advantage in the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles . Russia also had a 2-1 advantage in number of ICBM missiles .
 It also froze the number of offensive missiles at the 1972 level for five years . The number of missile launches was frozen at 1972 level .
 Russia has 2,358 land and sea-based missiles, and the United States only 1,710 . The U.S. had 1,700 missiles, the U.K. had 2,000 in total . The United States had just one in the number of missiles .
 Submarine-based missiles were restricted by a complicated formula which gave the Russians a numerical advantage, but was balanced by permitting the U.S. more warheads for its reliable and more accurate missiles . Submarine missiles were limited by a complex formula which allowed the United States more warheads .
 The second part of the agreement was a five-year pact limiting some offensive strategic weapons . The pact also limits the number of launchers for ICBM's carrying nuclear warheads . The agreement was also agreed to limit some offensive weapons .
 President Gerald R Ford and Brezhnev reached an agreement to limit the number of all offensive strategic weapons and delivery systems until December 31,1985 . The agreement was reached on November 24,1974 .
 SALT II was a treaty that resulted from a second round of talks, and was signed by President Jimmy Carter and Brezhnev on June 18, 1979 . It was to remain in effect until 1985 . The treaty was signed in 1979 and remained in effect .
 Each side limited each side to 2,400 ICBM launchers and long range bombers . Within six months of ratification, the agreement was reached . The agreement was ratified by the United States and South Korea .
 Each country would be able to develop one new missile, and modernize their existing weaponry, with certain limitations . It would allow each country to develop a new missile and to modernize existing weaponry .
 Each side would be expected to verify the other's compliance by its own surveillance methods . Each side's surveillance methods would be used to verify its compliance .
 The Jackson Equality Amendment still does not meet the requirements of the Jackson Equality amendment . Regardless of the many stipulations, it still did not meet requirements .
 The Senate never ratified SALT II, because the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, however, the United States is upholding it, but not Russia . Russia invaded Afghanistan in 1980s, but the U.S. never ratified it .
 If their military escalation wasn't an indication of their intentions, then the capabilities of their civil defense program should have been . The U.S. government should have shown its intentions, says CNN.com .
 They have protected water, power generators, and communications systems . They are protected water and power generators . They also have protected communications systems, water and electricity .
 In the event of a nuclear exchange, it is believed that a large part of the Russian population would survive . The Russian population is thought to have survived the exchange .
 The United States has literally abandoned its civil defense program . Much planning has gone into the ""Continuity of Government"" plan developed by the FEMA .
 It will contain all records on its computers, such as census, Social Security, and IRS information . It will house federal government officials, and contain all census and Social Security information .
 Ritchie, Maryland, and Colorado Springs, Colorado, have been designated for military and government leaders .
 There are said to be as many as 96 underground facilities throughout Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina .
 235,000 buildings designated as fall-out shelters . Civilians will be left to seek out buildings designated to be shelters . The 235,500 buildings are designated as shelters .
 Defense Department's Civil Defense Preparedness Agency indicates that there is the potential for sheltering 50 million people in mines . In addition, the agency says there could be the potential to shelter 50 million in mines.
 If a nuclear exchange were to occur today, the best estimates are that 160,000,000 Americans would die, but only 5,00,000 Russians would .
 The B-1 Strategic bomber was to be built by Rockwell International, General Electric, and the Boeing Co. It was the first production of the bomber . The bomber was built in the 1950s .
 The B-1 was to replace the obsolete B-52, and would have the capability of evading Soviet radar detection because of its ability to fly at high speeds, at low altitudes; and twice the speed of sound at higher altitudes . It would have been able to fly
 They would be able to carry a weapons payload twice the amount of the B-52, including 24 SRAM's inside its body, and eight on its wings . They would have to carry twice that amount of weapons payload .
 Internally, the device can carry 75,000 pounds of conventional bombs . It can carry 40,000 bombs externally, and 75,00 pounds of bombs .
 Its takeoff distance is half that of the B-52, giving it access to more areas . The plane has a takeoff distance of half the size of a B-51 bomber .
 Since 1961, about 1,000 of our B-57 strategic bombers have been phased out . The supersonic B-58's were deactivated in 1970 .
 The Russians produced their delta-wing supersonic ""Backfire"" bomber, which has a maximum range of over 5,000 miles, and can travel 1,500 mph . The Russians also produced their 'Backfire' bombers, which can travel over 1,000 mph .
 This means that they can be launched from bases in the Siberia, can cross the United States, refuel in Cuba, or somewhere else in Latin America . This means they can also cross the U.S. and refuel into Cuba, Cuba .
 It would have taken two Russian missiles at each site to be sure of neutralizing it, which is more than they have . Russia would have needed two missiles to neutralize it, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 This would give the United States time to retaliate with stationery missile silos . The U.S. would then be able to withdraw from the U.K.
 MX system, with its 2,000 warheads, would have the capability of devastating the Soviet Union . MX system could have the ability to devastate the Soviet U.S. The MX system would be capable of devastating Soviet Union.
 Soviet fixed silos are designed to refire, ours are not . They have at least 1,000 extra missiles for refiring . The Soviet silos were designed to fire, but not to be refirbed .
 They also have larger missiles, giving them a 6-1 advantage in firepower . The U.S. has larger missiles and larger missiles than any other team .
 The SS-9 Scarp Rocket can lift five times the load that the U.S.'s LGM-30 G Minuteman missile can . It can hurl a 35-kiloton multiple warhead close to 6,600 miles, enabling it to destroy a group of
 It can carry a 20megaton warhead, or three smaller warheads, each independently aimed . The U.S. nuclear submarine can carry 20 megaton warheads or three small warheads .
 It can even carry 14 one-megaton warheads, all of which could be directed to different locations . It can deliver enough explosive power to destroy a large city .
 With a single warhead, the missile can travel 5,700 miles, but only 4,700 with a multiple warhead . The missile has a maximum of 5,000 miles, and can travel more than 5,800 miles .
 Russia's SS-18 and SS-19 missiles could destroy America's land-based missile force of 1,000 Minuteman and 54 Titans in a single barrage, giving them a first-strike capability . With their increased number of warheads, and improved accuracy, the Pentagon indicated that
 Chapter Six warheads, while our largest can only carry three 1-megaton warheads, are only able to carry 3 1- megaton warheads . Chapter 6 warheads can carry six warheads .
 Russia also has many small missiles, such as the SS-20, a mobile multiple warhead missile, with a range of over 5,000 miles . Russia has a small range of small missiles that would be effective in taking out NATO ports and airfields .
 The SS-24, a rail-mobile missile, and the SS-25, a road-mobile missiles, were developed by the Russians . The Russians also developed the rail-based and road-based versions of the missiles .
 In 1977, Brezhnev called for a joint renunciation of neutron weapons, and in 1978, Carter said they wouldn't be produced . Carter said in 1978 that they would be produced, but in 1978 he said they won't be .
 President Reagan made the decision to begin production of the Neutron bomb in 1981 . Russia's edge in strategic weapons didn't seem that important after this addition to our nuclear arsenal .
 The Lance missile, and eight-inch artillery shells in the U.S. were furnished with a radiation enhanced warhead, which contained a radioactive isotope known as tritium, that produces far more radiation, and far less explosion and heat than conventional weapons .
 The result is that they kill people, without that much damage to surrounding buildings . The result of the attack is that people are killed without much damage, the author says .
 America had an edge with the Navy's nuclear-powered, nuclear-armed Polaris submarines . America's Polaris submarines were built in the 1950s and '60s .
 While at sea, they can't be detected, yet they can track Russian subs because of their ultra-sensitive electronic surveillance system . The Russian subs can be tracked at sea because they are not detected while at sea . The U.S. Navy says it can track the Russian subs using
 Russia stepped up the development of their long-range missiles . Knowing this, Russia has stepped up development of its missiles, experts say . Russia has been developing its own missiles in the past .
 It carries 20 SLBM SS-N-20 intercontinental nuclear missiles, which have a range of 4,800 miles, farther than ours . The U.S. military says it has a long-range nuclear missile range .
 It is capable of striking any target in the United States from protected Soviet waters . The U.S. Navy says it can strike any target from protected waters in protected waters .
 Typhoon subs built at Severodvinsk, the world's largest submarine production yard . The Typhoon subs are designed to operate under the Arctic Ocean ice cap .
 NATO force tanks, for example, had 193,000 anti-tank missiles, nine times the number that was in the arsenal of the Warsaw Pact . They also began producing the Soviet submarines with torpedo-proof titanium hulls, they say .
 They are accurate from distances up to two miles away, which is outside the range of Russia's tanks . The accuracy is based on distances between two miles and two miles from the Russian capital .
 Russia developed the T-80 tank, which has an armor consisting of a honeycomb process which combines steel, ceramics, and aluminum to create a substance that is three times stronger, yet weighs little more . The honeycomb armor is made from a process that combines steel and cer
 For some reason, the U.S. government, is trying to disguise, and hide, that we may no longer be the most powerful nation on Earth . The United States government is hiding the fact that we are no longer powerful, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Not only are they hiding it, but continue to make it worse with further plans for disarmament . Not only hide it, they also hide it with further disarmament plans for the war .
 On December 8, 1987, Mikhail Gorbachev and President Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . The treaty was to eliminate all medium and short range nuclear missiles .
 They have cheated on the INF Treaty of 1989, and have not fully complied with the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty of 1991 . They have not complied fully with the conventional forces in Europe treaty of 1991, it has been claimed .
 Many wars or confrontations since SALT I had been started by, or influenced by, Russia in one way or another . Russia has been involved in many of the world's most recent wars and confrontations . Russia is a key figure in the history of the Cold War .
 About the only people who do not know it are the general public in the U.S. and Australia . Only people in the United States and Australia know it .
 In December, 1979, over 50,000 Soviet soldiers moved into the country of Afghanistan with tanks and helicopters . By January, there were close to 100,000 Russian troops in positions throughout the country .
 Reports that Soviet Army officers were arming and training Baluchi tribesmen in southern Afghanistan . The tribesmen had long sought their own homeland . They were trained by Soviet officers in the region .
 They live in the region covering parts of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, along the strategic coasts of the Arabia Sea and the Gulf of Oman .
 It was believed that the intent of the Soviets, was to gain access to the Strait of Hormuz, in the Arabian Sea, where much of the world's oil supply is shipped from .
 Khan hinted that since more than half of the students that held our hostages in Iran were pro-Soviet Communists, the Russians may have instigated the incident, he said . Khan hinted, that since the incident may have escalated into a full-blown confrontation, the Soviet Union may have been
 In 1987, he initiated a program of reforms to bring democracy to their political process . He participated in four Summit meetings with Reagan, and initiated reforms .
 The reforms were denounced by some Eastern bloc countries and old-line communists . Some Eastern blocs denounced the reforms . The reforms have been condemned by some of the world's communist parties .
 A decline in the economy, the worst since World War II, has created an atmosphere of unrest . The country's economy has been hit hard by an economic downturn .
 We uphold the historical justness of the great ideas of Marxism-Leninism, and along with all the revolutionary and peace loving forces of mankind, stand for social progress, and peace and security for all nations .
 There will be no significant internal change within the Soviet Union, other than for cosmetic purposes . The Soviet Union will not change much more than cosmetic purposes, says historian .
 In February, 1989, after an eight year guerrilla war against government rebels in Afghanistan, the Soviets pulled their troops out of the country . The Soviets pulled out of Afghanistan in February 1989 .
 The Communist superpower had lost alot of the prestige that years of propaganda had built up, and the embarrassing defeat signaled the beginning of the end of the era .
 On August 19,1991, a report from Russia indicated that Gorbechev had become ill, and the Vice-President had taken over the country, imposing a state of emergency . The report indicated that the Soviet Union had taken control of the country .
 The military, the KGB, and communist hardliners had initiated a coup to take over the government . In reality, the military and the KGB were involved in the coup . The coup took place in 1953, when the Soviet Union was overthrown .
 Donald S McAlvany believes the coup was a hoax . He believes that the coup took place in Syria . Donald S. McAlvanian is the editor of McAlvinian Intelligence Advisor .
 In all past coups and revolutions, the KGB would have killed Gorbachev, and other reform leaders, but they weren't even arrested . "In all past coupps and . revolutions, they would have been killed," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "They weren't
 Only a minimal amount of troops participated in the coup, the coup was not held . The internal or international lines of communication were not cut, the press was not controlled, and the airports were not closed . The airport was not closed.
 Boris Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Republic, denounced the coup, and called for a show of force . About 50,000 demonstrators were at the Russian parliament . Yeltsins called for the demonstration .
 The picture of him on top of a Soviet tank, in open defiance of the Communist hardliners, was an indelible image in the hearts of the Soviet people, and the world . The image of him standing on a tank in defiance of Soviet hardliners was an iconic image in
 By August 21st, 1991, the coup had failed, and Gorbachev was restored as President . The coup was the first attempt to take over the Soviet Union .
 Of the eight coup leaders, one was said to have committed suicide, and may have been murdered; the other seven were tried and imprisoned . One coup leader committed suicide and seven others were tried .
 In the past, such men would have just been shot, which gives credibility to the theory that the coup was a hoax . The coup was likely to be a hoax, according to the president's spokesman .
 Shortly after the coup, the President of Soviet Georgia accused Gorbachev of masterminding the coup . Shortly after, the Soviet Georgia President accused the former KGB chief of being involved in it .
 Eduard Shevardnadze, Gorbachev's former foreign minister, said that he may have been behind the attack . The incident occurred in the Soviet Union in 1986 .
 The coup was to give Gorbachev the appearance of grabbing control back from the old-guard Communists . It would boost his popularity with the Soviet people, and make the West think there was a potential for widespread democratic reforms in Russia .
 On September 2nd, Gorbachev announced that his country was ""on the brink of catastrophe" and that all authority was to be transferred to himself, the Presidents of the ten independent republics, and an appointed legislative council would be the basis for a new Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin became President of a Russian Federation known as the Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics . He was President of the Russian Federation . Yeltsins was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 His first actions were to eliminate state subsidies on most goods and services, which caused prices to rise . He also initiated a program to privatize thousands of large and medium-sized state-owned businesses .
 The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty had been signed July 31,1991, by Gorbachev and President Bush . It was to reduce the amount of strategic offensive arms by about 30%, in three phases, over the next seven years .
 The transfer of all nuclear weapons to the Russian Republic had not been completed . It was approved by the Senate on October 1, 1992, and the Russian Supreme Soviet on November 4, 1992 .
 The republics of Belarus and Kazakhstan have each ratified START, and acceded to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as non-nuclear nations . But not the Ukraine, which is negotiating with Russia to transfer their weapons .
 On January 3, 1993, President Bush and Yeltsin signed START II, which, if ratified, will be the biggest disarmament pact in history . If ratified, START II would be the largest disarmament agreement in the world . START II was signed in 1993 .
 It calls for both sides to reduce their long-range nuclear arsenals to about 1/3 of their current levels within ten years . It would totally eliminate all land-based multiple warhead missiles .
 The Communist Strategy of Deception and Disinformation was published in 1984 . It was published by the Communist Party of China .
 He outlined virtually everything that has taken place recently in Russia, such as the tearing down of the Berlin Wall and the dismantling of East and West Germany . The author also outlined the partial relinquishing of their control of Eastern Europe .
 He wrote that their plan was to deceive the West into believing that the Soviet Union was falling apart, their satellites splintering, and its economy in shambles . He said they wanted to fool the West .
 The facade of weakness and instability would be part of a massive deception staged by the Kremlin to extort aid from the West . The Kremlin is trying to get the U.S. to withdraw troops out of Western Europe .
 At various times during the history of the Soviet Union, they have appealed to the U.S. for help, and gotten it, mostly through deception, and the efforts of apologists and traitors in our government . The Soviet Union has gotten the help of the United States for help
 This is the first time that Russia has made this kind of concession . This is not the first concession made by Russia to the U.S.
 The former Soviet Union and its satellite countries want to be part of the new family of nations known as the New World Order . The have made it appear that communism is dead, that democracy is sweeping the former Soviet Soviet Union .
 If you consider all the evidence that I have put forth, it just seems to be another ploy by the Soviets to undermine America. The Soviets are trying to undermine the U.S. President Barack Obama, says President Obama .
 A respected Sovietologist has stated his belief that the motive behind the Russian's actions is not so much need, but an attempt to destroy the U.S. economy by defaulting on an international loan that could be as much as $100 billion, which could precipitate a financial collapse
 Yeltsin has already addressed a joint session of Congress to appeal for economic aid . Yeltsins has already appealed to Congress for help to help Russia .
 The Bush Administration shut down Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, and Subic Bay Naval Base, in September, 1991, that it also announced in September that it was also closing Subic . Subic is a major naval base on the island, and will completely withdraw from the island
 The United States has also announced the withdrawal of troops from South Korea . They have also pulled out of, and are closing 79 military bases in Western Europe; and have withdrawn United States nuclear missiles .
 Between 1990 and 1992, the total number of military personnel has decreased by over 8% . The trend to scale down our military is continuing, says CNN.com .
 The United States is virtually shutting down our tank, submarine, and F-16 production lines . The U.S. is only producing one a year, compared to one every six weeks for the Russians, writes CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 U.S. Representatives voted to discontinue United States bomber production . Chapter Six Representatives voted in favor of the decision .
 The House voted to slash production of submarine launched ballistic missiles . The move coincides with the decrease of our submarine fleet, even though the Soviets have consistently outproduced us . The House also voted to cut production of sub-launched ballistic missiles, to coincide with a decrease of submarine fleet .
 Our government has set a goal of spending only 3.6% of GNP on defense by 1996 . The U.S. government has budgeted just $1.4 billion for defense spending .
 Our government has fallen for the massive deception being put forth by the Russian Federation, and continues to make the country vulnerable by dismantling our military, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Soviets are ready to implement the next stage of their masterplan . Meanwhile, the Soviets are watching, and waiting, for the next step of their plan .
 It was created, nurtured, and supported by the Illuminati as an opposing political ideology in order to achieve their goals . The Illuminati was behind the creation of the anti-American ideology .
 Rockefeller had just opened a Hong Kong branch of the Chase Manhattan, for trade with China, but since trade relations had broken off between Russia and China, because of an overbearing Khrushchev, Rockefeller got rid of the problem in order to stabilize the situation . Rockefeller opened the branch in
 Karl Marx wrote about the abolition of private property, a progressive income tax, a central bank, and state control of the family, religion, and education . The Socialist government is the prelude to the utopian goal of Communism, Marx wrote .
 The theory is that while the Soviets would slowly move to the political right, the U.S. would be pushed to the left . The two would meet in the middle as Social Democrats .
 From there, it is only a small step to a socialist one-world government, or the New World Order . And from there, there are only a few small steps to a one world government, says the author .
 It is apparent that the Russian Federation will continue to abolish the use of the word ""Communism"" in lieu of the term ""socialism" in order to gain the acceptance of Western Europe .
 They will be brought into future ""collectivesecurity" agreements, as protection against Third World dictators and terrorism . They will also be protected by the governments of the United States .
 The amplification of these agreements are what the United Nations has long sought, the U.N. says . U.S. troops will be a global reactionary force made up of American, Russian, European and Third World troops, the UN says .
 Brookings had become a partner in Cupples and Marston, ten years later, under his leadership, expanded and flourished . At the age of 21, Brookings was 21, he became a partner with Marston . Brookings was one of the world's most successful private companies .
 He was one of the original Trustees of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . He was a consultant to the Commission on Economy and Efficiency during the Taft Administration .
 In 1917, he was appointed to President Wilson's War Industries Board (which had the responsibility of receiving and distributing the supplies needed by the military) Later became Chairman of its Price Fixing Committee .
 At the age of 70, he took over the leadership of the Institute for Government Research . He raised $750,000 from 92 corporations and a dozen private citizens .
 Their first project was to push for legislation creating a federal budget, which was successful . They were successful in pushing for a national budget .
 The first U.S. Budget Director, under President Harding, was Charles G Dawes, who relied heavily on the IGR's staff .
 The Institute was also involved in civil service reform legislation in the 1920's . The Institute also helped develop civil service reforms in 1920s .
 Taft was the Supreme Court Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington, DC, in 1913 . Taft served as the president of the United States in the early 1900s .
 Brookings established the Institute of Economics in 1922 with a $1,650,000 grant from the Carnegie Corporation . The Institute represented the interests of the labor unions and the general public . Brookings decided that economics was the biggest issue, not administrative aspects .
 Chapter Seven work on the staffs of the IGR and the Institute of Economics . Chapter Seven is work of IGR staffs .
 In 1927, he merged all three organizations to form the Brookings Institution . The Brookings Institution's purpose was to train future government officials . Brookings Institution was founded in 1927 .
 He put $6 million, and 36 years of his life, into the nonpartisan, nonprofit center . The center analyzes government problems and issue statistical reports .
 Annual report, Setting National Priorities, analyzes President's Budget . Annual report produced by the White House .
 They have a staff of about 250, including about 45 senior fellows and 19 research associates . They have about 250 people, including 45 senior staff members .
 Leo Pasvolsky served close to ten years in the State Department . He returned to the Brookings Institution in 1946 . He was one of six other members of the State Dept.
 Pasvolsky initiated an International Studies Group, which developed the basis for the Marshall Plan, to aid the European war recovery efforts . The group was backed by the Rockefeller Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation, and the Mellon Trust . Pasvolksky was the founder of the International Studies
 In 1951, the Chicago Tribune said that the Brookings Institution had created an ""elaborate program of training and indoctrination in global thinking" Most of its scholars wind up as policy makers in the State Department .
 In 1941, he named Brookings Vice President Edwin Nouse as the first Chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisors . Nouse was named the first chairman of the council of economic advisers .
 Carter's foreign policy became a resting place for the many of the group's recommendations . The group was formed in the 1980s .
 Republican's regard Brookings Institution as the ""Democratic government-in-exile" Yet, Nixon appointed Herbert Stein, a Brookings scholar, to be Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors .
 The Nixon Administration considered bombing the Brookings Institution in order to allow the FBI to seize their documents . The idea of a ""Brookings Institution for Republicans" was considered to offset the liberalism of Brookings Institution .
 They thought of calling it the Institute for an Informed America, or the Silent Majority Institute . They thought it would be called the Institute of Information for the Informed .
 E Howard Hunt, of Watergate fame, was to be its first Director . Hunt wanted to turn it into a center for covert political activity . Hunt was the first Director of the CIA, but he wanted it to be a political center .
 The role of the ""conservative Brookings"" was taken by an existing research center called the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, which was founded in 1943 by Louis H Brown .
 During the early sixties, they shortened their name to the American Enterprise Institute . They later received a lot of financial support during the Nixon and Ford Administrations, when they drew their advisors .
 Hoffman and Benton approached Jesse Jones, the Secretary of Commerce, with an idea for an ""American Policy Commission" to analyze, criticize, and challenge the thinking and policies of business, labor, agriculture, and government .
 Establishment backing for what later emerged as the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs . Chapter Seven was a precursor to the agreement later emerged .
 While Hoover was on leave from Duke, he worked with Hoffman to develop what eventually became known as the Marshall Plan . After the War, while Hoover was working with Hoffman, he helped develop the Marshall plan . Hoover died in 1945 .
 The group's later work laid the groundwork for regional government in the U.S. The group was later involved in the creation of regional governments .
 Although this mentality is becoming more pronounced, getting to that point has taken many years . The mentality is more pronounced than ever before, but it has taken years to develop .
 James T Shotwell organized a group known as the Commission to Study the Organization of Peace, which was made up of a number of small subcommittees . Shotwell was a member of the Commission .
 The Subcommittee on International Organization was chaired by Sumner Wells, the Under Secretary of State, and its purpose was to plan postwar policy . One of these was to discuss postwar foreign policy .
 Col. Shotwell and Isaiah Bowman, members of subcommittee, were also members of the League of Nations Association, and had been on Col. Bowman's subcommittee .
 House's staff at the Paris Peace Conference in 1918, where plans for the League of Nations were laid out . House was at the Peace Conference at the end of 1918 .
 This established a direct link between the League of Nations and the United Nations . The League established a link with the U.N. and the League .
 The subcommittee's work formed the basis for the Charter of the United Nations . It was the means by which the Council on Foreign Relations was able to condition the Congress, and the people of the country, to accept the UN .
 Cordell Hull sent a letter to President Roosevelt recommending the establishment of a Presidential Advisory Committee on Post War Foreign Policy . The committee actually became a planning group for the United Nations . The group was established in 1941 .
 Ten of the Fourteen Committee members came from the Council on Foreign Relations . Ten members of the Committee are from the CFR .
 Roosevelt's ""Four Freedoms Speech"" planted the seed for the United Nations . Roosevelt's speech planted the seeds for the UN . Roosevelt’s speech was the inspiration for the organization .
 A conference held in Washington, D.C. between the representatives of the 26 nations that had banded together against the axis powers, gave momentum to the movement by issuing the ""Declaration of the Twenty-Six United Nations"" in 1942 .
 The State Department's Advisory Committee on Post-War Foreign Policy secretly worked out more details in 1942 . In February, 1942, the State Department secretly worked on more details .
 Diplomats from the United States, Russia, England, and China attended preliminary meetings in October, 1943, at a conference in Moscow . Leading diplomats from the U.S., Russia, China, and England attended the conference .
 Cordell Hull ""secured the consent of Stalin to establish a general organization...for the maintenance of international peace and security," in proposing it to Roosevelt . Hull made it appear as though it was an American project .
 Alger Hiss, Harry Dexter White, Virginius Frank Coe, Noel Field, Laurance Duggan, Henry Julian Wadleigh, John Carter Vincent, David Weintraub, Nathan Gregory Silvermaster, Harold Glasser, Victor Perlo, Irving Kaplan, Solomon Adler
 All of these men, were either communists, or had pro-communist sympathies . All of the men were either communist or were pro-Communist sympathists .
 The idea for the United Nations was officially proposed in 1944, at the secret Dumbarton Oaks Conference, where the framework was developed, and the final plans laid out .
 Alger Hiss coordinated the conference in the U.S., England, and Russia . The conference was attended by representatives from the three countries .
 Hiss was a Trustee of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, a director of the Executive Committee of the American Association for the United Nations . Hiss also served as President of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . He was a Director of American Institute of Pacific Relations, a Trustor
 Exposed as a Soviet spy, his communist activities extended back to 1939 . Exposed in the Soviet Union, he was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 At the Yalta Conference, President Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Joseph Stalin agreed to the establishment of the United Nations . The United Nations was established at the end of World War II .
 On June 26, 1945, the San Francisco Conference, attended by 50 nations, established the United Nations, and adopted the Charter which had been drafted . The United Nations was established by a San Francisco conference .
 The United World Federalists were established on February 22,1947, by two CFR members, Norman Cousins and James P Warburg . The U.W. Federalists are the United States Federalists .
 Their goal was to endorse ""the efforts of the United Nations to bring about a world community favorable to peace" The group endorsed the U.N. efforts to promote peace .
 Ronald Reagan was associated with them before he became a conservative . Ronald Reagan has been associated with the conservative movement since his presidency began in 1980s .
 Various other left-wing organizations have also defended and are supporting this international organization . Various other organizations have defended and supported the organization .
 Many of the countries are non-democratic, being ruled by dictators, royal families, military officers, or one-party governments . Many of these countries are ruled by military, military, or non-democracy .
 The evidence given, shows the communist influence which was involved during the establishment of the organization, and all indications are that it has maintained a social slant to its affairs . The evidence . shows the . evidence .
 Dag Hammarskjold, the second Secretary-General, was a Swedish socialist who openly pushed communist policies, and U Thant, the third Secretary- General was a Marxist . Dag Hammarkjold was the leader of the United States in the 1950s .
 The U.S. has only one vote in the socialist-dominated organization . We are powerless to prevent the socialists from taking over the world with diplomacy, he says .
 Nonaligned nations, a majority of the delegates, voted with the communists 85% of the time in the General Assembly in 1987 . In 1987, member nations voted with United States only 18.7% .
 The Constitutional right of Congress to declare war has been completely transferred to the UN Military Committee . As such, they can order us into war at any time, without our consent, as they did in Korea .
 The UN refused to come to the aid of China in 1949, ignored the Hungarian freedom fighters in 1956, shunned the Tibetans when they were attacked by Chinese Communists, and supported the communist attempt to overthrow the African country of Katanga in the 1960s .
 They criticized the U.S. invasion of Grenada, which sought to stem communist activity in the Caribbean . They even criticized the American invasion .
 The Undersecretary for Political and Security Council Affairs, had always been a Russian, who along with the Chairman of the UN Military Staff Committee were responsible for all UN military action .
 Alexandre Vasiliev, who took a leave of absence from the position to command the communist troops, actually gave the orders to attack . Alexandre Vassiliev was the only person to order the attack .
 He continued to get valuable information about the UN's military plans from his handpicked successor, Gen. Gen. David Cameron . Gen. Cameron: "I'm sure Mr Cameron will continue to work for the United Nations"
 By February, 1950, after the public expressed their outrage over the Resolution, the Liberals who sponsored it turned their backs on it in an attempt to salvage their political reputations . The Liberals who supported the Resolution turned their back on it .
 "We do not intend to continue in the role of sponsors of any movement which undermine U.S. sovereignty," the White House says .
 Within two years, 18 of the 23 states which had passed the Resolution rescinded it . The resolution was rescinded by 18 states within two years .
 Also discussed are Senate Resolution 133, introduced July 8,1949 by Sen. Sen. Tom Coburn .
 Kefauver called for an Atlantic Union of Canada, England, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the United States . Kfauver calls for a union of countries like Canada and England and France .
 Another conference, in London, in 1954, by the World Movement for World Federation, also proposed similar ideas .
 Chapter Seven internationalists like United States Supreme Court Justice William 0. 0.0.0 . Chapter Seven: Internationalists like U.S. Supreme Court justices like William 0 . 0.00 .
 President Eisenhower said it would curtail the power of the Presidency . Hubert Humphrey, John J McCloy, Paul Hoffman, Thomas K Finletter, John Foster Dulles, and President Dulles(Secretary of State), among others .
 The United States' Program for General and Complete Disarmament in a Peaceful World, revealed plans to give the UN control of our Armed Forces, and nuclear weapons, . The U.S. program for general and complete disarmament .
 President Ford called for the development of a global strategy and a policy concerning food and oil . President Carter tried to persuade the Chinese to take part in the plan .
 The World Constitution and Parliament Association was founded in 1959 . Philip Isely emerged during the 1940's as a leader in the one-world movement . The WCPA is located in Lakewood, CO .
 WCPA have assumed the task of trying to establish a New World Order . They have assembled a Provisional World Parliament . The WCPA are currently in charge of the Provisional New World Parliament.
 Chapter Seven ""Agreement to Call a World Constitutional Convention"" was first circulated from 1958-61, where it was signed by several thousand dignitaries .
 In 1965, work began on a world constitution, and a meeting was held in the City Hall of Wolfach, West Germany, in June, 1968 .
 A strategy was discussed on how to get the Constitution ratified by national parliaments and governments . A third session was held in January, 1979, in Colombo, Sri Lanka, where a strategy was held .
 A timetable announced in 1984, called for a world government to be instituted by 1990, which obviously didn't happen . A world government was announced by 1984, but never happened .
 Provisional World Parliament meets for the fifth time this year . They have since announced that a world government will emerge . World government is expected to emerge when the world parliament meets again .
 The WCPA is closely linked with the United World Federalists, the American Civil Liberties Union, Friends of the Earth, Planetary Society, and others . WCPA was founded in 1974 by UN executive Robert Mueller, author Norman Cousins, and activist Donald Keyes .
 Nearly 20% of their members are affiliated with the UN in various capacities . The UN is the largest body in the world, with more than 20% affiliated with it .
 In quest for peace, U.S. has allowed itself to become weaker, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Along with world peace, world order will be a new world order dominated by a socialist form of government .
 The Ditchley Group is engineering a plan by Harold Lever to control the fiscal and monetary policies of the United States . Harold Lever is a director on the Board of the UNILEVER conglomerate . He called for the International Monetary Fund to control central banks of all nations .
 Dennis Weatherstone of Morgan Guaranty said that this was the only way for the U.S. to save itself . Weatherstone said that the United States needs to be able to get ahead .
 The propaganda of world peace propels the U.N. further into the control of this world . The propaganda has done little to slow its momentum . The United Nations has been accused of encouraging violence in the past .
 The Reagan Administration withdrew from UNESCO in December, 1983, because the UN agency had ""increasingly placed an overfed bureaucracy at the service of a coalition of Soviet bloc and Third World countries" which was to be effective January 1, 1985 .
 The United Nations has failed to give us even a remote hope of lasting peace, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Now we must realize that the U.N. has failed ... that the United Nations .
 Chapter Seven propaganda will continue to grow, and we will become more desensitized to the campaign that continues to slowly take away the freedoms that our forefathers fought and died for . Chapter 7 propaganda continues to grow .
 Richard Gardner, a Clinton advisor on the UN, has outlined a plan for a world army of 30,000 men . Gardner is a professor of international law and international law . He has outlined the plan for the world army, which he says could be in the shape of an army of
 This would create a military force that the Security Council could deploy within 48 hours to maintain the peace . The Security Council would be able to use this military force within 48 days .
 In 1993, the UN became financially stretched to the limit, because of all the peacekeeping operations throughout the world . They pay each country $988 per soldier every month, and more for specialized troops . The UN cutback on travel, meetings, and the use of consultants .
 It seems likely, that the strength of our economy may determine how soon our country agrees to become part of a one world government .
 If it continues to decline due to government mismanagement and manipulation by the Illuminati, it may not be long till we have to be ""saved"" in order to survive, even if it is, as part of a new world order dominated by a socialistic political ideology .
 The European Union, formerly known as the European Communities, is a movement to unite Western Europe . The European Economic Community is a European Union of countries .
 For hundreds of years, there has been an ongoing effort to unify Europe . The EU has been a source of tension in Europe for centuries .
 Prior to World War II, because of intermarriage between Royal families, all crowned heads were closely related . All crowned heads are closely related to each other .
 Count Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi founded the Pan European Union in 1922 . He founded the European Union after founding the European Economic Council .
 He fled Austria in 1940, and came to the United States, where he continued to work towards European unity . He fled to the U.S. in 1940 and worked for European unity in Europe .
 Churchill made the United Europe Movement a cohesive group by merging the Union of European Federalists, the Economic League for European Cooperation, and the French Council for a United Europe . Churchill merged the three groups into the International Committee of Movements for European Unity .
 Late in 1947, various people and groups formed a committee to coordinate their efforts . By May, 1948, organized the Congress of Europe, which convened at the Hague in the Netherlands .
 Nearly 1000 prominent Europeans from 16 countries called for the establishment of a United Europe . Nearly 1000 European leaders called for an end to austerity measures in the past .
 Joseph Retinger, Winston Churchill, Duncan Sandys, and former Belgian Prime Minister HenriPaul Spaak came to the U.S. in July, 1948, to raise money for the movement .
 This led to the establishment of the American Committee on a United Europe on March 29,1949 . The committee was established in 1949 .
 First Chairman was William Donovan, the first Director of the Office of Strategic Services . ViceChairman was Allen Dulles, who later became CIA Director . Secretary was George S Franklin, a coordinator with the Trilateral Commission .
 George C Marshall, the Secretary of State, made proposals for European aid known as the Marshall Plan, also called for the unification of Europe . The Marshall Plan was made in the 1930s and 1940s .
 A 50 year treaty was signed for ""collaboration in economic, social, and cultural matters and for collective self defense" in Brussels, by England, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg . On March 17,1948, a 50-year treaty was . signed for
 The Council of Western European Union was established in May, 1955 . It was made up of foreign ministers from Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and England . In 1950, its functions were transferred to NATO, and in 1955, it became a military alliance
 The Western European Coalition began on June 8,1948, with the signing of the Benelux Agreement by Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands, to unite their economic and domestic policies . Chapter Seven Chapter Seven .
 Belgium, Denmark, France, France , lreland, ltaly, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, England, Greece, Turkey, Germany, West Germany, Austria, Cyprus, Switaerland, Malta, Portugal, Spain, and Lie-tenstein .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was the father of the Common Market . It was formed in 1949 to apply counterpressure against the growing Soviet military presence in Europe . The organization was formed to implement the North Atlantic treaty in 1949 .
 Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Italy, West Germany, Spain, Luxembourg, the United Kingdom, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, and the United States, all joined to oppose the growing threat of communism .
 The Russians, recognizing NATO is a stumbling block to their plans, emulated the group by uniting their communist satellites in 1955 with the Warsaw Treaty Organization . Soon afterwards, the Russians, recognized NATO is the stumbling block, emulating the group .
 The Warsaw Pact alliance included the countries of Albania, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Russia . The alliance was formed in 1961 .
 On May 27,1952, the European Defense Community Treaty was signed in Paris . It provided for the armies of West Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, to become aligned with England's .
 On October 23,1954, it was replaced with the Western European Union, who merged their armies into a multinational armed force . The West European Union merged its armies with the European Union .
 Greece became the tenth nation to join the Common Market in May 1979 . Norway eventually backed out, but on May 28, 1979, in Athens, Greece joined the Common European Union . Greece was the first member of the European Economic Community .
 Europe as as unified as it was in 814, when Charlemagne, founder of the Roman Empire, died . When they officially became a member in January, 1981, Europe was still unified . Europe as uniting again as they were united in the 8th century .
 The motion was introduced by a Socialist deputy in the Netherlands Assembly . It was passed on to the Common Market Commission in Brussels where it received approval .
 Great Britain, France, West Germany, and Italy had 81 seats; Netherlands, 25 seats; Belgium, 24 seats; Denmark, 16 seats; Ireland, 15 seats; and Luxembourg, 6 seats . The Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, Ireland and Luxembourg had 6 seats.
 On March 17, 1979, the Common Market initiated a new monetary system to encourage trade and investment by stabilizing their currency values . Chapter Seven: The Common Market was founded by the Common European Economic Council .
 The main feature of this link-up was a $33 billion fund made up of each other's gold and currency reserves . The fund is made up from each other countries' gold and currencies reserves .
 Members could borrow against this fund to support their own currencies . Members of the world's largest banks could use the fund to fund their currencies .
 The value of each participating currency were set against ""European Currency Units" established by the fund . Each participating currency was set against European currency units .
 Spain and Portugal became the 11th and 12th members of the European Community on January 1, 1986 . Portugal and Spain became the 12th and 11th European Community members .
 At a meeting in Maastricht, in the Netherlands, a serious effort was made to establish a common currency . discussions were held concerning a common foreign policy, and a common defense policy .
 On December 31, 1992, the ""Single Europe Act"" went into effect, uniting the 12 nations into a federation . The act lifted restrictions on the movement of goods, services, capital, workers and tourists within the Community .
 The two nations also adopted common agricultural, fisheries, and nuclear research policies .
 The industrial capability of the European Union, is nearly equal to that of the U.S. The industrial capabilities of the EU, is almost equal to the United States, according to the EU .
 Western Europe also accounts for about 25% of the world's production, and 35% of its trade . Western Europe accounts for 25% production, 25% trade and 25% global trade .
 When the European Union finally allow themselves to become a single political entity, they will be a world power . The European Union is a force to be reckoned with, writes David Cameron .
 Joseph H Retinger, economist, political philosopher, communist Poland's Charge d'Affaires, was a major proponent of a united Europe . Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, Colin Gubbins (former director of the British SOE, Special Operations Executive), and Gen. Gen.
 We must compromise and co-exist with communism.""he later became an Undersecretary of State in the Eisenhower Administration; joined together in 1954 .
 Sulzberqer, Stansfield Turner, Peter Calvocoressi, Andrew Schoenberg, Daniel Ellsburg, and Henry Kissinger . Henry Kissinger, who later became CIA Director, was at the center of the anti-war movement .
 In Alden Hatch's biography of Bernhard, he stated that the Bilderberg Group gave birth to the European Community . He said that the European community was born from the group .
 Bilderbergers hold annual meetings in locations all over the world . The Bilders meet in locations around the world from around the globe . Bilders hold meetings in countries such as Russia and China .
 The meetings were chaired by Prince Bernhard, the husband of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands . He was forced to resign in August, 1976, because of his involvement in the Lockheed Aircraft bribery scandal, and his extramarital affairs .
 The governments of the free nations are elected by the people, and if they do something the people don't like they are thrown out. For the governments of free nations, they are elected . For the . people, for the . governments of . the . free nations . They are elected
 Lord Carrington is on the Board of the Hambros Bank . Walter Scheel of Germany took over as Chairman of the bank . Now it is Britain's Carrington, who is a British citizen .
 The resort areas and hotels where they meet, are cleared of residents and visitors, and surrounded by soldiers, armed guards, the Secret Service, State and local police . The resorts are surrounded by armed guards and armed guards .
 All conference and meeting rooms are scanned for bugging devices before every single meeting . All conference meetings are scanned to ensure they are secure .
 Owen Lattimore(CFR, former Director of Planning and Coordination for the State Department), Winston Lord, Winston Lord (CFR), Allen Dulles, Sen. Sen. Clinton Clinton's Assistant Secretary of State, Allen D. Dulles and Sen. Bill Clinton (C
 William J Fulbright(from Arkansas, Rhodes Scholar), Dean Acheson, Gabriel Hauge (Assistant to President Eisenhower), George Ball(CFR, Johnson's Under Secretary of State from 1961-66), Philip Jessup , Henry Kissinger, David Rockefeller, Nelson Rockefeller, Laurance
 Several of the world's most powerful politicians have been involved in the anti-immigration movement . The movement was founded by members of the U.S. Chapter Seven Steelworkers Union and the International Workers' Union .
 Walter Mondale(MN, later Vice President under Carter), Henry Ford lll, Gen. Gen. Gerald Ford llr. Walter Mondial(MN) Walter Mondal(MN), later Vice-President under Carter, Henry . Ford lllll, General. Walter . Mond
 Andrew J Goodpaster (former Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, and later superintendent of the West Point Academy), Gen. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Gen. Gen. Andrew J. Brzezzinski . Gen. William E. Johnson was the U.S. Supreme
 Alexander Haig(European NATO Commander, former assistant to Kissinger, later became Secretary of State under Reagan), C Douglas Dillon(Secretary of Treasury in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, from Dillon, Read and Co.) Baron Edmond de Rothschild, Pierce Schweitzer, PiercePaul Schweitzer
 Bilderberg policy is carried out by the Steering Committee, made up of 24 Europeans and 15 Americans; and by the Advisory Committee, which forms a smaller group within the organization .
 The Goals 2000 program was developed during the presidency of George Bush to revamp the nation's public school system . Goals 2000 was born at the April, 1970, Bilderberger meeting in Bad Ragaz, Switzerland .
 At the 1978 meeting, they predicted that a depression would hit the world in 1979, and that the dollar would die . The meeting was held in Washington, DC, in 1978 .
 Their solution was to replace the dollar with an international ""bancor"" system ( international bank note) of currency that would be universally acceptable as a medium of exchange . The solution was replaced by an international "international bank note"
 The ""bancor"" system would have the international gold reserve deposited in a neutral country . The system would be based on the gold reserve in neutral countries .
 It is an offshoot of the same Keynesian system developed at Bretton Woods in 1944 from the idea by German economist Julius Wolf in 1892 . The system was developed by Julius Wolf and developed in 1944 .
 This system would protect the Illuminati when they spring their trap, and the world economy would crumble . This would be the system that protects the world from the Illuminati's trap .
 George Bush signed one of the biggest tax increases in history on November 15,1990 . Bush had pledged during the campaign, ""Read my lips no new taxes!""
 At their 1991 meeting at the Black Forest resort in Baden Baden, Germany, they discussed plans for a common European currency . They also reviewed Middle Eastern events and developments in the Soviet Union .
 It would have been impossible for us to develop our plan for the world if we had to be subject to the bright lights of publicity during these years . We would have had to develop plans for the future if we hadn't been subject to publicity .
 The world is now more sophisticated and prepared to march towards a world government . But, the world is not ready to accept the idea of a government government .
 No wonder Clinton was able to survive all the media attacks regarding his personal life and lack of experience . No wonder he survived the attacks .
 One of Bush's top money men, was investor and international banker Jackson Stephens, who also donated $100,000 to the Bush campaign . Stephens also donated to Bush .
 His wife was the Co-Chairwoman of the national ""Bush for President"" organization in 1988 . His wife is also a co-chairwoman of a national campaign organization .
 Vice President Dan Quayle impressed enough, that there was talk of supporting him for the Republican nomination in 1996 . Also in attendance were Michael Boskin, Chairman of Bush's Council of Economic Advisors, Nicholas Brady, United States Treasury Secretary; and Nicholas Brady .
 Rand was alleged to be a mistress to Philippe Rothschild, who instructed her to write the book in order to show that through the raising of oil prices, the Illuminati would take over the world . According to one source, Rand was said to be the mistress to Rothschild .
 It also related how they would blow up grain mills, derail trains, bankrupt and destroy their own companies, till they had destroyed the entire world . Yet, they would be so wealthy that it would not affect their vast holdings .
 If we are to believe that the book represents the Illuminati's plans for the future, then the following excerpts may provide some insight to the mentality of the elitists who are preparing us for a one-world government .
 "I shall destroy every last bit of it and every last penny of my fortune and every ounce of copper that could feed the looters," says President Obama .
 Dagney Taggart is the main character of the book . Dagney is the head of the Taggert Transcontinental Railroad . The main character is Dagney .
 She discovered that he was a young inventor with the Twentieth Century Motor Company . He said he would put an end to regulations which bound a man to his job indefinitely .
 We are the soul, of which railroads, copper mines, steel mines, and oil wells are the body . Railroads are living entities that beat day and night, like our hearts, in the sacred function of supporting human life, but only so long as they remain our body .
 Plane crashes, oil tank explosions, blast furnace breakouts, high tension wire electrocutions, subway cave-ins, and subway caves-ins will see them all .
 Midas Mulligan says that the world is falling apart so fast that it will soon be starving . Galt led the men of the mind, on strike, and they retired to a self-supporting valley, where they retired .
 Let the world discover who they are, what they do and what happens when they refuse to function . Let's find out who they really are and what they really do . Let’s find out. Let's discover who and what happened to them .
 Ayn Rand, author of Atlas Shrugged, had previously written We the Livinq . The Fountainhead became a 1949 movie starring Gary Cooper as an architect .
 She also quoted several news stories which seemed to indicate that the world was indeed being depleted of its brains and intellectuals . The world is being depleted, she said, according to reports .
 Is Atlas Shrugged a coded blueprint for the Illuminati's plans of bringing this world to a point where they can institute a one world government? Is Atlas is a blueprint for a one-world government?
 It certainly is thought provoking, and I include it only for the sake of conjecture, but I'm not sure what it is .
 One oil cartel is the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, known as OPEC . OPEC is made up of Iran, Iraq, Venezuela, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Gabon, Indonesia, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates .
 The group was created on September 14,1960, for the purpose of setting oil prices by controlling oil production . It was created to set the price of oil prices .
 They were originally thought to be primarily Arabian, in ownership, however, it is actually an international group, which includes Americans . They originally thought they were primarily Arabian .
 The cartel was established from an agreement signed on September 17,1920, by Royal Dutch Shell, Anglo-lranian, and Standard Oil, for the purpose of fixing oil prices . Standard Oil was established in 1920 .
 By 1949, the cartel was made up of Anglo-lranian, Socony-Vacuum, Royal Dutch Shell, Gulf, Esso, Texaco, and Calso .
 In the early 1950's, oil companies would pump the oil from the Middle East, then split the profits with the government of the country where the oil was produced .
 OPEC was formed to make people believe that the Arabian oil reserves were not owned by non-Arabian oil companies . OPEC formed to convince people that oil reserves in the Arabian kingdom were owned by oil companies not by Arab oil firms .
 Non-Arabian oil companies are another cartel, which had been informally called ""The Seven Sisters"", and control what is shipped to the U.S. and how much is refined into gas and heating oil .
 By controlling these vital arteries, they can restrict the flow of oil, limiting supplies to refineries . By controlling the arteries, the oil industry can also limit supplies to the refineries, say experts .
 Six of the nation's major commercial banks held their Executive Board meetings . The directors of the top eight oil companies, with the exception of Gulf and Chevron, met with them . The banks' directors met with the oil companies' directors .
 Chevron and Getty Oil directors met with the directors of the Bank of America board . The directors of both companies met with them at a Board meeting .
 Shell and Mobil directors were present at the Board meetings of First National City Bank . Shell directors also attended the meetings of the bank's board .
 Exxon was tied in with the Chase Manhattan Bank, a holding company for hundreds of smaller oil companies, including Humble Oil and Creole Petroleum, and Chemical Bank . Exxon was also tied to the Chase . Manhattan Bank holding company .
 The Seven Sisters controlled 70% of the United States coal supply during World War II . The Germans used the coal to make pollution-free synthetic fuel .
 The oil companies are powerful, and their power was never more apparent, then it was during the manufactured crisis of 1973 . Oil companies are still powerful, but their power has never been more apparent since 1973 .
 On October 6, 1973, as synagogues in Israel observed Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement, Syrian Mig-21's attacked a group of Israeli jets . The attack occurred on October 5, 1973 .
 Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Egypt, Jordan and eight other Arab nations mobilized against Israel . The Arab nations had mobilized against the Israeli government .
 Egypt attacked Sinai Peninsula with 4,000 tanks, knocking out many Israeli tanks . Syria attacked the Golan Heights with 1,200 tanks . Egypt attacked the Sinai Peninsula, knocked out many tanks .
 SAM-6 missiles plucked Israeli planes out of the sky with ease . New Soviet-made missiles were made of Soviet-built missiles . Israeli planes were hit by the missiles .
 Israel regained control of the Heights, and took a large part of Syria . The Israeli government says it will not be allowed to leave the country .
 Russia sent 71 ships, including 16 submarines, to the Mediterranean . Russia put their seven airborne divisions on full alert . Russia also put their 71 airborne divisions in full alert.
 On October 12th, the Chairmen of Exxon, Texaco, Mobil, and Chevron sent the Chief of Staff Gen. Gen. John McCain to Saudi Arabia . He said that the Saudis are not interested in the situation .
 On October 17th, Omar Saqqaf, the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia, gave President Nixon a letter from King Faisal, which said that if the U.S. did not discontinue their shipment of military supplies to Israel within two days, there would be an embargo
 The United States Sixth Fleet of 49 ships, including 2 aircraft carriers, was sent to the Mediterranean, where they maintained a state of combat readiness . The U.S. Sixth Fleet was deployed in the Mediterranean .
 OPEC met and decided to raise the price of oil to $5.12 a barrel, which was 70% higher than they had agreed to before the Arab-lsraeli War . OPEC agreed to raise oil prices at the time of the Arab War .
 As the Israeli counterattack continued, Egypt and Syria were in serious trouble, and Russia urged the UN to call a ceasefire . Russia called for a ceasefire in Syria .
 The Saudis requested from the Aramco directors, information concerning the amount of oil used by the U.S. military, which they supplied . Two days later, the Saudis requested the information . The Saudis supplied the information, which was supplied by the Saudis .
 In December, OPEC announced a price of $11.65 a barrel, and the result was economic chaos in the U.S. and Western Europe . The result of the price announcement was chaos in Western Europe and the United States . OPEC announced the price of oil in December .
 The rush was on to reallocate other sources of oil, and distribute it throughout the world . Venezuela and Iran had not joined the boycott, and Iran did not .
 The global emphasis of the U.S. oil companies were revealed when they refused to favor the United States at the expense of the other countries . This is causing us to lose a higher percentage of the available oil supply, he says .
 In Egypt, Sadat's terms for a ceasefire, was that Israel had to withdraw from all territories that it had won during the 1967 war . Pressure from the United States and the Soviets, forced Israel to turn their victory into a negotiated compromise .
 The news that oil companies were experiencing record profits, ripped right through the heart of America . To add insult to injury, when the winter was at its worst during the shortage, the news of record profits ripped through America .
 Exxon ended up the year with a profit of $2,500 million, an all-time record for any company, in any industry . Exxon made a record $2.500 million profit in 2013, the highest profit ever made by any company in the industry .
 By March, 1974, the embargo was lifted from the U.S., and oil companies scrambled to salvage their reputations . The oil companies were left reeling from the embargo .
 The incident shocked the American people back to the reality of just how much control a foreign government, and multinational corporations could exert over our nation . However, the incident would never be forgotten, because it shocked the public back .
 The price of oil never went down to their pre-embargo levels, and the threat of another shortage would always remain as the Arabs realized that they could achieve political leverage by using oil to blackmail the world .
 Texaco bought Getty Oil in 1984, but Getty Oil sued Texaco for breach of contract . Pennzoil won an award of $10. billion, which placed Texaco on the brink of bankruptcy .
 Chapter Seven matter forced Texaco to sell off many important assets, such refineries which were sold to the Saudis . Texaco was forced to sell many of its assets, including refineries, to Saudi Arabia .
 British Petroleum purchased the remaining 45% of Sohio in 1987 . Texaco's power was diminished in 1987, with the purchase of the remaining remaining 45%.
 He claimed to have solutions for world peace and prosperity, which could be accomplished through world government . He claimed that world government could be achieved by world government.
 The Club of Rome was established with a membership of 75 prominent scientists, industrialists and economists from 25 countries . Along with the Bilderbergers, they have become one of the most important foreign policy arms of the Roundtable group .
 Many of the Club of Rome executives were drawn from NATO, and they have been able to formulate alot of what NATO claims are its policies . Many of these executives have been drawn from the NATO .
 Through Lord Carrington, they were able to split NATO into two factions, a left-wing political group, and its former military alliance .
 Sen. Anderson and Harlan B Cleveland are members of the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies . Sen. Cleveland is a member of the FRS and a former member of Congress .
 On September 17, 1973, they released a Report called the ""Regionalized and Adaptive Model of the Global World System" The Report was prepared by Mihajlo Mesarovic and Eduard Pestel . It revealed the Club's goal of dividing the world into ten
 North America, Europe, Japan, South Africa and Australia, Asia, South America, North Africa and the Middle East . Central Africa, India and Indo-China, and China, are the focus of this article .
 One of their reports, ""Limits to Growth", dealt with the problem of overpopulation . However, one of them dealt with overpopulation in 1973 .
 During the Carter Administration, a task force was appointed to expand upon this report . On July 24, 1980, a two-volume document called ""Global 2000 Report" was presented to President Carter, and then Secretary of State Edward S Muskie .
 It attempted to project global economic trends for the next twenty years . It indicated that resources of the planet were not sufficient enough to support the expect dramatic increase in the world population .
 They suggested an aggressive program of population control which included sterilization, contraception and abortion . They suggested that sterilization and abortion were part of the plan .
 This would be accomplished by using limited wars in advanced countries, and even a limited nuclear strike at a strategic location . starvation through created famines and diseases in Third World countries would be used to create famine .
 In 1961, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and Dean Rusk, all CFR members, were concerned that there were no studies concerning long-term plans for peace . The CFR members wanted to study the direct and indirect ramifications of war .
 They wanted to explore ways to control the economy during peace-time . They wanted a study which would explore ways of controlling economy .
 Some have speculated that the think-tank known as the Hudson Institute, actually conducted the Study .
 Report from iron Mountain on the Possibility and Desirability of Peace appeared to be a blueprint for the future of this country . It contained recommendations that included depopulation, gun control and disarmament, an international police force, and concentration camps .
 "No alternate method of control has yet been tested in a complex modern economy that has shown it is remotely comparable in scope or effectiveness" No alternative method of controlling the economy has ever been tested .
 AIDS has become a plague in our society, spreading to 91 nations, says President Obama . AIDS has spread to 91 countries, according to the president .
 There has been alot of talk about AIDS awareness and prevention, but the full danger of it has been covered-up by the Center for Disease Control and the media . The media has increasingly shown its pro-homosexual bias .
 Derivatives from sheep and cattle have been commonly used to manufacture vaccines . Certain viruses common to animals can interact indefinitely, forming a new strain of deadly viruses called retro-viruses .
 The question is whether it was created either accidentally or intentionally . It's not clear whether the question is if it was intentionally created .
 The most common theory about the origin of AIDS, was that it came from green monkeys in Africa .
 Several virologists have said that the AIDS virus does not occur naturally in any animal . Yet several virolists say that the virus is not naturally found in any animals .
 It would have been statistically impossible to reach the point we are at now, just from a single episode . Besides that, it would be statistically impossible for us to reach that point . Besides, it's unlikely to reach it just from one episode .
 If the AIDS virus had originated with the monkeys, then the disease would have surfaced with the Pygmies, who are closer to them, and use them as a food source . Yet, it appeared first in the cities. If the disease had originated .
 AIDS practically occurred simultaneously in the U.S., Haiti, Brazil, and Central Africa . AIDS occurred in the United States, Haiti and Brazil .
 The AIDS virus was developed by the National Cancer Institute, in cooperation with the World Health Organization, in their laboratories at Fort Detrick, Maryland, in the United States Army's germ warfare unit, known as the Army Infectious Disease Unit .
 The bovine leukemia virus is lethal to cows, but not to humans . The visna virus is deadly to sheep, but deadly to man, not to man. The visnna virus kills sheep but not man.
 When combined, they produce a retro-virus that can change the genetic composition of the cells that they enter . However, when combined, the virus can also change the gene composition of cells .
 Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in chimpanzees in 1972has not been analyzed and compared with AIDS... until 1987 . 'Characterization and Molecular Cloning of Bovine Lente Virus Related to Human Immunodeficiency Virus' published in Nature magazine .
 The London Times linked the mass vaccination program of the World Health Organization in the 1970's to the outbreak of AIDS, because Central Africa was the focus of the program . Central Africa has become the most affected area in the world .
 AIDS is generally a heterosexual disease, but in the U.S. it has the stigma of being a 'gay' disease . AIDS is a 'homosexual disease' in the United States, yet in Africa, it has a 'straight' stigma . In Africa, HIV is a
 AIDS struck with a vengeance within the homosexual community in 1978 . Prior to 1978, there was no sign of the AIDS virus, yet in 1978, the killer disease struck .
 Evidence points to introduction of an experimental hepatitis B vaccine . The evidence points to the introduction of the vaccine .
 Only promiscuous males between the ages of 20 and 40 were included in the study . This has led some to believe this was how the virus was introduced into the gay population .
 Various facts were covered-up and glossed-over. To allow the disease to become entrenched within the population, the disease was covered up .
 A great deal of emphasis has been put on the prime cause of AIDS infection, being the exchange of body fluid, through sexual activity and intravenous drug use . The prime cause has brought a campaign for the importance of using clean, unused needles and condoms .
 The use of a condom does not guarantee protection against the transmission of the AIDS virus . Use of condoms is not a guarantee of protection against transmission of HIV .
 AIDS is a highly contagious disease which demands that a quarantine be placed on those who suffer from the disease . The risk of casual contact has been played down, when in fact, AIDS is highly contagious .
 Chapter Seven concerned itself with giving AIDS carriers more rights and more exposure to the general population . Chapter Seven was concerned about giving AIDS carrier more rights to the public .
 There is concrete medical evidence that indicates that the virus can survive up to 7 days on a dry petri dish, and in an aqueous environment, up to 15 days . The virus can also survive in a moist environment for up to seven days .
 AIDS carrier would sneeze into punch bowl or salad bowl . This raises the question, what would happen if an AIDS carrier sneezed into a punch bowl .
 Report published in 1981 issue of Science . Boston hematologist Dr. Dr. John Defterios said the study was published in the October 1981 issue .
 If the virus exists in these fluids, the better part of wisdom dictates that we assume it can also be transmitted by these routes .
 Professor William Haseltine of the Harvard Medical School said that anyone who tells you categorically that AIDS is not contracted by saliva is not telling you the truth .
 The virus is constantly mutating, which makes it impossible to develop a general vaccine that would be effective with everyone . Vaccine is impossible to create a vaccine for everyone, experts say .
 AIDS is a twentieth century plague, and every year, the number of those affected is doubled . AIDS is the most serious form of disease, and AIDS is now a worldwide problem, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Besides not being able to combat it medically, the disease will progress to being an economic drain, especially if national health care is instituted . National health care should be instituted .
 If its purpose was to glean out the population, it certainly will be successful, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Chapter Seven assumed that the progenitors of this disease must have a measure of protection to prevent themselves from being exposed . Chapter 7 assumed that . . The progenitor of this . disease must . have had a measure . of protection .
 The elite have already segregated themselves from the general population by virtue of their position, so from that aspect, there is little risk from being contaminated . The elite are already segregated from the public, so there's little risk of being contaminated, says the author .
 In the event of medical treatment, they have access to the best medical treatment money can buy, and most likely possess a private, untainted blood supply . The children's blood supply is most likely to be untainted .
 I just can't help think, that when their goal of limits to the population have been reached, how will they end the scourge which they have placed upon the earth . Somehow, I just . can't . help thinking, that . when their . goal of . limits to . the
 The Illuminati would not unleash a disease, that they didn't already have a cure for. Just as the saying goes, that a lawyer in court doesn't ask the witness a question that he doesn't have the answer for. The same reasoning would seem to apply .
 Stair, a well-known evangelist, received an anonymous letter which seemed to confirm his theory . Stair received the anonymous letter from an anonymous person .
 The writer claimed to be a molecular biologist who works in the same laboratory with Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter claimed to have worked with him in the lab .
 The writer claims that there is an AIDS vaccine that is now available, and that 500,000,000 doses have been produced and now available . The writer also claims there is a vaccine that has now been produced, and is available .
 The writer accidentally discovered that Gallo had actually created the AIDS virus, and found a couple letters in his office, from high government officials which mentioned the New World Order .
 Gallo and eight other scientists have been working to modify the genetic structure of the virus . They are believed to have modified the virus so it can be more easily transmitted . Gallo is believed to be working to make the virus easier to transmit .
 Whether AIDS is the vehicle of elimination, that the Club of Rome has referred to, is undoubtedly open to speculation .
 CNN.com: "You can't deny how neatly this little piece of the puzzle fits into the entire picture of preparing the world for a one-world government. However, you can’t deny that . However, it can be seen as a way to prepare for one-
 The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was signed; and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development(World Bank) and International Monetary Fund was established . The IMF and World Bank were established in 1973 .
 In the early 1960's, the American economy began declining, and the international situation became unbalanced again . In the 1960s, the U.S. economy began to decline, and international situation was unbalanced .
 He initiated a 90-day wage price freeze, stimulative tax and spending cuts . He also placed a temporary 10% tariff on most U.S. imports .
 Japan and Western Europe were pressured into relaxing their trade barriers, in order to give the U.S. more access to them . Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, and Taiwan were requested to decrease the flow of goods and textiles into the United States . These moves offered relief to
 He proposed the creation of an International Commission of Peace and Prosperity in early 1972 . He spoke at Chase Manhattan International Financial Forums .
 At the 1972 Bilderberger meeting, the idea was widely accepted, but elsewhere, it got a cool reception . The idea was accepted at the 1972 meeting, but it was not widely accepted elsewhere .
 Franklin, Robert Bowie, Gerard Smith, Marshall Hornblower, William Scranton, Edwin Reischauer, and Max Kohnstamn . Franklin was the Salt I negotiator, Rockefeller in-law .
 Brzezinski was the author of the book Between Two Ages . He called for a new international monetary system . The book is considered to be the ""Bible"" of the Trilateralists .
 He became the first Directory 97376 (97376), drafted its Charter, and became its driving force . He was also the driving force behind the organization .
 Funding for the group came from David Rockefeller, the Charles F Kettering Foundation, and the Ford Foundation .
 In his 1979 book Who's Running America? Thomas Dye said that Rockefeller was the most powerful man in America . Dye also said Rockefeller was a powerful man .
 The Trilateral Commission is considered to be an off-shoot of the Bilderberger group . Within a year, after their first full meeting of the Executive Committee in Tokyo, the Commission was officially initiated .
 Rockefeller saw the need for such a private consultation among these three democratic areas . Rockefeller was pleased with Rockefeller's decision to consult with the public . Rockefeller: "It's a good idea to have a private discussion among these areas"
 With the demise of the Bretton Woods system, they believed an overhaul was needed . They believed it was needed to be replaced with a new system .
 The theory was, that America's role should be diminished, and made equal to the Common Market and Japan, because together, the three represented 70% of the world's trade . Together, together, they represented 70%.
 This may sometimes require slowing the pace at which interdependence proceeds, and checking some aspects of it . It may also require slowing down the pace of inter-independence to be checked .
 In other words, they were promoting world government by encouraging economic interdependence among the superpowers . The U.S. government was promoting economic inter-independence among superpowers, he says .
 Rockefellers control little-known organization, which is controlled by Rockefers . Rocchefellers oversee its activities and provide guidance for their policies .
 The organizational structure consisted of a ten-member Executive Committee, made up of a Regional Chairman, A Deputy Chairman, and a Director for each of the three areas .
 American Executive Committee nominated candidates for its delegation based on their profession, their involvement in international affairs; and taking in account their place of residence .
 They only considered people interested in promoting close international cooperation, especially among non-communist industrial nations . They actually meant they advocated a one-world government, according to the report .
 An analysis of one of their three-year budgets of $1.67 million, indicated that $644,000 came from foundations, $530,000 from corporations, $220,000 . $84,000 was also from investment income .
 The Commission holds an annual-three-day meeting, rotated among the three areas, to discuss the world monetary situation, and other economic and military issues .
 Task Force Reports usually take up to a year to prepare . They are always written by at least three experts, representing each region . The Task Force Report is written by experts representing each country .
 Many Cabinet level officers, and advisors, from the Kennedy Administration to the Clinton Administration have served on the Commission . The Commission was formed in 1964 .
 Bank of America, Lloyds of London, Bank of Tokyo, Barclays Bank, Compagnie Financiere Holding, Brown Brothers, Harriman and Co., Fuji Bank, Banque de Paris, Provincial Bank of Canada, TorontoDominion Bank, Industrial Bank of Japan,
 Boeing, Coca-Cola, Japan Air Lines, Volkswagenwerk, Sony, Toyota, Fiat, Dunlop, RollsRoyce, Thyssen, Bendix, Texas Instruments, Exxon, Hewlett-Packard, Kaisar Resources, Shell, Mitsubishi,
 Workers Union leaders: Sol Chaikin, Glenn Watts, Leonard Woodcock, Sol . Abel, Leonard . Woodcock . Sol Chaikkin, Sol. Chaikkins, and Glenn Watts .
 A man was arrested for breaking into the offices of the Commission . When he was taken to the 12th Precinct, he began ranting and raving about how the Commission was attempting to set up an ""international community"
 The character, William Klein was made to look like a fool, and upon leaving the squad room, Detective Sgt. Sgt. William Klein left the room . The character was left with a smile .
 The character was made to look like a paranoid maniac, reminiscent of the McCarthy era . The character has been dubbed 'a paranoid maniac'
 This was only one of the many propaganda pieces that was used to make the Commission look just like any other organization .
 This is the principle that the Illuminati has used for years to slant the news, so that the public will accept their views . The Illuminati has been using this principle for years in order to get the public to believe in their view .
 There is not one of you who dares to write your honest opinions, and if you did, you know beforehand that it would never appear in print . If you did write a honest opinion, you would never be published .
 I am paid weekly for keeping my honest opinions out of the paper I am connected with . I'm paid to keep my honest opinion from being published by a paper I'm connected to .
 Any of you who would be so foolish as to write honest opinions would be out on the streets looking for another job . Others of you are paid similar salaries for similar things, and any of you .
 If I allowed my honest opinions to appear in one issue of my paper, before twenty-four hours my occupation would be gone, he says . "Before twenty-twenty-hour my occupation was gone, I would have been gone," he adds .
 The business of the journalist is to destroy truth; to lie outright; to pervert; to vilify, vilify; to fawn at the feet of mammon, and to sell his country and his race for daily bread .
 Our talents, our possibilities, and our lives are all the property of other men . Our talents and possibilities, our lives, are our property of others, says the author .
 Those who have penetrated the inner workings of the organization say the real purpose of the Commission is to take over all key policymaking positions in the government . However, those who have . penetrated the . inner workings say the . real purpose is to . take over key policy making positions in government
 Antony Sutton wrote in the Trilateral Observer that Trilateralists have rejected the United States Constitution and the democratic political process . Sutton: Their objective is to obtain the wealth of the world for their own use and to have, ultimately, a one-world socialist government .
 The John Birch Society suspects them of being radical infiltrators of the government . They say they are not government infiltrators, but government agents .
 Barry Goldwater wrote that the Commission was intended to be the vehicle for multinational consolidation of the commercial and banking interests by seizing control of the political government of the United States . Goldwater said the Commission would be used to seize control of American politics .
 Their economic plans leaned toward controlling of energy sources, food production, and the international monetary system . So was there any reason to doubt that there were ulterior motives to their agenda?
 The Death of Democracy: The presidency of the United States and the key cabinet departments of the federal government have been taken over by a private organization dedicated to the subordination of the domestic interests of the U.S. to the international interests of multi-national banks and corporations .
 It would be unfair to say that the Trilateral Commission dominates the Carter Administration . It would not be the first time that it dominated the administration, the author says .
 Rockefeller met with Carter in 1971, when they had lunch in the Chase Manhattan's Board of Director's dining room . Rockefeller was impressed with the fact that Carter had opened trade offices for the state of Georgia in Tokyo in Tokyo .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggested that Carter would be a good candidate for the Commission . Rusk was having dinner with Gerald Smith in February, 1973 .
 In April, while Robert Bowie(former professor of International Affairs at Harvard, who later became Deputy Director of the CIA), George S Franklin( Rockefeller assistant, CFR member, and Coordinator for the Commission), was discussing the recruitment of candidates .
 Franklin went to Atlanta to talk to Carter, then proposed his name for membership . Franklin went on to propose his name to membership .
 In the fall of 1973, after having dinner with David Rockefeller in London, Carter's political momentum began . Carter's presidential momentum began when he met Rockefeller in 1973 .
 From that point on, he was groomed for the Presidency by Zbigniew Brzezinski, and the Trilateralists . From that, he became the President of Russia .
 Chapter Eight guaranteed the Democratic nomination for Carter (and Rep. Carter), and Rep. Richard Nixon's nomination for President .
 Elliot Richardson considered as possible candidate for the job . Richardson considered Sen. Ted Kennedy as a possible candidate . Richardson was also considered for Secretary of Commerce under Ford and Nixon .
 Carter campaigned by stressing those very virtues, as he asked America to elect him, an ""outsider,"" to clean up the mess in Washington . Carter won the White House in 1980s .
 Gallop Poll indicated that only 4% of the country's Democrats wanted Carter in 1975 . In December, 1975, the Gallop poll indicated that 4% wanted the president .
 The nomination was his because of the most elaborate media campaign in history . Within six months, the nomination was he because of a media campaign . The media campaign was the biggest in history.
 Carter was glorified as the new hope of America as the media misrepresented his record as Governor in Georgia . Carter's record in Georgia was misrepresented by the media .
 There was no stress in Carter's voice when he lied, which would seem to indicate that he is a pathological liar . According to the Dektor Psychological Stress Evaluator, a lie detector measures voice stress with an oscillograph .
 He was supported by the Trilateral Commission, the Rockefellers, and Time magazine . Time magazine supported him .
 Early contributions came from Dean Rusk, C Douglas Dillon, Henry Luce, and Cyrus Eaton . Early contributions to the book were written by Douglas Dillon .
 Leonard Woodcock of the United Auto Workers Union, and Henry Ford II, both of whom are CFR members, endorsed Carter on the same day . Woodcock and Ford II are members of the CFR .
 Carter's two major foreign policy speeches during the primary campaign were made before the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations and the Foreign Policy Association .
 Carter's religious convictions became a big part of his campaign, but things weren't really what they seemed . Carter: "I'm not sure what I'm going to say, but I'm sure it's not what I think"
 Carter claimed that his favorite theologian was Reinhold Niebuhr, former professor at the Union Theological Seminary . The Seminary had been funded by the Rockefellers, who founded Americans for Democratic Action .
 Barth, Tillich, and Kierkegaad, all liberals who led the 'God is Dead' movement during the 1960's . Barth said the Bible was ""fallible" and filled with ""historic and scientific blunders,"" and ""theological contradictions"
 Carter told his sister, evangelist Ruth Carter Stapleton, that he wouldn't give up politics for Christ . Carter told her sister that he would not give up his political career for Jesus .
 He joined a Southern Baptist Church when he was 10, taught Sunday School at 16, and became a deacon in his twenties . He admitted he wasn't ""bornagain"" until 1967, yet he joined the church at 10 .
 Carter attacked the "unholy, self-perpetuating alliances have been formed between money and politics" In his acceptance speech, Carter attacked a political and economic elite who have shaped decisions and never had to account for mistakes nor to suffer from injustice .
 When deprivations results from a confused welfare system, they never do without food, clothing or a place to sleep . The system is confused and often confused by the welfare system .
 When public schools are inferior or torn by strife, their children go to exclusive private schools . Public schools are "inferior or torn" or "torn by strife"
 In an interview with Playboy magazine, Jordan said he would quit if they were appointed . Jordan said in an interview that he would resign if appointed .
 This self-proclaimed ""outsider" filled many of his administrative posts with establishment insiders from the Rockefeller Foundation, the Brookings Institution, and Coca Cola . The Rockefeller Foundation and Brookings Institution are establishment insiders .
 The Trilateral Commission had accomplished its goal of controlling the Presidency . Jimmy Carter was Time magazine's Man of the Year in January, 1977 .
 Time 's Editor-in-Chief, Hedley Donovan, a Rhodes Scholar, was a member of the Commission .
 About 40% of the American Trilateral members joined the Carter Administration . 40% joined the Trilateral in the Carter administration .
 Commission members must resign when accepting posts in the Executive branch, but they remain loyal . Commission members usually rejoin the group when their service is complete .
 Almost every aspect of Carter's foreign policy reflected a Trilateral viewpoint . Carter was dominated by the chief advisors of the Commission .
 Panamanian leader Omar Torrijos owed the International Bankers $2 billion in loan payments . The income received from the Canal could help pay them back .
 The United States guaranteed a 5-year program of loans and credits, which amounted to $295 million . The U.S. also guaranteed a 10 year, $50 million arms sale agreement to bolster the defense of the Canal .
 When Carter broke off diplomatic relations with the government of Taiwan, Sen. Sen. Carter broke ties with Taiwan .
 In May, 1989, George Bush would bestow favored-nation trade status to China . Bush would also give favored nation trade status for China .
 Stephen is the founder and patron saint of Hungary . Stephen is Stephen's patron saint . Stephen has been in possession of the U.S. since 1945 . Stephen was the founder of Hungary's first Hungarian saint .
 Carter's membership in the organization was the only foreign policy experience he had, limited to attending a couple of conferences in Europe and Japan . Carter was a member of the organization .
 Congressman John Anderson, himself a member, said that Carter became a member just to improve his image . Congressman Anderson said that President Carter joined the group just to make his image better .
 Chapter Eight indoctrination made him a willing pawn in furthering the goals of the Trilateral Commission . Chapter 8 indoctrination led him to furthering his own interests .
 David Rockefeller, Henry Kissinger, and John J McCloy pressured Carter into allowing the deposed Shah of lran into the country for medical treatment . The Commission operates in literal secrecy .
 The move caused the Iranian government, under the leadership of the Ayatollah Khomeini, to storm the American Embassy, and hold 52 American hostages for nearly 11/2 years .
 Carter's inadequacy in dealing with this situation certainly cost him the election . Carter's "inadequate" handling of this situation cost him an election .
 The Presidential election of 1980, saw two former Trilateralists running for President . The election was held in New York City .
 George Bush resigned his post on the Council on Foreign Relations because they were ""too liberal" However, he didn't resign his seat on the Commission . Republican George Bush, had resigned his position on the Foreign Relations .
 Reagan chose Bush to be his Vice Presidential running mate, over the likes of Rep. Bush and Rep. Cheney . Reagan and Bush had a bitter Primary fight between them .
 Chapter Eight President Ford wanted the power to appoint people to the National Security Council and Cabinet . Ford wanted to be the first president of the country to be elected .
 This situation would have been almost like a co-Presidency, making Reagan more of a figurehead, which he refused to be, so his only other option was Bush . Bush was Bush's only other choice was to run for the president .
 Reagan's Campaign Manager, William J Casey, was a Trilateralist . Casey later appointed as Director of the CIA . Casey was Reagan's campaign manager . Casey served as the CIA Director under Reagan .
 His campaign was controlled by such Trilateralists as David Packard, George H Weyerhaeuser, Bill Brock, Anne Armstrong, Philip M Hawley, William A Hewitt, Caspar Weinberger and others who were CFR members .
 Reagan had the personal support of David Rockefeller, and belonged to the elitist Bohemian Grove Club in Northern California . Reagan had a personal support for David Rockefeller .
 The Bohemian Grove is the site of an annual two-week summer retreat on a 2,700 acre redwood estate north of San Francisco . The estate was established in the 1870's and was established along the Russian River .
 Every Republican President since Calvin Coolidge had been a member of this conservative clan . Among its 2,000 members are other high level government officials, government officials and the very elite of America's corporate power .
 The bottom line is that it is one of the most influential meetings of the powers-that-be,"" and not the all-male social club they purport to be . "The bottom line, is that the meeting is a setting for policy-making"
 Reagan's 59-member ""transition team" consisted of 28 CFR members, 10 Bilderbergers, and 10 Trilateralists . Reagan's team would pick, screen, and propose appointees for major administrative posts .
 The Bolsheviks had offered $1 million in credits to the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution . They had offered the credits to them during the revolution .
 Caspar W Weinberger was Reagan's Finance Director when he was Governor of California, former Vice President of Bechtel Corp., and former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare under Nixon and Ford . Weinberger became Secretary of Defense under Nixon .
 Reagan was the Establishment's candidate all along, because he played ball with them . Seemingly, Reagan was playing ball with the Establishment all along . Reagan was Reagan's candidate because of that .
 Republican Presidential candidate John Connally, said that if he was elected, he wouldn't appoint any Trilateralists to his Administration . Connally said if elected he would not appoint a Trilateralist to his administration .
 Among the Trilateralists in the Bush Administration, were Brent Scowcroft(National Security Advisor), and Nicholas F Brady; and in the Bill Clinton Administration, Al Gore, Donna E Shalala, Alice M Rivlin(Deputy Budget Director), Madeleine Albright, Peter
 The Trilateral Commission represents a skillfully coordinated effort to seize control and consolidate the four centers of power, political, monetary, intellectual, intellectual and ecclesiastical centers . The Commission represents an effort to take control of the world's most powerful institutions .
 What the Trilateralists intend is the creation of a world-wide economic power superior to the government of the nation states, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The Trilateralist wants to create a world of economic power .
 The Commission had suggested that Iran, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, and Mexico be brought into the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . The Organization was founded in 1961 to encourage world trade, economic progress .
 Their long range goals have included joint policy making in regard to economic and political relations with the Third World and the former communist bloc countries . They have been in touch with the United States since 1973 .
 Chapter Eight: Chapter Eight their threats, by abandoning allies, and reducing America to a second-rate power . Chapter Eight is Chapter Eight . Chapter 8: Chapter 8 their threats . Chapter eight: Chapter eight their threats. Chapter eight is Chapter 8 .
 The Commission has pushed for the restructuring of the International Monetary Fund . They would be able to create new money, and restrict its use, by issuing a form of currency called Bancor .
 The Commission, consisted of 18 members, had been established in December, 1977 . The Commission was chaired by former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt .
 A Program for Survival called for the ""instant"" redistribution of wealth from the richer, to poorer nations, and a stepping up of world disarmament . The program was called for an 'instant' redistribution of world's wealth .
 In 1959, Nelson Rockefeller called for an Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations . It became a federally-funded thinktank within Congress to prepare a formula for the concept .
 ACIR analyzed information produced by the Public Administration Clearing House (also known as the "" 1313 "" ) and translated it into legislation to develop regional government . The legislation would usurp the power of the local government .
 Their purpose is to train and place a ""new administrative class"" in every level of government, which will replace elected officials . The new administrative class will be trained and place in government offices .
 On March 27,1969, as published in the Federal Register, President Nixon announced the ""Restructuring of Government Service Systems" The plan called for the merging of states into eight federally-controlled regions .
 An Executive Order, when decreed by the President, is printed in the Federal Register . It then becomes law 15 days later . The Executive Order becomes law .
 In each of the ten standard Federal Regions, there was to be a council made up of the directors of the regional offices of the agencies . The council was made of directors of each office of the Department of Labor, the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare .
 The President was to designate one member of each Council as the Chairman of the Council . The President would designate one of the members of each council as the chairman .
 This Executive Order was unconstitutional because Article IV of the United States Constitution prohibited the merging of the states, and guaranteed a government represented by elected officials . Article IV was violated by the U.S. Constitution, which guarantees elected officials, and Article IV prohibited merging .
 Regional government accepted because it brought with it, revenue-sharing funds . However, regional government was accepted by regional government because of revenue sharing funds .
 Dept, of the Interior, Dept. of Agriculture, Dept,. of Agriculture; Dept, . of Commerce, Dept, Dept of Labor; Dept of Health, Education, and Welfare . Dept of Energy, Department of Energy and Dept of Transportation among agencies . Agency, Office of Personnel Management
 The Department of Education was added later, after it separated from the Dept, of Health, Education and Welfare . The department was added to the Department of Health and Education after it split from the Health Department .
 It created the Federal Emergency Management Agency, an agency within the Department of Justice . The agency oversees all of the federal agencies that have specific duties during times of emergency .
 It seems that only about 10% of its personnel are actually involved in disaster assistance . The U.S. government says it has a very low percentage of personnel .
 Its purpose was to merge every community's police force, transferring control of them to a central government . It was intended to transfer control of the police force to the central government.
 Revenue-sharing funds will provide special training programs to the local police, special communications equipment, and other things . This was to be done through revenue sharing funds .
 National Guard began receiving SWAT training to be part of this national police force . The National Guard is receiving training to become a police force in the United States .
 FEMA has been actively engaged in developing a computer database, for CAPS, to collect records on millions of Americans . FEMA has reportedly been working on the database to collect information on millions .
 In addition to dividing the country into Ten Federal Regions, the government has also been making plans for the establishment of a dictatorship . Among other things, will freeze prices and wages, close the Stock Exchange, and regulate the amount of money you can withdraw from your checking and savings account .
 Chapter Eight #11005 Gives Government the power to take over all railroads, inland waterways, and public storage facilities .
 On January 30, 1976, came the announcement of ""A Declaration of Interdependence"", a document which endorsed a one-world government .
 The meeting was funded with a $100,000 grant from the Pennsylvania Bicentennial Committee . The meeting is funded by a grant from Pennsylvania's bicentennial .
 In 1984, the Committee on a Constitutional System presented the document as an alternative to the existing Constitution . This document went through further drafts, and in 1984, it was presented by the committee on a constitutional system .
 About a third of the CCS Board members belonged to the CFR, including Chairman C Douglas Dillon, Lloyd Cutler and Lloyd Cutler .
 Robert McNamara was Secretary of Defense under Kennedy and Johnson . McNamara served as Defense Secretary under Kennedy, Johnson and McNamara .
 William J Fulbright, and others who were associated with the Brookings Institute, Rockefeller Foundation, and Woodrow Wilson Center . William Fulbright and others associated with Brookings Institute .
 In October, 1970, the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, a tax-exempt foundation in Santa Barbara, California, published an article called the ""Constitution for the United Republics of America" The article was the forerunner of their new version .
 Tugwell's 1974 book, The Emerging Constitution, was published as ""A Constitution for the Newstates of America" The Ford Foundation spent $25 million to produce and promote the original draft of the Constitution .
 Tugwell claimed that our Constitution was too cumbersome and needed to be changed . He claimed that the Constitution was outdated and that it needed to change .
 The document contains no guarantees of freedoms that we now have under the Bill of Rights . The document is not a guarantee of freedoms, says the author of the document .
 In an emergency, the government will have the power to curtail communication, movement, and the right to assemble . The government will be able to curtail communications, movement and assembly .
 The Conference of States is the newest threat to our Constitution . Chapter Eight: The newest threat is to the Constitution is the conference of States .
 The Constitution intended for the States to be sovereign, and for the federal government to only have limited powers . It is being peddled as a movement for the states to come together and discuss the need to balance the relationship between the states and federal government .
 Michael Leavitt, the Republican governor of Utah, told the Salt Lake City Tribune in 1994, that he wanted a constitutional convention . The ACIR was founded by the ACIR in 1994 .
 COS literature indicates their interest in passing Constitutional amendments . That ""better way"" seems to be an end-run around the Constitution, says COS .
 Article V of the Constitution indicates that two-thirds of the States must vote for a constitutional convention before Congress could call one . The COS may be planning to use the same method used by the delegates at the Annapolis convention in 1786 .
 The Constitution was originally drafted on June 12,1776, and fully ratified by 1781 . Within ten years, the Constitution was no longer able to meet the needs of a growing nation . The Constitution that was drafted in 1776 was not ready to meet growing needs .
 The need for a stronger central government was expressed, one that didn't limit States rights . President Obama spoke of the need for strong central government in a speech .
 Philadelphia met in May, 1787, to set up a new national government . Locked all the doors, and posted armed guards; and closed all the windows, so they could deliberate .
 The Constitution of the United States was born on September 17,1787, and was fully ratified on May 29,1790 . Neither the Congress, or the people, could stop them .
 Many people are worried about this Conference of States, because nobody is really sure what could happen . Nobody knows what will happen, but many are worried .
 Case law mandates that members of a constitutional convention must be directly elected by the people . They can act as their representatives to exercise the sovereign power of the state, case law says .
 Chapter Eight alternates, one from each party, and therefore would be empowered with the necessary legal status as representatives of the people . If the decision be made to turn the meeting into a constitutional convention, they would be delegates .
 They maintained that without this Congressional approval, it would be in conflict with Article 1, Section 10 of the Constitution, which does not allow any agreements between States . They maintained, that . without this . approval, they said, “without this . Congress approval, the agreement would be
 Only 14 state legislatures had passed resolutions calling for participation in the COS, which was short of the 26 needed . Organization meeting scheduled for July, 1995 was canceled .
 The same forces behind this movement planned to have a ""federalism summit"" in Cincinnati on October 22 with the support of the Council of State Governments, National Governors Association and the National Conference of State Legislators .
 It is obvious that the Illuminati has taken a two-prong approach to regional government . The Illuminati has been criticised for taking too much of a regional government approach .
 They have been working within the confines of the Executive Branch to get various Executive Orders passed . They have used their various finger organizations to study our existing constitution, and recommend changes .
 All of their efforts may culminate in a call for a Constitutional Convention, that will spell the end of democracy as we know it in this country . All of the efforts may end up being called for a constitutional Convention, writes David Frum .
 Questions raised during the 1973 Oil Embargo, seem to point to the fact that the crisis was created by the Illuminati, as a test to see what it would be like without gasoline for automobiles, and fuel for heating homes .
 A 1973 study by Philadelphia Inquirer reporters Donald Bartlett and James B Steele, revealed that while American oil companies were telling the United States to curtail oil consumption, through a massive advertising campaign, they were selling close to two barrels overseas for every barrel of oil sold here .
 They accuse the oil companies and the Federal government of creating the crisis . They accuse them of creating it . The Federal government and oil companies have been blamed for the disaster .
 Drivers were hauling excess fuel to storage facilities in the Mojave desert .
 All of this evidence points to the conclusion that there was no oil shortage in 1973 . All of the evidence is consistent with this conclusion .
 The Created Crisis: "Our mythical energy shortage can be dismissed with a few statistics. The Created crisis is a mythic energy shortage. The created crisis can be easily dismissed with statistics.
 The United States consumes about 71 quads(a 'quad' is one quadrillion BTU's, or 10 to the 15th power British Thermal Units) of energy per year . The U.S. consumes 71. quads of energy a year .
 There is available now in the U.S. excluding solar sources and without oil and gas imports, about 151,000 quads . There are currently 151,500 quads available now .
 We have sufficient energy resources to keep us functioning at our present rate of consumption for about 2,000 to 3,000 years without discovering new reserves . We have enough energy resources for about two,000-to-three thousand years .
 In 1977, independent petroleum companies discovered 88% of the new oil fields, drilling on 81% of those . Even at higher consumption rates there will be no problem in the next millennium""
 Large corporations want to avoid adding to our national supply so they can profit from the higher prices . They have been hampered by the large corporations, referred to earlier as the Seven Sisters, who want to keep prices low .
 Carter's Department of Energy was established to perpetuate the propaganda of the existence of an energy crisis . Carter's department of energy was established in order to keep the government's view of the crisis alive .
 The Government won't allow it to be pumped out, and it is tunneled back into the ground . However, the Government is tunneling it back in the ground to keep it out .
 Three different chemical compositions indicated the existence of separate pools of oil on the North Slope in an area of 50,000 square miles . The Gull Island find had a different chemical structure, as did the Kuparuk oil field .
 This seems to be an almost unlimited supply of domestic oil . Needless to say, this seems to . seem to be a almost unlimited . supply of . domestic oil.
 A few days after the find, the Federal Government ordered the documents and technical reports locked up, the well capped and the rig withdrawn .
 Their excuse was that an oil spill in that part of the Arctic Ocean would kill micro-organisms . Their excuse: An oil spill would kill various micro-organisms .
 The American Petroleum Institute said in their 1977 Annual report, that recoverable crude was set at 30. billion barrels, and with today's technology, the amount of unrecoverable crude is 303.billion barrels . That amount is about an 80-year supply .
 Only about 2% of the Outer Continental Shelf has been leased, even though it may contain over half of our potential natural gas reserves . Over half of the nation's potential gas reserves could be found .
 Along the Atlantic Coast, there is a potential of 67 TCF of gas, yet only about a dozen wells had been drilled in those areas . Only about a half of the potential of the gas is being drilled .
 These sources did not include unconventional sources of coalbeds, shale formations, ""tight sand"" formations, and deep underground water areas .
 The California Giant Kelp grows two feet per day, and could be a renewable source for the production of synthetic gas . That doesn't take into account the synthetic gas obtainable from growing marine bio-mass, such as growing marine .
 At the time of this report, maximum production up to 1985 would have only used 10% of this reserve, even if no new reserves were discovered . Maximum production in the 1980s would have used only 10% this reserve .
 40% of all coal reserves, are on land owned by the Federal Government, and environmentally-minded citizens . The United States Geological Survey has estimated our coal reserves will last us well into the next century .
 The Illuminati has a firm grip on the oil supply, and after their ""test"" in 1973, its obvious that oil will be used as a weapon of control .
 One can only wonder what would happen to this country if a large-scale oil crisis occurred . The U.S. has been hit by an oil crisis in recent years .
 It would be a disaster of unbelievable proportions, that most likely would cause an economic collapse . Needless to say, it would be an economic disaster that would most likely lead to collapse .
 Law and order would not exist in this scenario, as the population would fight among themselves for the limited resources that would be available, thus making the perfect situation for a World Government to step in . The World Government would step in to take over .
 Revolution has always been the method used to facilitate change, and it would seem likely that an environment would be created that would ultimately lead to a revolt by the citizens of this country . Revolution is the method of changing a nation's society .
 As our economy continues to decline, and it becomes harder for people to get by, there may be a ground swell of revolt across the country against the government . Of course, the Illuminati has already planted these seeds .
 As you have read, the Illuminati controls the leadership of the labor unions, and the corporate structure of America . The Illuminati has control of the unions, the corporate structures of America and the unions .
 A strike by the Longshoremen would prevent anything from being unloaded off the ships . For instance, a strike would prevent any of the ships being unloaded from the ships.
 A strike by the Teamsters, would prevent anything from being shipped on a truck . A strike would prevent any of the items from being sent on a . truck .
 A strike by the Air Traffic Controllers, would prevent all flights, except military planes, except for military planes . A strike would stop all flights in the U.S. from taking place .
 Nothing would move, and there would be no way to get food and other products of necessities to the cities . Basically, with a major strike, nothing would move in the U.S. The strike would have no effect on the economy .
 Chapter Eight most likely to be accompanied by acts of violence and sabotage . Chapter Eight likely to most likely be accompanied with acts of sabotage and violence . Chapter 8 most likely will most likely involve acts of terrorism or sabotage .
 This situation would make it possible for a World Government to step in to maintain control of the situation . Indeed, this situation would allow the world government to take control .
 It is a known fact, that revolution has been fermenting in this country for a long time, and riots could be instigated through the many terrorist groups that exist here . It is known fact that revolution .
 In 1992, after four policemen were acquitted in the beating of Rodney King, massive riots swept across south-central Los Angeles . The military had to be sent in to restore order after the riots .
 Incidents also reported in Atlanta, Las Vegas, San Francisco, Miami, and Seattle . Incidents were also reported .
 The fight against oppression has hardened them, and has created a generation that thinks nothing of using the political power of violence and demonstration to make their views known . Even though the Blacks in this country have achieved quite a bit in the past 30 years, they have hardened .
 This powder keg could be ignited in the future in order to create a nationwide crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "Until you're prepared to kill your parents, you're not ready to change the country. And I mean that quite literally, because until you're . prepared to . kill your . parents, he said .
 Chapter Eight is playing into the hands of the Establishment they claim to hate . Chapter Eight are playing into . the hands . of the establishment they claim . to hate. Chapter Eight .
 Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson was assassinated in San Francisco, California, on September 19, 1993 . Rev. Jackson was a member of the Hamilton Square Baptist Church .
 Lou Sheldon of the Traditional Values Coalition was to be the scheduled speaker . Lou Sheldon was scheduled to speak at the event .
 Around 5:00 PM, homosexual demonstrators began arriving, and by the time of the service, so many had shown up, that they completely controlled the area outside of the church . They attempted to prevent people from entering the church, including the pastor and his wife .
 Even though the police were there, they did nothing, claiming that the situation was under control . The police were called to the scene after the incident .
 The noise was so disturbing that the service had to be temporarily stopped . The service was temporarily stopped at the request of the public .
 I heard a recording of this on a radio show, and needless to say, it was very unnerving. I heard it on a . radio show . It was "very unnerving" to hear it .
 As the churchgoers left, they were shouted and cursed at; and the speaker had debris thrown at him . The speaker was thrown debris at him as he left the church .
 This is just the beginning of gays exercising militant action to gain rights to carry out their perversive lifestyle . This is not the first time gays have taken to the streets to protest their perverted lifestyle .
 As much as the Government would like us to believe it, Communism is not dead only sleeping . Communism is still sleeping, says David Cameron .
 When it awakes, most likely under the banner of Socialism, it will be a force to be reckoned with . When it comes to power, it is likely under socialism, most of the time .
 Chapter Eight transportation centers, communication centers, and water reservoirs, supplies, are located in Chapter Eight . Chapter Eight includes transportation, communication, and communication centers .
 Despite overtures toward democracy, they are continuing to follow an agenda to undermine the U.S., says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They are clearly continuing to continue to follow their agenda," he says .
 Regardless of who is involved in these riots, the police and the military will be mobilized to bring order . The police and military are mobilized to help bring order in riots .
 In 1965, the Department of Justice established the Office of Law Enforcement Assistance to help the local police fight crime . The Office was established in 1965 to help local police .
 In 1968, as part of the Crime Control Act, it became known as the Law Enforcement Assistance Agency . The agency is now known as a law enforcement agency .
 "I do not raise the spectre of a federal police force merely to frighten you," says President Obama . "I'm not afraid of it. I'm not scared of it," he says .
 "We now see a substantial federal effort there, not simply because organized crime is interstate in nature," says FBI chief . "We are seeing a substantial amount of federal effort," he says .
 The LEAA originally discussed the possibility of a National Police Force to be used in the event of a civil disturbance, for crowd dispersal and to neutralize revolutionary leadership . The force was originally discussed as a solution to the civil disturbance .
 Deputy Attorney General of California had said during a conference on Civil Emergency Management, that anyone who attacks the state, even verbally, becomes a revolutionary and an enemy by definition .
 On December 30, 1975, the California National Guard announced that they were prepared to provide emergency assistance to any local police force in the country . The National Guard was prepared to assist in the fight against the government .
 Law Enforcement Assistance Force is a specially trained and equipped military police force to handle mass disturbances and riots . They introduced the 1,000 member LEDF, a special force to deal with mass disturbances .
 This national police force seems to be taking shape through the Multi-Jurisdictional Task Force, a creation of the Department of Defense . The task force is a joint operation of FEMA and the National Guard Bureau .
 With less military involvement abroad, some military personnel will be reassigned to this type of domestic duty . Some of the military personnel are reassigned .
 MJTF is the coordinating body of the BATF, FDA, CIA, DEA, IRS, Federal Marshals, National Guard, and local police organizations . The MJTF also includes the DEA, DEA and National Guard .
 Since 1971, there have been many reports concerning unmarked black helicopters . They are equipped for low-flying ground surveillance, and appear to be part of the military's counter-terrorism program .
 Since 1987, the U.S. Army has been training the police, local National Guard units, and the Drug Enforcement Agency, in how to break in and enter private property . As part of their new urban warfare training, the Army has also been training local police units .
 The United States Army's Office of Public Affairs announced that the Defense Department Authorization Act was passed by Congress in 1987 . The new training was being carried out in military bases such as Fort Benning, Fort McClellan and Fort Hood .
 There have been reports of antiterrorist training missions which have taken place throughout the country .
 Marines from the 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit at Camp Lejeune, along with air support from the unmarked black helicopters, carried out a late-night raid in July, 1993, near the mouth of the Savannah River .
 In early 1994, the Army and the Alaska State Police held a joint operation on the Kenai Peninsula, near Anchorage .
 In July, 1994, Marines from the 13th Marine Expeditionary Unit at Camp Pendleton held urban warfare training in different locations around Sacramento . The training took place in Sacramento .
 In October, 1994, Army Special Forces and Detroit Police SWAT team, engaged in anti-terrorist training missions at a vacant 6-story apartment house on West Alexandrine Street, and at a group of abandoned houses in Van Buren Township, a suburb of Detroit .
 It is also the location of the North American Training Center for the United Nations . It is located in the U.S. and Canada .
 The FBI has established an anti-terrorist training compound at the abandoned Brown and Root, Inc. construction yard in Belie Chasse, Louisiana, just south of New Orleans . The compound is located at an abandoned construction yard .
 The purpose of this urban warfare training, is nothing more than the perfection of ""house-to-house searches and controls on the civilian population"", which will be used to disarm the American people through force . The U.S. will be using this training as a way to disarm
 It has been suggested that the UN operations in Somalia and Haiti were used as practice runs for disarming the civilian population .
 Before this can happen, a massive gun law will have to be passed, so that all the guns will be confiscated . However, before this can't happen, the gun law must be passed .
 Recent estimates place the number of registered handguns in this country at 70 million . The number of unregistered handguns in the U.S. is estimated at 50 million .
 The Illuminati will not instigate any uprising if Americans will be able to defend themselves, the Illuminati says . Americans will not be instigated by the Illuminati if they can defend themselves against the threat of an uprising .
 The extended waiting period mandated by the Brady Bill was only the beginning of the gun ban . There have been other Bills introduced in Congress to ban guns .
 In the last twenty years, the incidence of violent crimes have more than doubled . In the 1990s, violent crime rates in the U.S. have doubled .
 The Government's view is to disarm the criminal, but at the same time, they also disarm the law abiding citizens . The Government says it wants to disarm criminals but also disarm law abiding people .
 The move for gun control is snowballing, and that is part of their plan, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The move is snowballed, and it's part of the plan, he says .
 In 1994, the National Rifle Association got their hands on a secret document which represents the blueprint for the gun-control lobby in this country .
 The first step is to use the media to create a clamor for gun control in this country . This will in turn sway the opinion of a large portion of the population to support such a measure .
 The second step would be the initiation of gun control legislation that would establish annual licensing fees, and surcharges on ammunition . The legislation would establish yearly licensing fees for ammunition .
 After two years, the third step would involve a massive increase in licensing fees . The fee increase would take place after two years . After two more years, licensing fees would increase .
 The reason given, would be because of the costs involved to enforce the law, when in fact, it would be to discourage ownership . The reason for the law is that it would discourage ownership, rather than discourage it .
 Failure to get a license would result in a $1,000 fine and/or six months in jail . Failure to turn your guns over to the government could result in an 18-month jail sentence . If your license lapses, you could face a $15,000 or 18
 The fourth step will call for further legislation to increase the licensing fees even more . After two more years, the government will increase the fees even further .
 The Second Amendment to the Constitution of the U.S. will be circumvented in order to take the guns out of the hands of the American people . In this way, the Second Amendment is being circumvented, says President Obama .
 After that, the population will be defenseless against government forces . The population will not be able to defend themselves from government forces, he says . The country will be "defenceless"
 There was a law passed that tells us what the mentality of the government is concerning this issue . The law was passed by the British government in 2010, a year after it was passed .
 This information can be found in the U.S. Code, Volume 9, Title 22, Chapter 35, Sections 2551-2595 .
 Even though the Agency is active in negotiations regarding foreign policy, you can't be sure that all such negotiations include the same concessions for America . The Agency is currently negotiating with the United States .
 Congressman James B Utt said that this .disarmament Act sets up a super-agency with power greater than the power of Congress, which delegated it . Chapter Eight February 14, 1963 edition of the Washington Report .
 A 46-question survey was handed out in May, 1994, to ""300 randomly selected" Marines at the Twentynine Palms Marine Corps Base in the Mohave Desert .
 A thirty-day amnesty period is permitted for these firearms to be turned over to the local authorities .
 A number of citizen groups refuse to turn over their firearms . At the end of this period, a number of citizens refuse to hand over their weapons .
 A Study of Their Effect on Unit Cohesion had been classified, until March, 1995, when it was approved for public dissemination . The study was published in 1995 .
 If ordered, one out of every four Marines would shoot American citizens . So, the bottom line is, if ordered, would one of the four Marines shoot Americans .
 Survey reveals that, for the most part, our military could not be relied on to act as a cohesive force to fire upon the citizens of this country . What this survey reveals, is that ... our military can't be relied upon to act in this way .
 "I don't think there is time for that. However, with increased indoctrination, that could change, but there is still time for it to change."
 Fort Dix in New Jersey is a major east coast base right next to McGuire Air Force Base . The use of Fort DIX was fully committed, the spokesman said .
 The military staff of the UN Secretary-General has called for a ""Rapid Response Peace Force" of 60,000 soldiers, for instant deployment . A ""Permanent Peace-Keeping Force"" of 275,000 troops, for conflict control; and a ""Standing Reserve Peace Force""
 In 1993, Clinton issued Presidential Review Directive #13, supporting Boutros-Ghali's proposal for a UN military force . The force would be substantially made up of Americans . Clinton issued directive #13 in 1993 .
 Colin Powell, Commander of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, insisted on a codicil that said, if any U.S. commander believed his orders violated the United States Constitution, or placed our country or military forces at risk, the orders could be disregarded . Colin Powell insisted on
 On May 3,1994, Clinton signed the Presidential Review Directive #25, which put U.S. military commanders under the authority of the UN during UN military operations . The Directive instructed the Department of Defense to establish a United States military organizational structure which included the United Nations .
 Troops who are attached to the Russian Interior Ministry were seen training with the U.S. 10th Special Forces Group . They were being reassigned to Fort Carson, Colorado . Troops attached to Russia's Interior Ministry trained with the United States .
 Russian soldiers still wear red berets bearing the hammer and sickle, the symbol of Communism . The Russian soldiers were still wearing the red beret bearing the red . Red berets were still worn by the soldiers .
 Russians reportedly involved in joint military training operations in Alaska and Alabama . Russians have also been seen training with the SWAT team of Las Vegas, Nevada, Nevada .
 German soldiers were seen training at Luke Air Force Base near Phoenix, Arizona; as well as Fort Bliss, and Fort McClelland . German soldiers have been seen training in the past .
 In May, 1991, the German government negotiated a deal with our government, which gives them permission to establish a German military facility in our country . In fact, in May 1991, in fact, the deal was signed by the German Government .
 Foreign soldiers are now training with American troops in order to function as a cohesive multi-national unit . The unit will function under the authority of the United Nations . Chapter Eight Foreign soldiers will train with American soldiers .
 A multinational UN military force stationed in this country would fire upon American citizens . The U.S. would fire on American citizens if it were attacked by the U.N. forces .
 Russia-made T-72 main battle tanks have been spotted on our nation's highways . They are being hauled on flatbed trailers, being hauled out of the country's roads .
 Also seen, were Soviet surface-to-air missiles . Also seen: Soviet surface to air missiles and surface to-surface missiles .
 A Soviet HindD attack helicopter, and a Soviet Helix anti-submarine naval attack helicopter were seen at the Gulf port National Guard facility in Mississippi . The two helicopters were seen in the Gulf .
 Gene Taylor reported that the aircraft, as well as hundreds of other Russian-built equipment, were being purchased and used for training purposes . Taylor: "Hundreds of other equipment" are being purchased .
 Hundreds of Soviet Z1L-131 military trucks were photographed in Saucier, Mississippi . The trucks were imported from East Germany with a UN bill of lading by Airmar Resources Corporation .
 They are to be painted white, marked for UN use and shipped to Africa . Yet many of them have been sent to destinations in this country . Many of the items are still being shipped to this country.
 There was a report from Montana concerning three train loads of military vehicles . Some of the vehicles were painted white and marked with the UN designation . The report was published in Montana .
 It is widely believed that our government is stockpiling military equipment in preparation of a massive assault against the American people, if necessary .
 The attack on David Koresh and the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas may be a glimpse of what is going to happen in the future to groups who don't toe the government line . The attack is a glimpse into the future of groups like Koresh .
 "In order to control the population, there will be large groups of people rounded up and detained," says President Obama .
 Executive Order #9066 directed the Army to intern up to 112,000 in concentration camps . This was done in March, 1942 to Japanese-Americans in the western U.S.
 These detention centers were setup at Army facilities in Avon Park, Tutelake, Wickenburg, and Allenwood . The detention centers are set up in four locations .
 In 1971 Congress passed legislation that repealed the Emergency Detention Act of 1950 . Americans were concerned about this talk, and it was repealed in 1971 .
 During the Reagan Administration, a secret program identified as ""Operation Rex 84"", was initiated by our National Security Council, and authorized the establishment of 23 ""emergency detention centers" for the purpose of detaining a large number of ""potentially subversive" people . Chapter Eight .
 An additional 20 centers were funded with the 1990-91 defense budget, and another 43 were commissioned . Another 20 were funded by the 1990s defense budget .
 Chaffee, Vandenburg Air Force Base, Eglin Air Force base, Camp Krome, Ft. Ft. Krome and Ft. Chaffee . Chaffee is a member of the U.S. Air Force .
 Elmendorf Air Force Base, Eilson Air . Base, Tutelake, El Reno, Tulsa, Florence, Florence and Maxwell Air Force bases .
 It is believed that the government's plans for these detention centers are still being carried out . Even though the directives that brought about Rex 84 have been eliminated, they are believed to still be carrying out .
 It was discovered that major construction was underway, and it was being prepared for conversion into a massive civilian detention center . It was reported by The Spotlight that it was preparing for conversion .
 Alfonse D'Amato announced that a large part of the base was going to be turned over to the National Guard . The National Guard, it is believed, will oversee the facility .
 Nearby Fort Drum, the location of the Army's 10th Mountain Division, is also slated to be used as a detention facility . Fort Drum is the site of the U.S. Army's "peacekeepers" who have been utilized as UN ""peacekeepers".
 Aerial surveillance of a many-thousand acre location in Indianapolis, has made this facility a prime suspect for being a detention center . The facility is located in a large-scale area of Indianapolis, Indiana .
 It is surrounded by a barbedwire fence, pointing inward, has a helicopter pad, a sewer treatment plant, and barracks . It has been surrounded by barbed wire pointing inward . It also has a water treatment plant and barracks.
 They are located near a body of fresh water; near a railway system, major highway, and large airport; and have the capability of holding thousands of people . Located near a . railway system and major highway system, and . large airport, they are located . near a large body of
 After these revelations, wouldn't it be a good idea to prepare you and your family accordingly?
 "Our way of life is going to be drastically changed if this New World Order succeeds in establishing itself in America," says President Obama . "We are going to have to live a very different lifestyle if this is true," says Obama .
 The Illuminati ceased to exist as an organization in the 1790's . The organization's leaders kept the conspiracy alive, and continued working towards their goal of a one world socialist government .
 The Illuminati is the name for the engineers of this Master Conspiracy, since it is more recognizable than the various secret, and little known organizations that are carrying out this Satanic plot . Since then, as you have read, various organizations have been established to perpetuate these goals .
 It is believed, that at the pinnacle of the Illuminati, is a group of nine men, who, for the most part are the descendants of the original Illuminati conspirators .
 In October, 1977, the John Birch Society printed a secret report from the office of C Douglas Dillon, head of Dillon, Read and Company, former Chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation,and former Secretary of the Treasury under Kennedy and Johnson . The report indicated that the Illuminati had hoped to establish
 The move is on for a National Health Care program . The sweeping social reforms of the past, brought us the Social Security and Welfare system, are on the way .
 This is all part of the Master Plan, because it is the ultimate goal of the Illuminati, for the American citizen to eventually be totally dependent upon the government for their security, food, electricity, heat, clothing, and other necessities . The American citizen is dependent upon their government for security
 One-World Government is right around the corner. Once that potential exists, One-world Government is possible, it could be right around .
 "Slowly our country is being globalized, to fit into the world marketplace," says President Obama . "We are going to be globalized," says Obama .
 In 1988, the Commerce Department was charged with the conversion to the metric system . The International System is now known as the International System . The Commerce Department is responsible for the conversion .
 Federal law now mandates that all products must list both metric and non-metric measurements . Federal law mandates all products have to list both measurements and measurements .
 The economy of the U.S. is experiencing what may be the final assault . Chapter Eight: The economy has been allowed to erode for years .
 NAFTA is a two-volume document, nearly 1,100 pages in length . It incorporates most of the provisions of the 1988 Canadian Free Trade Agreement . NAFTA makes the U.S., Canada, Mexico, and Mexico unequal partners in trade .
 On December 31, 1988, President Ronald Reagan signed Executive Order # 12662 which said that regardless of the constitutionality of decisions made by the binational committees of the CFTA, the United States had to accept it .
 When NAFTA was approved by Congress, more of our national sovereignty was given up to Mexico . Mexico's sovereignty has been given up by Mexico .
 Mexican workers do not have minimum wage protection and the right to bargain collectively . The agreement has made Mexico fertile territory for American companies to relocate, thus creating the probability of a huge loss of American jobs .
 "That is only part of the inequities that are contained in this agreement," the author says . That is only one of many inequities in the agreement, he says .
 A report by the Joint Economic Committee of Congress indicated that the nation had lost 137,000 jobs . The Clinton Administration reported that 127,000 new jobs were created by NAFTA . The report also said that the U.S. had lost more than 137,00 jobs .
 During the first nine months of 1994, our trade surplus with Mexico shrunk by 27 percent . During the same period, the U.S. trade deficit with Mexico shrank by 27 per cent .
 NAFTA promoters said 60,000 American manufactured cars would be exported to Mexico in 1994, but only 28,000 were . Marcy Kaptur, NAFTA promoter said that 60,00 American made cars would export to Mexico .
 The highly skilled, well-paying positions have gone to Mexico, while low-paying, low-skilled jobs have been created in the U.S. Low-paying jobs have also gone to the United States .
 Raw materials and parts are exported to Mexico, assembled, then imported back into the country at a far greater value . This stems from the fact that the raw materials and . parts are . assembled, assembled and then . imported back to Mexico at a higher value .
 At the 1994 Summit of the Americas in Miami, Clinton spoke about bringing South America into NAFTA . Chile became the first nation to join NAFTA .
 It is a descendant of the International Trade Organization and the Organization for Trade Cooperation, which had been proposed during the 1940's and 1950's . It was proposed in the 1950's and 1960's .
 At that time, the country and the Congress was not ready to have their economic authority transferred to international control . The country and Congress did not want to lose control of the economy to the world .
 Based on its size, how many of our legislators do you think read every word of this trade agreement? Based on the size of the agreement, how do many of your legislators think you think they read it?
 GATT is the only international agreement which sets rules for world trade, and provides for the mediation of disputes . It is argued by many to be the best way to open up foreign markets to the U.S. exports .
 Critics familiar with its contents say it will succeed in seriously damaging our national sovereignty and independence . However, critics familiar with the contents say that it will seriously damage our sovereignty . The proposal is expected to be presented to the British House of Representatives in New York City .
 Proponents say any country can withdraw from membership after giving a six month notice . Proponents disagree, saying that any country could withdraw after six months notice . The U.S. is the only member of the world's largest group of nations to withdraw .
 GATT will have the power to force Congress to change laws by declaring them to be 'protectionist' and if we don't comply, we would be subject to trade sanctions . GATT has the power of forcing Congress to comply with GATT .
 The October 24,1994 issue of Barron's indicated that the WTO is a de facto world government . Barron's: WTO is de facto World government .
 William Holder, deputy general counsel of the UN's International Monetary Fund, said that the WTO is a de jure world government . William Holder: "The WTO is de facto world government"
 In all actuality, this legislation is a Treaty, and as such, it should require approval by two-thirds of the Senate . Instead, it is being considered a Trade Agreement, which will require only a majority vote .
 GATT was brought to a vote during the lameduck session of the 103rd Congress and passed, rather than waiting for the Republican-majority Congress that was elected . Even though the midterm elections of November, 1994, the country overwhelmingly voted to change the course our country has taken,
 Some opponents believe, that if the vote had been postponed, it may never have been ratified, at least in its present form . But that was unlikely, since its passage was a bipartisan effort spearheaded by a group of key Republicans lead by Sen. Mitch McConnell .
 Newt Gingrich of Georgia is a member of the CFR and a conservative think-tank like the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute .
 Chapter Eight the world economy is teetering, and democracy hangs in the balance . A handful of men wait for a few more pieces of the puzzle to fall into place, so they can spring their trap . Chapter Eight is the world's most important chapter in the history of the world
 Even though we have gone back to look at the roots, and evolution of this movement, the actual motive goes back much farther than that . The actual motive for the movement goes back far more than that, says CNN.com .
 Just think about, what motivation could there be to fuel that kind of desire . Just think of what motivation you have to be motivated by .
 The answer, is that you have to look at things with a spiritual eye, in order to comprehend the complexities that the New World Order actually represents . The answer to the question is that the answer is that it is not to be drawn to the world's 'New World Order'
 'When you do that, then you can understand how it has been able to progress through all these years, and why it will continue. And when you . do that then you . can understand why, and how, you can . understand that, and when you do . that,
 The earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep . And the earth was . without form and void .
 There was an undetermined amount of time which passed between these two verses. You have to understand that there was a lot of time .
 We do have some clues about certain events which occurred before Adam, and the refurbishing of this world for his habitation . However, we do not know what happened before Adam's arrival .
 God told Noah and his sons in Genesis 9:1 to ""replenish"" the earth after the flood . God had told Adam and Eve the same thing in Genesis 1:28 . God also told Noah, his sons and his children to "replenchish" the earth .
 Now you can understand the time frame, and the circumstances regarding Lucifer . Now you have to understand the circumstances surrounding Lucifer .
 He was described in the Bible as being wise and perfect . He was a ""cherub""(the highest classification of angels)
 He led a third of the angels in a revolt against Michael, the archangel, and the remaining angels, for the control of Heaven . The angel led a revolt in a bid to take back control of the world .
 Adam gave Adam dominion over the earth, which infuriated Satan, who had the impression that he was to rule over the world . Satan had an impression that God had created man in his image .
 Adam and Eve sinned by eating the fruit of the tree which was forbidden by God . Satan plotted against God, and caused Adam to sin . Adam's sin was caused by eating fruit forbidden by the tree, Adam's first sin .
 Satan has been carrying out his plan to corrupt and control the earth . Ever since then, Satan's plan to destroy the earth has been carried out . Satan's plans to corrupt the earth have never been realized .
 For six thousand years, a small group of satanically empowered men have been feverishly working to eliminate God and to enslave mankind . For 6,000 years, God has been trying to eliminate him and enslave humanity .
 "The New World Order is nothing more than the culmination of these efforts," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 The final step of a plan that will enable Satan to again challenge God, and the angelic forces of Heaven . Satan's final step will enable him to challenge God and the angels of Heaven, he says .
 Just as there have been signs that the political powers of this world are coming together in a New World Order, so it has been with the Church . The Church has been under the influence of the world's political powers in recent years .
 World Church would seem to go hand-in-hand with a World Government . The establishment of a World Church seems to be a good idea for a World government .
 In this chapter, we will go back to the early history of man, and follow the history of the church, and what its relationship may be to the World Church . The first chapter of this chapter will focus on the church's relationship with the world church .
 Noah had three sons, Ham, Shem, and Japheth, according to the book of Genesis . Ham was the son of Noah, Ham and Shem . Ham is one of three sons .
 Nimrod attempted to build a tower that would reach to Heaven . Nimrod's tower was built by Nimrod who attempted to reach Heaven . The tower would have reached Heaven .
 God confused their language, so they couldn't understand each other, and they were scattered over the face of the Earth . God confused the language, and God scattered them over the world . They were scattered .
 Nimrod (allegedly the founder of Masonry) established a religious system, with the help of his mother and father, to control the people through political methods . Nimrod is said to have established the religious system to control his people through religious means .
 This was the beginning of the occult, which became known as Baal worship . Baal worship is now known as ' Baal worship' The occult was the birth of Baal worship, the first time Baal worship was discovered .
 Nimrod's great-uncle Shem killed him, chopped his body up into little pieces, and sent the pieces to different cities as a warning to those who dabbled in the occult . Shem became so enraged that he killed Nimrod and chopped the body into pieces as a
 Nimrod's mother, Semiramis, took over the religion, and proclaimed Nimrod a god . Nimrod was killed by his mother, and his mother took over .
 She gathered Nimrod's pieces, except for his penis, which she couldn't find . She gathered all the pieces except for the penis .
 She claimed that an Evergreen tree sprouted from a tree stump, which indicated the entry of new life into the deceased Nimrod .
 Those joining had to take oaths of secrecy, and had to tell their priests everything they did wrong . Those joining would have to tell them everything they had done wrong .
 In this way, via the ""confessional"", they could blackmail anyone who didn't yield to their will . The 'confessional' was a way of blackmailing anyone who refused to yield to them .
 Semiramis became known as the ""Queen of Heaven"" and was symbolized by the figure of the Moon . Semiriamis became the ""Mother of Heaven" and symbolized as the "Queen of the Heaven" Semirimis was known as Semiram
 When Babylon fell, the religion grew in Egypt and Pergamos, where Semiramis became known as Isis, and Nimrod was known as Horus, the Sun God . Nimrod became known to Horus, and Isis became Isis .
 Baal worship became dominant among various religious practices in other lands . Baal worship is still dominant in many of the world's religions .
 God established a nation of Jews, called Israel, and gave them laws to live by . So, God established them in Israel, Israel . God established the nation of Israel, which is Israel .
 They were to be the light to a world ravaged with sin, but they too became caught up in idol worship . They were also caught up with idol worship. They became the light of the world ravaged by sin .
 Even though prophets, anointed by God, warned them, they did not heed the warning . The prophet was anointed to warn them that they should heed the warnings .
 Julius Caesar became the Supreme Pontiff of the Babylonian Order . Julius Caesar was Julius Caesar's first supreme Pontiff .
 Jesus Christ, whose birth was prophesied by lsaiah, was sent by God to be the saviour of the Jews . The birth of Jesus Christ was predicted by God by the prophet of the Bible .
 He wasn't recognized as the awaited Messiah, and was despised by religious leaders who plotted against him . However, he was not recognized as a Messiah, but was despised .
 Jewish leaders became his judges, presenting phony witnesses, and breaking eighteen Jewish laws in order to have him sentenced to death . These Jewish leaders broke 18 Jewish laws to try and get him to death, he says .
 Satan, who three years before, had tempted Jesus in the wilderness, believed that through his crucifixion, he had defeated Christ . Satan believed that by the crucifixion of Christ, he'd defeated him .
 He was resurrected three days later, and forty days later was transfigured into heaven . But, as well as he was resurrected, he was also transfigured .
 With the Great Commission, Jesus instructed his disciples to go through all the world to spread the gospel . Satan tried his best to defeat the Christian movement, and Satan tried to defeat it .
 Satan raised up a man known as Simon Magus, a Babylonian priest, to do his bidding . Two years after the establishment of the true Christian Church, Satan raised him up . The man is known as the Babylonian Magus .
 apostleship without repenting his sins, in order to gain this mysterious new power . Chapter Nine apostleship . apostleship. apostleship, without repentance, is to gain new power.
 Simon adopted some of the Christian teachings interweaving it with his own pagan religion, and called it Christianity . Simon was a pagan who had a pagan religion that he called Christianity .
 Satan's attempt to dilute Christian teaching was an attempt at diluting Christian teaching . Satan zeroed in on its leaders . Satan's efforts were aimed at Christian leaders .
 Christians who refused to worship the Emperor were persecuted, beginning with Nero, in the middle of the first century . Rome, who ruled the known world, was under the influence of a form of Baal worship .
 They were arrested and put to death in various ways, such as crucifixion . They were tied inside animal skins and attacked by wild dogs, fed to lions, and tied to stakes to be burned as human torches to light Nero's gardens .
 Persecutions caused Christians to literally go underground, to worship secretly . Christians were forced to worship under the cover of their worship . The persecution lasted until early in the fourth century .
 They took refuge in the subterranean catacombs of Rome, which extended for miles underneath the city . They were forced to take shelter in the underground catacombas of Rome .
 There are said to be over two million Christian graves in these caverns . Over 2 million Christian remains are believed to have been buried in the caves .
 This persecution of the Christians was Satan's attempt to get rid of the Biblical teaching. Satan was trying to stop the Christians' persecution, he says . The persecution of Christians was an attempt to remove Biblical teaching, he adds .
 Various religions, cults, and sects, were established to alter the Holy Scriptures in order to change them, and confuse the world . The Holy Scriptures were created to alter them, to confuse them and change the world.
 Christians were persecuted, but their faith in God stood fast . Although the Christians were persecutors, their faith stood fast. The Christians were Christians in the United States .
 He was instrumental in preserving our Holy Bible, by informing Christians which of the manuscripts were genuine . He also told Christians which manuscripts of the Bible are genuine .
 These manuscripts were then hidden by Christians in the cellars of the great monasteries . Christians hid them in cellars in their cellars .
 In 305, the two Roman emperors, Diocletian and Maximian, stepped down, and were succeeded by their deputies, Galerius and Constantius .
 Constantius was replaced by Maximinus Daia in the east, and Severus in the west . He sent for his son Constantine to help him reclaim the throne . Constantius then sent his son Constantius for help .
 Constantine was proclaimed emperor by his father's army after Constantius died . He led them in a march against Rome, leading them to victory .
 On the night of October 27, 312, he came face to face with the legions of Maxentius at the Milvian Bridge on the Tiber River . On the evening of that night, he was confronted by the legions .
 He vowed that if God would help him conquer Rome, he would institute Christian rule . As he prepared to pit his small army against the military might of Rome, so the legend goes, he vowed to conquer Rome .
 Christ appeared to him with the cross, and told him to use it as a guardian . That night, Christ appeared with him and said he could use it to protect himself .
 The next morning, he had this ""sign of God" placed on his helmet, and the shields of his men . The next day, he was given a helmet and shield by his men in honor .
 Eusebius was given this account by the emperor himself, years afterward, but he didn't write about it till after Constantine's death .
 Historians never acknowledged this glorified account, and not one man in his army of 40,000 ever mentioned it . Most historians never acknowledged the account .
 Constantine had a vision of Apollo at the temple in Gaul, who instructed him to place the ""celestial sign of God"" on their shields prior to going into battle . Lactantius, a Christian, a few years later, wrote that Constantine had . a vision . of Apollo
 Constantine felt Christ was a manifestation of the Sun God, Sol, or Apollo, even though Christians didn't know it . Constantine felt that Christ was the manifestation of Sol or Apollo .
 The next year, in 313, he issued the Edict of Milan, which bestowed religious freedom, in order to show tolerance towards Christianity, and all forms of monotheism were forbidden . The Edict was issued in 313 to show religious freedom .
 He had his troops sprinkled in baptism, proclaiming them to be Christians, although spiritually they weren't . He had to be sprinkled in baptisms, but spiritually they were not, he said .
 A document discovered in the eighth century, called the 'Donation of Constantine' was said to have conferred some of his secular power upon the Pope . It was used by the Church to gain some authority in the government, but it was later proved to be a forgery .
 He considered himself to be the head of the Church, although the Bishop of Rome was the recognized head, later to be known as the Pope . Pope considered himself head of Church, but the Bishop was recognized head .
 In 303, pagan emperor Diocletian had already destroyed most of the Christian writings around Rome, so of all the manuscripts of the New Testament available, not one had been produced before the fourth century .
 All Romans were baptized into the Christian faith, but there were those who wanted to retain some aspects of the Babylonian mysteries in the new Christian religion .
 Constantine claimed to have converted to Christianity, but secretly worshipped Sun God . Constantine worshipped the Sun God, even though he claimed to be a Christian .
 He made Sunday a day of rest, not because it was supposed to be the Lord's day, but being that it was the first day of the week, it was to be a tribute to the Sun God . The Sun God made Sunday of rest as a tribute .
 Peter Peter was said to be the first Bishop of the Church, and each Pope is said to have been his successor . Peter was also the first Pope of the Catholic Church .
 This is a tradition that is historically inaccurate, because Peter never professed that distinction, he says . This is an inaccurate tradition, he adds. This is not the first time Peter has professed to that distinction .
 There is no evidence that the Apostle Peter had ever been in Rome, at any time . The Apostle Peter is believed to have visited Rome at the time .
 Secular history explains that there was a ""Simon Peter"" in Rome during the first century . However, secular history explains there was also a 'Simon Peter' in Rome .
 The pagan gods of the Babylonians and Greeks were identified by the name Peter . The name Peter is the name of a pagan god of the ancient Greeks .
 The Romans referred to Neptune, Saturn, Mars, and Liber, as ""gods"" of the Peter-rank . Neptune, Mars and Liber were referred to as "gods" of the . Peter-Rank .
 Deuteronomy 23:4 says that Balaam of Pethor was a sacred high place where there was an oracle temple . Balaaam was also known as Nimrod, and Nimrod .
 Simon Magus, who had become the interpreter of the Babylonian Mysteries, became known as Simon Peter . Thus, Simon Peter became Simon Peter.
 Eusebius, the Bishop of Caesarea, was Constantine's chief religious advisor . He was imprisoned by the Romans as they searched for Bibles to destroy .
 He studied at Origen's school of Religion and Philosophy in Alexandria . Many gnostic scholars lived and studied there .
 Eusebius wasn't a true Christian, because he believed Jesus to be a lesser god . He was guided by that fact when he produced his version of the Scriptures .
 Jerome's Vulgate Bible became the official Bible for all Roman Catholics . It was out of Eusebius' translation, that the Latin Vulgate was written by Jerome .
 Emperor Theodosius made Christianity the official State religion, and church membership was mandatory . Church membership in Rome was mandatory in Roman Catholicism .
 This forced conversion brought many heathens, idol worshipers, and pagans into the Church . The forced conversion of Christ's followers was the result of the forced conversion .
 Babylonian system of ""mother and child"" worship evolved into the Madonna and child symbol . Soon these pagans succeeded in getting statues of Semiramis and Nimrod into the Church . They referred to them as the Virgin Mary and baby Jesus .
 Confessionals were established, just as they were in Babylon, and soon the Church began to grow in power . The Church grew in power, and the Church was established .
 Several Christian sects, and semi-Christian orders criticized the Catholic Church, and taught from the original manuscripts, which they guarded with their lives, in order to insure the survival of God's word .
 Waldenses were founded in 1170 by a rich merchant from Lyons, in southern France, called Peter Waldo . The Waldenses are the descendants of a wealthy merchant from the city of Lyons .
 He separated from the Catholic Church, and sold all of his possessions . He has since sold all his possessions, including all his belongings, to the Catholic church .
 Christian movement spread to Spain, northern France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Hungary, and Switzerland . The Christian movement also spread to northern France and northern Italy .
 The Anabaptists and Lollards were two groups which sprang from the Waldenses . The Lollards and Anabbaptists were the first of the Lollards to form .
 The Anabaptists was the name for various groups from the radical branch of the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century . The name is the name of various groups involved in the Reformation .
 They rejected the idea of infant baptism, which was practiced by the Roman Catholic Church, as a means of saving souls, and demanded rebaptism . They were active in Germany, Holland and Switzerland .
 Menno Simons started the group which eventually became known as the Mennonites . The group is now known as a group of people who believe in Mennonite Christianity .
 He produced the first English Bible in 1382, paving the way for the Reformation . He translated the Bible from Latin to English, and produced the most famous Bible .
 He organized a group called the Order of Poor Preachers, and began distributing his new Bible . The group distributed his Bible .
 Wycliffe's writings were banned, and the Pope ordered him to Rome to undergo trial . Eventually Wycliffe was taken to Rome, where he was put on trial for his writings .
 Anyone who didn't profess Catholicism was sought out, and again, Satan attempted to destroy Christianity . Satan's attempt to kill Christianity was attempted to do so again .
 In 1200, the Pope instructed a Spanish priest named Dominique de Guaman to form an Order to vanquish all opposing religious groups .
 Dominican monks were dispatched to speak out against the Albigensians, a semi-Christian group prominent in France, who condemned the Catholic Church for worshipping images . In 1215, these Dominican monks became known as the ""Militia of Christ"
 A missionary, Peter of Castelnau, was sent to preach against the Albigensians, who killed him . In 1208, in response to the murder, the Pope instigated a holy war against the Cathari of Toulouse, killing many .
 At the Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1227, Pope Honorius III sanctioned the Inquisition . All heretics should be turned over to the government, and their property confiscated .
 Catholics sympathetic to the views of these groups were excommunicated . Catholics sympathetic . to these views were ex-Catholics sympathetic to these groups .
 Inquisition sought to eliminate anyone who wasn't Catholic and refused to submit to the Pope . Inquisition sought the elimination of those who weren't Catholic . The Inquisition was founded in the 13th century .
 Torture was used to obtain confessions and information, which was authorized by Pope Innocent IV in 1252 . Torture has been used in torture cases since 1252.
 Other methods of torture included lacerating their backs with spikes, suffocation, pouring oil on them and setting them on fire . The victims were tortured with spikes and lacerated with spikes .
 The Roman Catholic Church had become so powerful, that through their control of the royalty in Europe, the Church and State had combined in an effort to make Catholicism the universal religion . The Church and the State combined in a bid to make the Catholic Church the religion of the world .
 In Spain, within an eighteen year period, the Chief Inquisitor, Torquemada, imprisoned 97,000, and burned 10,200 to death . In the same period, 10,000 people were burned to death in Spain .
 From Spain, the Inquisition spread to northern Italy, southern France, Germany, the Netherlands, Mexico, Latin America, Austria, and Poland . The Inquisition was first established in Spain in 17th century .
 The massive campaign, which ran into the early 1800's, claimed 68 million victims . In all, the massive campaign claimed about 68 million people .
 The Pope pardoned sins without confession and repentance without repentance . They were certificates, signed by the Pope, which pardoned sin without confession .
 Martin Luther, who turned away from Catholicism after reading the Syrian text of the Bible from Antioch, witnessed John Tetzel (Archbishop of Mainz and Magdeburg) selling indulgences . Tetzel compiled a list of 95 ""points"" and nailed them on a church door on
 Those siding with Luther, were called ""Protestants" because they protested the power of the Catholic Church . Those who sided with Luther were called "Protestant" by those who did .
 In 1520, a Papal Bull was issued, that officially excommunicated Luther . Luther was officially ex-communicated by the Papal Pope in 1520 .
 It called for his death because of his heresy, unless his document was retracted within 60 days . The document called for him to be killed unless he retracts it . It was published in 17th century and called for the death of him .
 He went on to translate the New Testament into German . Soon the Lutheran religion became the dominant religion in northern Germany .
 William Tyndale translated the Greek version of the New Testament into English . Church authorities prevented him from publishing it in England, so he published it in Germany in 1525 .
 By 1536 he finished translating the Old Testament, but before it could be printed and distributed, he was burned at the stake in Belgium as a religious heretic, by the order of King Henry VIII of England . He was burned in 1536 as a result of his translation .
 In 1537, King Henry authorized the Tyndale Bible to be distributed as the official Bible of the Church . A year later King Henry broke away from the Catholic Church, forming the Church of England . King Henry died of his injuries in 1537 .
 Chapter Nine ""Society of Jesus"") in order to oppose the Protestant movement . Chapter Nine is titled "Society of Jesus"
 Loyola, as a soldier, had been maimed in battle, and claimed a conversion to Catholicism . She claimed to have converted to Catholicism while recuperating in battle .
 He wrote a guidebook called Spiritual Exercises to help people get spiritually closer to Christ .
 On August 15,1534, 1534, in Paris, Loyola and six other men, joined together in taking vows of poverty and chastity . The men took vows to accept any assignment requested by the Pope .
 Most of the French Christian leaders were killed, which practically stopped the Christian movement in France . Carried out by Dominican monks and Roman Catholic troops, most of them were killed .
 The Pope ordered the Rosary said in every church to thank the Virgin Mary for victory . He also had a medal struck to commemorate the occasion .
 Jesuit priests translated Origen's Alexandrian manuscripts into English in 1582, but the new Bible was rejected . In England, Jesuit priests transliterated the Alexandrian Bible into English .
 By 1626, there were 15,000 members of the Jesuit movement . By 1749, there had been over 22,000 .
 On June 1773, Pope Clement XIV, pressured by France, Spain, and Portugal, said that the group was ""immoral and a menace to the Church and the Faith,"" and abolished the Order . In Germany, the government established a Commission to liquidate and inventory Jesuit assets
 Councilor Zuytgens was appointed to inventory all articles at their college in Ruremonde, and to forward all documents to the government . Councilors were also ordered to forward documents to government .
 The book contained secret instructions for the Jesuits, and its leaders, and warned against its discovery . The Jesuits warned against people getting the wrong idea about the Order .
 Jesuits continued to operate secretly, establishing their headquarters in Russia . The Jesuits operated in Russia, establishing headquarters in the country .
 Pope Plus VII re-established the Order after the Congress of Vienna . Demand for their services allegedly to ""make America Catholic" led to the re-establishment of the Order .
 Pope Leo X proclaimed that all human beings must be subject to the Roman Pontiff for salvation . The Pope said that all humans must be under him for their salvation .
 The operation was carried out by a Commission governed by six Cardinals, called the Congregation of the Inquisition . It is governed by a commission of six Cardinals .
 In 1908, Pope Plus X renamed them the Holy Office, charged with maintaining the purity of the faith . As Catholicism expanded, they were only concerned themselves only with maintaining religious order .
 In 1965, Pope Paul Vl reorganized the group, and renamed it the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith . The group was reorganized by the Pope in 1965 .
 Pope Plus Xl said in 1928, that the Roman Catholic Church was the only Church of Christ . The Roman Catholic church is the only church of Christ, according to the Pope .
 Pope Gregory XVI awarded the Rothschild family with a Papal decoration . The Rothschild family was so grateful that he awarded them the Papal award . The family was awarded a Papary decoration .
 The Rothschilds have been one of the financial agents of the Vatican . Ever since then, the Rothschilds were one of their financial agents for the Vatican.
 Properties were sold, relics of the saints were sold and annulments were sold . They also raised money by selling straw from the Pope's bed, candles, rosaries, and images of the Madonna .
 For years, the Popes ruled a 16,000 square mile area in central Italy which was referred to as the Papal States . The Papal State is now known as Italy .
 Italy was reduced to about 4,891 square miles in 1860 when the Kingdom of Italy was formed .
 In September, 1870, Italian troops marched on Rome and ended the temporal power of the Pope . Italian troops limited his sovereignty to the palaces of the Vatican, the Lateran in Rome, and the villa of Castel Gandolfo .
 On February 11,1929, Cardinal Gasparri and Italian Premier Benito Mussolini signed the Treaty of Conciliation . The Treaty established the independent state of Vatican City, Vatican City . It also made Catholicism the official religion of Italy .
 The agreement compensated the Vatican for their lost land, and transferred about 5% of the government's bonds to them . The Vatican compensated the government for the land .
 Thirteen buildings outside the boundaries possess extraterritorial rights, and house people necessary for the administration of the Church . Thirteen of the buildings are located outside of the boundaries .
 The Vatican is the central administrative office of the Roman Catholic Church . With a population of 800, 3,0000 employees, and an operating budget of over $100 million annually, the Vatican is located in Vatican City .
 The Pope wields executive and judicial powers over a religious empire of 1,042,501,000 members in about 20,000 churches . He wields the power of the papacy over the world's largest religious empire .
 They own extensive real estate holdings, own major companies and utilities . They also own priceless works of art, religious artifacts, and massive deposits in Italian and foreign banks .
 Vatican City has their own flag, their own bank and their own license plates . The Institute for Religious Works provides about $10 million a year towards their budget . Radio Vatican broadcasts in thirty languages .
 There are no taxes; and they issue their own passports and citizenship papers . There are also no taxes and there are no passports for citizens .
 They used Antioch manuscripts, and the Jewish Massoretic text, to complete their work in 1611 . They completed their work using Antioch manuscripts .
 Today, it is the most widely accepted version of the Scriptures in the world . The Bible is widely accepted and widely accepted by Christians .
 Separatists became known as Pilgrims after fleeing persecution of King James . William Bradford led many to Holland, in 1608; and in 1619, they joined a larger group in England and sailed to America on the Mayflower, where the Separatist became known .
 41 of the Pilgrim leaders drew up plans for a civil government based on Christian principles . The Mayflower Compact became known as the 'Mayflower Compact' The Compact was created by the Mayflower leaders in 17th century .
 Bradford was elected as the first Governor of the colony . He established a system that was unlike the Jamestown colony in Virginia, based on the communal theories of Plato and Francis Bacon .
 The success of the Plymouth colony brought an influx of others seeking religious freedom from the dominance of the Anglican Church of England . Half of the settlers died during the harsh winter, but half of the colony's population survived .
 To protect their new found freedom, their government took on the form of a theocracy . Theocracy only allowed propertied church members to vote; and there was no tolerance towards other religions .
 As the population grew, the Puritans were unable to maintain their strict control . Other colonies in New England were established as a haven from those frustrated with their rigidity .
 Even though Puritan control was broken in the late 1600's, the New England colonies continued to ban Roman Catholic worship until 1783 . Quakers and Jews, continued to be banned from Roman Catholicism .
 Various religious groups flourished there, such as the Dutch Reformed, Swedish Lutherans, French Protestant , Quakers, and Jews . The city was home to a number of religious groups .
 Quakers, Scotch-lrish Presbyterians, Mennonites, and other pietists from Germany settled in Pennsylvania in 1682 . In 1682, responding to William Penn's ""Holy Experiment", Quakers and Scotch Presbyterians arrived in Pennsylvania .
 Mott chaired the World Congress in Edinburgh to foster inter-church relations and to eliminate overlapping by spreading out their manpower in the missionary field . Mott is a 45-year-old American Methodist minister .
 Out of that, came the Universal Christian Council of Life and Work, at Stockholm, Sweden in 1925; and the World Conference of Faith and Order, at Lausanne in 1927 . Out of this, there have been two World Conferences of faith and Order .
 G Bromley Oxham was a 33rd degree Mason, and Vice-President of a communist organization known as the Methodist Federation for Social Action . Six co-Presidents were appointed to run the organization, including an American .
 Chao and his students welcomed the Communists' actions when they took over China . Chao was later given an official position in the Red Chinese government . Chao and students welcomed their actions .
 Communism ideology promise that freedom will come automatically after the completion of the revolution . Communism ideology...promise that freedom would come automatically . The Communist Party is currently in power in Russia .
 Capitalism puts emphasis on freedom and promises that justice will follow as a by-product of free enterprise . Capitalism puts the emphasis on free enterprise and promises justice as a result of it .
 They also called for the United Nations to accept Red China as a member of a Communist Party . Red China is the only country in the world to have a communist party .
 Martin Niemoeller, President of the WCC, was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize by Russia . He was awarded by Russia for his role in the organisation .
 The Executive Committee meets twice a year, to keep things going between Central Committee meetings . The committee meets twice each year to keep the meetings going .
 Their avowed objective is to uphold the ecumenical movement, and to establish an all-inclusive church . The church is based in the United States and Canada .
 The WCC is made up of liberals, evangelicals, neo-Orthodox, Armenians, Calvinists, Protestants, Lutherans, Anglicans, and Russian Orthodox .
 Most of the non-Roman Catholic Churches belong to . They have been extending invitations to groups such as Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, and Jews . The invitation has been extended to Hindus and Buddhists and Muslims .
 Since then they have been giving financial aid to nearly 46 revolutionary groups in 17 countries . Since then, they have given financial aid .
 Some of the groups are communist, while others had been getting arms from Russia . Some are communist while others are receiving arms from communist Russia .
 Between 1969-79, this Committee, known as the Program to Combat Racism, had provided an average of $2,600,00 a year . The Committee provided $2.600,000 a year between 1969 and 1979 .
 The WCC gave millions of dollars to the Vietcong in North Vietnam . Within a ten-year period, ending with the Vietnam War in 1975, the WCC donated millions .
 The largest United States Church donors to the WCC, had been the Presbyterian Church , United Methodist, Disciples of Christ, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, United . Church of Christ in America .
 National Association of Evangelicals, and its parent organization, the World Evangelical Fellowship; and the American Council of Churches, and the International Council of Christian Churches . The National Evangelical Alliance of Churches is the largest Christian denomination in the world .
 The National Council of Churches of Christ in America is the American subsidiary of the WCC . The group was founded on November 29,1950, after 14 interdenominational organizations merged .
 Actually, it was just a reorganization of the pro-communist Federal Council of Churches, that was founded in 1908 by Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The Federal Council was formed in 1908 . Dr. King was a member of the Federal Council .
 Dr. Walter Rauschenbusch called for ""a new order that would rest on Christian principles of equal rights and democratic distribution of economic power."") Dr. Walter Rauschensbusch was the leading spokesman of socialist Christianity, who called for a new order .
 "This was a subtle way of advocating the communistic principle of the confiscation of private property," he said . This was a way to advocate the private property confiscation .
 In 1907, Rockefeller financed Ward's establishment of the Methodist Foundation of Social Service . The foundation was America's first Communist-front organization . Rockefeller funded Ward's organization .
 This religious institution cast serious doubts as to the virgin birth and divinity of Jesus . The birth of Jesus was the birth of Christ Christ, according to the Catholic Church .
 In 1953, Ward was identified as a Communist by the House Committee on Un-American Activities . Ward was a member of the House of Representatives' Communist Party Party .
 In 1908, they reorganized and changed their name to the Federal Council of Churches . The Federal Council was founded in 1908 . In 1908 they were reorganized .
 After World War II, Rockefeller got involved with the Interchurch World Movement . He contributed over $1 million to its initial budget of $40 million . Rockefeller traveled the country on a national speaking tour .
 He also donated $26 million to build the Riverside Church, which opened in 1930 . The Riverside Church is pastored by Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson . Rev. Jackson donated $25 million to the church .
 Admiral William H Standley, Chief of Naval Operations, publicly accused the Federal Council of Churches of collaborating with the Communists . Later that year, Admiral . Standley publicly accused .
 Rockefeller provided the land for the 15-story triangularshaped Interchurch Center that serves as the headquarters for the National Council of Churches . Rockefeller gave Rockefeller the land to build the center, which is located in a triangular shaped building .
 The membership of the National Council of Churches of Christ in America consists of 36 groups . There are 36 groups in the organization .
 Many NCC pastors are Masons, and in the May 22,1989 edition of Time magazine, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was a member of the Masons .
 The National Council of Churches is responsible for the Revised Standard Version of the Bible . It is based on a Bible Bible that was published in the 1970s .
 They have concerned themselves with civil liberties, social justice, and the theological critique of U.S. foreign policy, particularly in respect to China and Indochina . They have also concerned themselves .
 Domestic Hunger Network also coordinated through the NCC gave a hefty sum to political groups throughout the world . The domestic Hunger Network gave the sum to Political groups .
 Billy Graham was deciding whether to extend or end his revival in 1949 . Billy Graham's tent meeting was suddenly crawling with reporters and photographers . Graham was in Los Angeles at the time of his revival .
 This may be hard to swallow, and you may ask, how Graham, one of the country's greatest Christian leaders, could be linked to the Illuminati . Well, by now, you should understand how they work, so what better person to use is Graham?
 Graham had said that one of his best friends is Jessie Bader, who was the Secretary of Evangelism for the National Council of Churches . Graham said that Bader is a great friend of his .
 Henry Luce refused to publish the book because of pressure from the Kennedy camp . Luce was pressured to publish it because of the pressure from Kennedy camp.
 Billy Graham flew to Washington, DC, and called a meeting at the White House of leading ministers from across the country . Billy Graham was the recipient of quite a backlash from the American people for planning a trip to Red China .
 Both he and Henry Kissinger were able to convince them that the trip to Communist China was necessary . The trip was necessary, Kissinger said .
 Reagan Administration tried to convince him not to go, fearing that he would become a victim of communist propaganda . Reagan Administration feared he would be a victim to communist propaganda.
 Over 2,700 gathered, including Roman Catholic hierarchy, 28 non-Catholic prelates, representatives from most major Protestant denominations, and dignitaries from Eastern Orthodox Churches .
 A few months after the initial meeting, the Council reconvened with 2,500 ecclesiastical dignitaries, and 50 observers from non-Catholic denominations . The Council of the Catholic Church reconvenes again in 2012 .
 The Ecumenical Council's ultimate goal was the universal union of all Christians . A year later, on September 29, 1963, Pope Paul Vl made an appeal for Christian unity .
 He was elected in the 6th year of the previous Pope's reign, in the sixth month, he was 66 years old, and he had completed four sets of 66 Popes . One observation that was made about him, was that he was .
 There had been talk of a merger with the World Council of Churches, to form the Christian Catholic Church of the United Church of Christ .
 It calls for Protestants and Catholics to discontinue their opposition in order to unite against enemies which are common to both of their religious philosophies .
 This seems to be part of a campaign to bring the two religions closer together in ideology . The two religions are divided in ideology.
 Colson accepted the ""Prize for Progress in Religion" from New Age leader John Templeton, at the 1993 Parliament of World's Religions in Chicago . Revelations of a United Nations connection to his Prison Fellowship ministry are highly suspect .
 Evangelical leaders that signed the agreement still retained the aura of religious unity . The two groups were able to hammer out a five-point statement to clarify the support of those Evangelicals .
 Neuhaus was a keynote speaker at the Christian Coalition's(700 Club's political action group) ""1994, Road to Victory Conference"" held in Virginia Beach, Virginia .
 Pat Robertson presented the Christian Coalition's ""Catholic Layman of the Year" Award to Pennsylvania Governor Robert P Casey, a Democrat .
 Pat Robertson lost credibility when he entered the 1992 Presidential campaign, saying God told him to run . Robertson says God said he would run if he ran for President in 1992 . Robertson has lost credibility in the eyes of some Christians . Robertson: "God told me to run"
 He didn't win, it gave him more political clout and visibility . It paved the way for him to receive the mantle of America's most prominent religious leader from Billy Graham .
 As a guest on Larry King's national radio show, he refused to comment on a caller's question about an element of the New World Order . Even though he has written about the order, he has refused to say anything .
 In Pat Robertson's book, The New Millennium, at the top of every page, to the right of the page number, is the symbol of a circle with a dot in the middle . Robertson: "The New Millennium" was published in 1990 .
 An unusual symbol, it is used as an astronomical symbol for the sun . It is used to indicate a place where a comma should be inserted . It has also been used as a mathematical sign for a circle .
 According to documents discovered by the German government in 1785, it was the secret symbol which represented the Illuminati's name . The symbol was discovered by documents found by the government of Germany .
 I contacted Word Publishing to ask them about the use of the symbol, since I didn't want to be accused of making an irresponsible accusation . Word Publishing has not responded to the request .
 Various symbols called ""dingbats" are sometimes incorporated into the header design of a page . They told me that various symbols, called "dingbats", are sometimes used in header design .
 In this case, the symbol was randomly chosen, and nobody at Word was even aware of the symbol's connotations . Nobody at Word even knew of the connotations of the word .
 Chapter Nine considered that perhaps the symbol was used to sabotage the book, but Word maintains that everyone there is a committed Christian . Chapter Nine had even considered that maybe perhaps perhaps . perhaps perhaps  perhaps the symbol was . used to sabotage the book .
 There are no other symbols, that I know of, that would lend itself to having any connections with the New World Order . If it was randomly chosen, it would really be a coincidence, because there is no other symbol .
 Robertson's The New World Order was published by Word in 1991 . Robertson's book is a companion volume to his 1991 book The World of the World Order .
 It remains to be seen whether there was truly a reason for that symbol to be used, and for now, I guess we have to chalk it up as being an amazing coincidence .
 His ministry has been a tremendous witness in this country . His efforts as part of the Religious Right certainly contributed to the conservative swing this country has taken .
 Family Channel succeeded in beginning the movement towards more family-oriented programming . His connection to the entertainment industry through the Family Channel .
 I can not ignore the trend towards tolerance and coexistence that is succeeding to bring us closer to a united Church, which he seems to advocate . However, I can't ignore the disturbing trend towards tolerating people in the church .
 Jack van Impe said that he agreed with the Pope on almost every issue . He agreed with him on almost everything, including the Pope . Van Impe says that he agrees with Pope's views .
 "He has done a tremendous amount of prophetic research, and yet he is contributing to the ecumenical movement. Now here is a man who has done ... prophetic research," he says .
 The underlying power to all occult practices, is Satanism . The worship of Satan is in opposition to the worship of God . Satanism is a form of Satanism that opposes God .
 It is the worship of Satan which has been the driving force behind the Illuminati conspiracy, says the author . The worship of the Satan is behind the conspiracy, he says .
 The word 'witchcraft' is derived from the Anglo-Saxon word 'wicca-craft' which means 'craft of the wise' Witchcraft is considered the world's oldest religion and is considered to be the oldest religion .
 It is a descendent of the Druids, who existed in the British Isles, Scotland, and Ireland . The Druids existed in Scotland, Ireland, and Scotland .
 Druids were members of a priesthood made up of the upper class of Celt society, who were exempt from taxes and manual labor . Druids are exempt from manual labor and taxes . The Druids have been known to be the most powerful men in the world .
 Their name comes from the Celtic word ""daur"" which means ""oak tree"", which was sacred to them . Their name is derived from the word "daur" which means oak tree .
 It was alleged that they possessed strange powers, such as being able to produce mists, storms, floods, and cast spells .
 Some of their rituals included both animal and human sacrifice . As it turned out, these men were greatly feared .
 The earliest mention of these ""men of the oak"" was in the 3rd century BC . What little information that is available comes from Roman and Greek historians, and ancient records found in Ireland .
 For the most part, their legacy has been passed down orally from generation to generation . The most part of their legacy is that they have passed down oral oral oral traditions .
 Samhein is the Horned Hunter of the Night (Satan), the Oak God of the Underworld, and the God of The Dead . The biggest night of the year, was the ceremony known as the ""Vigil of Sam hein" on October 31st .
 Many of their rites centered around such astronomical occurrences as equinoxes and solstices . The rites were centered around these astronomical occurrences .
 Stonehenge, built in 2750 BC on the Salisbury Plain, was later used by the Druids as a temple for sacrifices . It is believed to have been used as a solar observatory by 1900 BC .
 The lineal successor to the religion of the Druids, was British Witchcraft, which became strong in the 120O's . Witchcraft is a form of religion that has its roots in witchcraft and sorcery .
 Witches are polytheists who believe in the superiority of the mother goddess who controls the fertility rites, and the process of birth and life . Polytheists believe that the goddess controls fertility rites .
 They worship a horned god which represents death and the afterlife; and a number of lesser deities . They also worship a Horned god, which represents the afterlife .
 White Sorcery is practiced out of the La Clavicule de Solomon, which was said to be written by King Solomon, but was actually written in the 14th or 15th century . The Key of Solomon is said to have been written by the King Solomon .
 Witches claim that their religion is not anti-Christian, because they worship deities in existence before the advent of the Christian era . Witches claim to worship deities that existed before the age of Christianity . Witches worship deities from the ages before Christianity .
 Chapter 9 witchcraft, and their churches, are recognized as tax-deducted entities . Chapter Nine witchcraft, or witchcraft, is recognized as a tax-exempt entity .
 It has been reported, that the spread of Witchcraft and the occult, has been the job of an inner circle of the Illuminati, known as the Council of 13, or the Grand Druid Council .
 The deities they worship are actually demons, and the ""horned hunter of the night"" is actually Satan . The god they worship is actually demons and Satan is the reason for worship .
 Many witches have realized, that in order to get more ""power"", they have to surrender more of themselves, moving into the direction of all-out Satan worship .
 Satanic charms, amulets, and talismans have now infiltrated our society, even our churches . Satanic charms and amules are now infiltrating society, including churches .
 The charms, which attract demons, are used in demon worship and to cast spells . The charms are believed to attract demons and are used to attract them .
 It had been impossible to buy them, and were only available in witchcraft bookstores, because they were handmade and sold to occult stores . They were handmade, sold to witchcraft book stores .
 Now they are marketed commercially to spread the influence of witchcraft . They are now being marketed commercially as a means of spreading witchcraft .
 The Unicorn Horn was a symbol used by Druid priests . The most notorious of these was called the Unicorn Horn, used by Druids .
 It is now called the Italian Horn, and it means that you trust Satan for your finances . The Italian Horn is now known as 'Satan Horn' and means that Satan is Satan .
 It is available from most jewelry manufacturers and is frequently worn . It is often worn around the world .
 Remember the peace symbol, which was prominently displayed by the anti-war protesters of the 1960's and 70's . The peace symbol is a symbol of peace .
 During the Middle Ages, this symbol was known as the ""crow's foot"", the insignia of Satan . This symbol was the symbol of Satan, and was also known as a symbol of evil .
 It was first used as a ""peace"" symbol on February 21,1958, at the Aldermaston Easter Walk in England, led by Lord Bertrand Russell .
 Fairy Tales-Alleqories of the Inner Life are linked to the occult, author says . Author: Fairy tales are linked with the occult . Cooper: Fairy Tales is linked to occult .
 Cooper said that the practice of kissing frogs, is a pagan ritual that dates back to prehistoric days . Cooper said kissing frogs is a practice that is believed to have originated in prehistoric times .
 In the story of Hansel and Gretel, the two children encountered a witch . The two children encounter a witch in Hansel's tale . The story is based on the book, "Gretel and Hansel"
 One of the greatest victories of the occult movement was to infiltrate the music world . occult courses were established at colleges and universities .
 Druids knew that when certain chords were struck, it acted as a hypnotic suggestion to stir rebellion . The music that was performed during Druid ceremonies, had a ""rock"" beat, and they knew that .
 Witches have their own language, and some rock songs have incorporated these coded incantations .
 On the surface, what sounds like a bunch of strange words, is actually an intentionally written lyric of hidden meaning . The song was written with the intention of creating a lyric with hidden meanings .
 Acid rocker Jimi Hendrix said in an interview with Life magazine that ""music is a spiritual thing of its own"
 Some of Elton John's songs have allegedly been written in witch language . Some of the songs have been allegedly written in witchcraft language .
 It became one of the biggest selling records in music history, and is still one of most requested songs on rock format radio stations .
 Page said it was taken from the writings of a Druid priest, hundreds of years ago, which was based on the Bible . Page said they were taken from writings of Druid priest based on Bible .
 The song also used a process known as ""backward masking" which is accomplished when a phrase is recorded on tape, played backwards, then recorded again on the master tape .
 There were no windows or doors in the room, and that fire was coming at him . He was hallucinating from drugs, and was imagining that there was no windows .
 Black Oak Arkansas lead singer Jim Landy utters something unintelligible, then laughs . During the song, ""The Day Electricity Came to Arkansas"" the lead singer laughs . The lead singer is known for his raunchy lyrics .
 Critics of backward masking say it's a myth that the government is trying to cover up its mistakes .
 In the opinion of the judge, in his statement to the court, when any segment of human speech is played backwards, it will inevitably contain sounds than can be interpreted as cohesive sentences, but they are purely coincidental and not evil messages put there .
 The face of the church's founder, Anton LaVey, can be seen in a window on the inside cover . The church was founded in 1903 in the early 1900s .
 The Satanic Bible was written by LaVey in 1969 . The Church is located on California Street, and the song refers to 1969 .
 In January, 1983, Congressman Jack McCoy proposed legislation that would require albums which utilized ""back-masking"" to bear warning labels .
 If such a record failed to display such a warning, then it would be confiscated . The record would then be confiscated if it failed to show such an error .
 When it got to the Senate, they amended the penalty to a Class A Misdemeanor, and when it was sent back to the House for concurrence, they tabled it . The penalty was amended to be a class A misdemeanor .
 McCoy vowed to reintroduce the Bill during the next session of Congress . McCoy has vowed to introduce the Bill in a new session .
 Many groups also use occult symbols on their album covers, even though the public doesn't think of it that way .
 Rush and Starz, use the inverted five-pointed star(which represents Satan, the horned hunter of the night); the Blue Oyster Cult, used an inverted Satanic cross, with the bottom section replaced with an upside-down question mark . Rush uses inverted five pointed
 Deep Purple recorded in a 17th century castle that is said to be haunted by a demon who is a servant of the Babylonian god Baal . Deep Purple has recorded in the 17th Century castle .
 The name of Ozzy Osbourne usually comes up because he bit off the head of a bat in concert (because he thought it was a rubber one) and bit off a dove in the office of his record company . Rumors of him throwing live puppies into the crowd during the 1983
 This rumor grew out of an incident at an Alice Cooper concert where someone through a live chicken on the stage and he through it back at the audience thinking it would fly away . The bird was torn to pieces by the audience .
 MTV, owned by Warner Communications, broadcasts rock music 24 hours a day to millions of cable subscribers across the country . MTV is a network of rock and pop music networks that airs 24 hours of a day .
 The Illuminati has been working behind the scenes to ensnare our youth, by weakening our moral fiber with pornography, encouraging the use of alcohol and drugs, and seeking the destruction of the family unit . The Illuminati wants to destroy our youth's moral fiber .
 The 1980's and 90's have brought an explosion of interest in the supernatural, and its level of acceptance has increased because of graphic horror movies and rock music . The 80's, 90's and 80's were the most popular horror films .
 Michael Myers, Jason, and Freddy Krueger became heroes to the youth of this country who were fascinated by this kind of power . "Nightmare on Elm Street" became a cult favorite of the youth .
 Role-playing games, like Dungeons and Dragons, which contain occult material, have become wildly popular . Some of those games have contributed to the deaths of some participants .
 Many kids are being seduced into the occult because of the allure of having power, and feeling accepted . The occult is a way of being accepted by many people, says author .
 Some come from disfunctional homes, being raised in an environment void of love . Some are raised in a disfunctional home . Others are raised without love .
 The problem with this mentality, is that there are too many external conflicts. The problem is that this mentality is too much of an external conflict, he says .
 "Nothing has done more damage to the youth of this country, than to have prayer taken out of our schools," says President Obama . "The youth has been affected by this," says Obama .
 "Much of the decline of morality in this country can be traced to that single incident," he says . Much of the . decline in morality in the . country can't be pinned to that one incident, he adds .
 With the weapon of first amendment rights, our children are being bombarded with sex, violence, and drugs, says author . "Our children are bombing with drugs, violence and drugs," she says .
 Others witnessed ""a great coronet of brilliant, shimmering blue"" appearing above his head . Others witnessed a great  coronet appear before himself appearing in the sky .
 A biographer later wrote: ""Although he was only a little boy when she brought him from India to London, he hardly moved and did not speak when introduced at a party at Charing Cross, those who were present professed to feel a strange 'vibration' coming from
 Theosophists accepted him as their Messiah when he addressed a conference in Holland . Thousands of thousands of people fell at his feet in homage, accepting him .
 A visitor to the conference afterwards testified, 'When he spoke, it was awe inspiring' A visitor at the conference said, 'It was awe-inspiring. A visitor .
 When he came to America in 1926, his occult powers failed him, and his spirit guides left him . However, when he moved to America, he was unable to find his spirit guide .
 His speaking engagements were canceled, and he later denied that he was the ""Christ" He renounced the Theosophical Society and renounced Theosophy Society .
 The spirit that inhabited Jiddu had to leave him . Because America, at that time, was still, for the most part, a Christian, Bible-believing nation, had to .
 He retired in 1929, broke all connections with organized philosophy, and became a popular mystic writer and speaker . He retired from organized philosophy in 1929 .
 In 1969, Krishnamurti established a foundation to publish and distribute his teachings . In 1969 he established the Krishnamurist Foundation of America to publish teachings .
 His library and archives are continuing to feed a new generation his brand of New Age teaching .
 Bruce Lee is listed as a contributing editor of Bruce Lee magazine, the official publication and voice of the Jun Fan Jeet Kune Kune Do nucleus . He is the editor of the Bruce Lee Magazine .
 Her writings were telepathically sent to her by Tibetan Djuhal Khul, who said that there was going to be a new world government and a new religion . Collaborating with other occultists, she claimed to be working out mankind's spiritual destiny .
 Years later, Perry Coles tried to downplay the sinister overtones, by saying that ""lucis"" comes from the Latin word ""lux"", which means ""of light" The word is used in the context of being ""bringers of light"", and doesn't
 The occult publisher is one of the biggest publishers of occult material in the country . Yet they are also the biggest publisher of occult materials .
 Robert McNamara, Donald Regan, Henry Kissinger, David Rockefeller, Paul Volcker, and George Shultz . Henry Kissinger and David Rockefeller were also on the panel .
 In her Externalization of the Hierarchy she said that the New Age will be in full bloom after the global crisis occurs and the world turns to ""Christ"" for leadership . The world will turn to "Christ" for leadership when the crisis occurs .
 She felt that the term ""Christ"" could be applied to any person who reached an elevated state of consciousness, thereby achieving a divine status . The term 'Christ' was applied to anyone who reached a state of consciousness and achieved a divine status .
 Only a few souls found enough favor with the spiritual hierarchy of the reincarnated ancient Masters to be chosen to return to earth as an avatar . The avatar was chosen by the reincarnations of the ancient Masters .
 Bailey said her ""hidden Masters"" told her that 1975 was the time to begin open propagation of their plans . Bailey said that her 'hidden Masters' told her to do so in 1975 . Bailey: 1975 is the time for 'open propagation'
 They hope to usher in the ""Age of Aquarius"" and their goal is to be a oneworld religion . The goal is a onworld religion .
 It is nothing more than a revival of the ancient Babylonian religion, and a dressed-up version of witchcraft . The group hope to introduce witchcraft to every aspect of society . They say they want to introduce the religion to society .
 They are working to integrate New Age teaching into religion, and in the process, they are trying to discredit Christianity, says Christian leader David Frum .
 For instance, New Agers have latched onto the ""lost years"" of Jesus, the period between his boyhood and the beginning of his ministry, which are omitted from the Bible . The period between the boyhood of Jesus and his ministry is omitted .
 Kevin Ryerson, the demon channeler for actress Shirley Maclaine, says that his spirit guides told him that Jesus studied for 18 years in India before he returned to Jerusalem . Ryerson says that Jesus spent 18 years studying in India .
 Elizabeth Clare Prophet in her book The Lost Years of Jesus, said that she discovered, through documents she found in the Himalayas, that when Jesus was a youth, he joined a caravan to the East, and studied under ""wise men"" who taught him mysticism .
 He claimed that Jesus traveled through Egypt, India and Persia, and it was in Persia that he learned from the Mystery Religion teachers .
 New Age leaders claim this information was censored in the 6th century by the Church . They say this information has been censored by the church .
 A book called Jesus Lived in India, by Holger Kerston, has gone as far as to say that after the ""resurrection"" of Jesus, he returned to India, and his tomb in Kashmir can still be seen .
 An evil Satan who doesn't exist, will vanish from man's memory, says author . "Evil Satan who didn't exist" will vanish in the New Age, he says .
 Luciferians worshiped him, believing him to be the brother of God, and taught that he was wrongly cast out of Heaven . New Agers refer to the writings of a 14th century gnostic group, called Luciferians .
 The Omega-Letter reported that the New Age movement is the fastest growing religion in America . The New Age Movement is also known as a spiritual movement .
 People are being drawn into the New Age movement because of its propaganda regarding social injustices, environmental concerns, and ending world hunger . People are drawn to the movement due to its propaganda .
 New Age movement has grown to such an extent, that thousand of groups are now a part of the network, including: Human Potential Movement, New Thought, Consciousness Movement, Holistic Movement, Whole Earth, and Unity .
 Association for Humanistic Psychology, the Holistic Health Organizing Committee, Association for World Organization, and the Movement for a New Society. The Hunger Project, Planetary Citizens, Planetary Initiative for the World We Choose.
 Lola Davis identified the New Age ""Christ"" as Lord Maitreya, who has been labeled as an avatar and a world teacher . The New Age 'Christ' has been identified by Lola . Lola has been called an avatar of the world .
 It promised that the ""Christ"" would appear ""within the next two months"" and that his message will be heard inwardly, telepathically, by all people in their own language . The message was said to be heard by all of the world .
 Rahmat Ahmad is the great-great grandson of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, who claimed that he was the Messiah, sent to unite the entire world in a New World Religion . Rahmat was born in the 1800's in India, and claimed to have been the Messiah .
 It has been revealed that he was born in February, 1962 in Rabwah, Pakistan, then went to England in July, 1977, in preparation for his role in the film .
 New Agers believed that the birth of the new ""Christ" was prophesied by Jeanne Dixon . The birth of Lord Maitreya was predicted by many Old Testament prophets . Jeanne Dixon was a New Ager .
 Shortly before sunrise on February 5,1962, Dixon had an unusual experience . Dixon had the unusual experience before sunrise .
 Astrologers had predicted an earth-shaking event on that day because of a rare conjunction of Jupiter, Saturn and Venus in the constellation of Pisces .
 A similar conjunction which occurred nearly 2,000 years ago, is believed by some to explain the ""bright star in the east"" at the time of the birth of Jesus . The conjunction is believed to have occurred at the same time of Jesus' birth .
 As she looked outside, she didn't see any trees, or the street, just a blue sky, above a barren desert . She looked up at the sky as she looked out, looking like she was in a desert .
 Coming from the sun in every direction were brilliant rays which seemed to be drawing the earth toward it like a magnet . The sun's rays seemed to draw the earth towards the earth .
 Pharaoh and Queen Nefertiti stepped out of the brightness of the sun's rays, hand-in-hand .
 The eyes of the child were ""all-knowing""(the all-seeing eye on the Illuminati seal?), full of wisdom and knowledge . The eyes were "full of wisdom" and full of knowledge, according to the child .
 Rays of light burst forth from the baby, blending with those of the sun, obliterating the Pharaoh from her sight . The Pharaoh was obliterated from the sight .
 Dixon saw Queen Nefertiti walking away, thousands of miles into the past . Off to the left, Dixon saw her walking away .
 She paused beside a large brown water jug, and as she stooped to cup her hands and drink, she was stabbed in the back by a dagger .
 The baby, meanwhile, had grown to manhood, and a small cross formed above him, expanding until it dripped over the earth in every direction . The baby had grown up, and the cross appeared above him .
 At the same time, people of every race, religion, and color, all knelt and lifted their arms in worship; and were all as one .
 Dixon interpreted this to mean that there was a child born somewhere in the Middle East, shortly after February 5,1962, of humble peasant origin, possibly a direct descendent of Queen Nefertiti . The child was born in the Mideast of humble peasants . Dixon interpreted
 Pharaoh Amenhotep IV had changed his name to lkhnaton, and built a city, Tell-el-Amarna, protected by impregnable cliffs, to worship the sun god .
 Tutankhaton became Pharaoh at the age of twelve and changed his name to Tutankhamon . He destroyed all traces of Atonism, returning to the worship of earlier gods .
 The sun could be a symbol of the one world religion that is to come . If the child isn't a direct descendent, it could be the symbol of a new religion .
 When the Illuminati was established, their secret code utilized the planetary symbol for the sun to signify the Order . The sun was used to signify Order .
 Robert Mueller, a former Assistant Secretary-General of the UN, has supported a one-world religion organized along the same lines as the UN . Mueller has suggested that the UN flag be displayed in all the churches and a universal Bible be written .
 His views were molded by his ""Master"", former Secretary-General U Thant, a Buddhist and one worlder . His views have been molded by Thant's "Master"
 In his book The New Genesis, he calls for the New Age to be ushered in by the year 2000 .
 We can see New Age philosophy being advocated on television, and in the movies . New Age philosophies are being advocated in television and movies .
 New Age meditation techniques have been introduced in our public schools . There seems to be no end as to how far they will go to spread the New Age message .
 Chapter Nine had been involved with the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, later converting to Hinduism . Chapter Nine was involved with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and later converting to Hinduism. Chapter Nine converted to the Hinduism and later converted to Christianity .
 The New Age movement is nothing more than a politically-correct form of witchcraft . Its purpose is to deceive, says Dr. John Sutter .
 What we want is a man of sufficient stature to hold the allegiance of the people, and to lift us out of the economic morass into which we are sinking . We want a man who holds the allegiance to the people and lifts us from the morass .
 Such a man will arise, and his ascent to power is discussed in various places in the Bible, says the author of the Bible . The Bible says such a man would arise and rise to power .
 I believe that the Illuminati has been working behind the scenes to create an environment, that will enable one man to gain enough power to finally pull the countries of Europe together into one political entity .
 Chapter Ten devour the whole earth, and shall trod it down, and break it in pieces . Chapter 10 devour . The Bible says: "The whole earth shall be trod down and broken down" Chapter Ten will devour. The Bible will break it down .
 And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies . And power was given to him to continue forty and two months .
 Even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition. And the beast that was, and not, even he is . Even he was the eighth and is the .
 The ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom yet, but receive power as kings one hour with the beast . And the ten horns that thou sawst are 10 kings, they have received .
 The Scriptures have given us an excellent indication of the origin of the man who will be known as the Antichrist . The Scriptures give us a very good indication of his origin, says the author .
 Daniel 8:8 refers to the four powers who are Greece, Turkey, Syria, and Egypt; . Daniel 7:7-8 speaks of the seventh world empire, consisting of ten kingdoms, and the rise of another . Daniel: The rise of the seven world empire was the rise
 France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, England, Denmark, Ireland, Ireland and Greece . The ten horns or kingdoms were the original Common Market countries of France and West Germany . The 10 horns and kingdoms were formed by France, Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands
 The impact of the theory was lessened upon the later addition of Spain, Portugal, and Austria, which made a total of thirteen nations in what is now called the European Union .
 Belgium, Denmark, Liechtenstein, Liechtstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and the Netherlands .
 According to Daniel 7:20, this leader of the eleventh country, will go against three of these nations, and defeat them . According to the Bible, the leader of this country will defeat three of the nations, according to Daniel .
 Revelation speaks of the ten kings pledging their allegiance to the Antichrist . Revelation says they pledged allegiance to Christ, but not the Christ . Revelation also says they pledge allegiance to Jesus Christ .
 Will he defeat the three nations, and replace them in the federation with his, and two others? Will he replace them with his and two other nations?
 Or will the three defeated nations remain, under the leadership of the eleventh? Or will they remain? The 11th will be the leader of the world's most powerful nations .
 What is the purpose for the Antichrist to go against these three nations? What is a purpose for him to go on these three countries?
 Is it because they were not originally part of the revived Holy Roman Empire? Or if they were, what else could prompt him to attack these countries? Or maybe it's because they weren't part of it?
 One clue, is that nations may be apprehensive about uniting behind the political leadership of the Antichrist . One clue is that these nations may not unite behind the leader of the Satanist .
 Great Britain and Denmark voted against the initiation of a common currency in 1991 . The European Community met in Maastricht, the Netherlands, in 1991, in the Netherlands . Denmark and Great Britain voted against a single currency .
 Aramaeans, a seminomadic people who migrated from the Arabian desert around the third century BC, migrated into Syria and Mesopotamia . They have also been called Syrians .
 The land of the Chaldeans was in Babylonia, in what is now southern Iraq . The land was in southern Babylonian, in the region of modern Iraq .
 These references seem to point to an Arabic background, and are given credence because they consider themselves the enemies of Israel . These references were made in reference to the fact that Israel is considered an enemy of the country .
 In Revelation, John omitted the name of Dan when he listed the tribes of Israel . John omitted Dan in the seventh chapter of Revelation, Revelation .
 The people that destroyed Jerusalem and the Temple in 70 AD, were the Romans . The Romans destroyed the Temple and Jerusalem and destroyed the city .
 Charlemagne, Charles V, Louis XIV, Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm, Benito Mussolini, and Hitler all tried to take over Europe to unify it, but failed . Napoleon, Henry VIII, Charles VII, Napoleon and Kaiser Wilhelm among those who have tried to .
 The Antichrist will be a strong political leader, who will gain strength through statesmanship and promises of peace . He says he will be strong statesman and promises peace .
 If Western Europe would unite as one power to have economic, military and political unity, they would be a truly great power, says McGeorge Bundy .
 Time magazine even wrote that the real aim of the Common Market was to become a single country . Time magazine said the aim was to create a single European country .
 Through the policies of the Antichrist, he will revolutionize industry, agriculture, commerce, and business to bring economic prosperity . The policies will bring prosperity to the world .
 In the past ten years, an incredible revelation has been made in regard to the unity of Europe, the forces behind it, and its relationship to the man who will rise to prominence in Europe's political community .
 "Let me relate the information as it has been presented, and afterward I will comment on how it may fit into the scheme of things," says the author of the book .
 These are views which represent a radical departure from those traditionally held by Christians . Before you read the section, 1 have to warn you that these are views . 1 have a warning: These are radical views .
 I do not share these views, but only include them because of how they may have a bearing on prophecy . I only include these views in this article because they may relate to prophecy .
 In 1891, in Rennes-le-Chateau, a tiny southern French mountaintop village, made a discovery while doing renovations to restore a church which had been dedicated to Mary Magdalene in 1059 .
 The altar stone had been removed, which rested on two old Visigoth columns, one of which was found to be hollow . It was removed from the site, which was discovered to be a hollow .
 Chapter Ten which carried the seal of Queen Blanche de Castille, mother of King Louis IX; and the other dated from 1644 by Francois-Pierre d'Hautpoul . Chapter Ten was dated to 1644 .
 The Testament of Henri d'Hautpoul, dated 1695, was written in French, and is believed to be a complex code detailing a state secret . The other parchment, written in the 1780's by a priest, Antoine Bigou, contained two coded Biblical texts
 Sauniere went to Paris to present the parchments to Church authorities . He was in France at the time of his death .
 A flagstone dating to the 7th or 8th century was removed, allegedly revealing a burial chamber which contained skeletons . Also during the restoration, a flagstone was removed from a burial room . The burial chamber was allegedly revealed to contain skeletons .
 There has been much speculation about what this treasure could have been . It is not known what the treasure was discovered .
 The Grail was believed to be a chalice made of gold, which was first used by Melchizedek as he offered bread and wine to Abraham on Mount Moriah . The Grail is believed to have been used by Abraham Abraham as a gift to him .
 It was guarded in a Phoenician temple in Tyre, the city of Hiram, the king who designed and built Solomon's Temple . It is guarded in the city in Hiram's birthplace of Solomon .
 It fell into the hands of the Queen of Sheba, who gave it to King Solomon, and it was last used by Jesus and the disciples during the Last Supper . It was last seen by the disciples at Jesus' last meal .
 Mary Magdalene or Joseph of Arimathea caught the blood of Jesus as it dripped off his body while he hung on the cross . Other traditions have said that it was used to catch the blood .
 It is believed that Joseph took the cup to Glastonbury in England; while others claim that Mary took it with her to Marseilles in France .
 Cathars descended from the Bogomils in Bulgaria and existed around the 10th and 11th centuries . The Cathars were perceived to be a wealthy people, and were said to possess a treasure beyond material wealth .
 In January, 1244, three months before the fall of their fortress in Montsegur, two men got out with the gold, silver, and money .
 As their defeat seemed eminent, the northern invaders served them with terms of surrender in March, and gave the Cathars two weeks to make a decision .
 One of the terms of this ""cease-fire" was that if anyone tried to escape, they would be killed . The terms were part of the conditions of the 'cease fire'
 Four men escaped with a rope, down the sheer western face of the fortress . A day before the surrender, when they would have been released, they escaped . The four men were released a day before surrender .
 The gold and silver was smuggled out three months before, but what did they risk their lives to protect? It's not clear what they were risking their lives .
 Others believe that the treasure Sauniere found, may have been the Temple treasure .
 Chapter Ten believed that they may have gotten all of the Temple wealth, including the Ark of the Covenant . Chapter Ten thought that the Temple may have had all the Temple's wealth . The Ark was believed to be the most valuable piece of the Ark .
 Could the treasure discovered by Sauniere have been the treasure plundered from the Temple grounds by the Knights Templar? Or, could the treasure . Or, may the treasure have been discovered by the . Knights Templar . Or the treasure could have been found by the French explorer .
 Many of the Crusaders who went to Palestine to fight against the Moslem invaders were French Catholics . By 1061, they had conquered Jerusalem, and established Godfroi de Bouillon, Duke of Lower Lorraine, on the throne of Jerusalem .
 His aims were to possess the wealth of the world, including the Temple treasure, and establish world government which would be controlled by a Merovingian king in Jerusalem . His aims included to possess world's wealth, including Temple treasure and establishing world government .
 Through alliances and intermarriages, this line continued through Godfroi . Through alliances, the line continued to prosper in Russia .
 This bloodline was known as a ""royal tradition...founded on the rock of Sion,"" which was considered to be equal to other European dynasties . The bloodline is considered equal to those of European dynasts considered equal .
 Their headquarters was at the Abbey of Notre Dame du Mont de Sion, in southern Jerusalem on Mount Sion . The ruins of a Byzantine basilica from the 4th century stood, which was called the Mother of All Churches .
 It was Prieure' de Sion that created the Knights Templar as its military arm . Godfroi's younger brother, Baudouin I, became the first king of Jerusalem .
 In 1118, Hugues de Payen, a nobleman from Champagne, and Godfroi de St. St. Mignignay, a Champagne nobleman, were married . The couple married in 1118 .
 Omer, a French Knight, along with seven other Knights, founded the Order of the Knights Templars . Omer was one of seven Knights who founded the Knights Templar .
 St. Augustine taught his followers to use swords, arms, and strength to defend the Christian faith . They were instructed to defend their faith by using their swords and arms .
 The group took vows of chastity and poverty, and promised not to join any other organization . They also took vows to not be involved in any other organizations .
 They pledged to ""keep the roads and highways safe...for the protection of pilgrims"" and not to surrender any wall, or foot of land .
 They offered their services to Baudouin I, the King of Jerusalem, and an entire wing of the royal palace on the Temple Mount was given to them to be used as living quarters .
 In 1139, Pope Innocent II decreed that these Knights of Christ owed their allegiance to no one but the Pope . They began to wear white robes with a red cross on the front, and they began to become a military arm of the Church .
 For nine years, the Knights were searching for something beneath the Temple grounds . Evidence points to the fact that they might have found something .
 The Temple Mount was plundered by the Templars and taken to Europe . It became the basis for the establishment of the international banking system . It is believed that 24 of these locations were under the Temple Mount .
 In 1153, Bertrand de Blanchefort became the 4th Grand Master of the Knights Templars . He lived only a couple of miles from Rennes-le-Chateau, France .
 He escalated their growth into the diplomatic and political circles, and established a Templar presence in the area . The Templar Templar was established in the Middle Ages .
 The Order spread to Tripoli, Antioch, Cyprus, Portugal, Castile, Leon, Arragon, France, Flanders, the Netherlands, England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, Italy and Sicily .
 In 1187, after the fall of Jerusalem to Saladin, they were forced to move their headquarters to the island of Cyprus . In 1188, the Prieureure' de Sion withdrew their control from the Knights Templars .
 The Knights became the bankers of Europe through their organization and wealth . They moved their headquarters to a Temple in Paris, and through their wealth, they became the banking of Europe .
 By the end of the 12th century, they had 30,000 members, and fought in the wars of their own countries . They fought in their own country's own wars .
 Between 1303-05, King Philip had Pope Boniface Vlll kidnapped and killed, and had his successor, Pope Benedict Xl, poisoned . King Philip then had his own man, Clement V, elected to the vacant papal throne .
 Pope Clement worked with Philip to destroy the power and influence of the Knights, the Merovingian bloodline, and to confiscate their treasures .
 In Germany, Spain, and Cyprus, they were acquitted of any charges . But not in England, Italy, and France, where they were found guilty .
 On October 13,1307, all the Templars in France were arrested, amidst charges by a former member, and an investigation by Pope Clement . Pope Clement said that they appeared to serve Christ, but actually worshipped Lucifer .
 A silver bust of a woman's head, with a hinged top, contained two head bones wrapped in a white cloth . When opened, the head bones were wrapped around a red cloth around that . The head bones are wrapped in white cloth, with the white cloth around the red cloth
 The skeletal remains were believed to be part of the skeletal remains of Mary Magdalene . They are believed to have been found in the early days of the 16th century .
 It was revealed, that part of the initiation, required the initiate to deny, curse, and spit at the cross, as part of a gesture symbolizing St. Mary's Day .
 Peter's denial of Christ, thus introducing the candidate to the Order as a sinner, so they could teach him the ways of Christianity . The candidate was invited to join the Order to learn from Peter's rejection of Christ . Peter denied Christ, so the Order was able to teach him
 Knights had actually become opposed to the Pope, when they realized Vatican's pagan relationship to sun worship . In actuality, the Knights were opposed to Pope, and since the Catholic Church had become so identified with St. Francis, they had become opposed .
 In 1312, Pope Clement ordered that the Knights Templars were to be suppressed . The Knights Templar were suppressed by Pope Clement in 1312 .
 On March 18,1314, Jacques de Molay, the 22nd Grand Master of the Knights, Geoffrey de Charney, and two of their highest officers were burned at the stake for trying to overthrow the government . The Knights' Grand Master was burned at stake .
 In England, the Templars established the first modern Masonic lodge at York, it was identified as the York Rite . In France, it became known as the Scottish Rite, while in France it was called Scottish Rite .
 Masonry is the highest attainable degree in Masonry . Order of Masonry was created to signify accomplishments of the Order .
 Capt. Sauniere's niece, Madame James of Montazels, inherited the parchments in 1917 . She kept them until 1965 when she sold them to Capt. Capt. James . Capt. Jacques sold them in 1965 when he died .
 Only two of the parchments have been released, the contents of the other two have not been revealed . Only two have been revealed, only two have revealed the contents .
 In the original sources concerning the Holy Grail, references are not to a cup, but to a mystery . The Holy Grail is a mystery, not a cup of gold .
 In the 1180's, ""Le Roman de Perceval"", a poem by Chretien de Troyes, chronicles one of the men seeking knighthood . The poem chronicles a man seeking his knighthold .
 Chapter Ten King "" he sees the Grail, which is golden and studded with jewels . Chapter 10 King"" he sees . The Grail, a golden and is studded . with jewels, is the Grail .
 Perceval discovers that he is a member of the ""Grail family"" because the custodian of the Grail is his uncle . Percival discovers he is the heir to the Grail because he is his unclean and his uncle .
 The story lived on, becoming closely aligned with King Arthur . However, the story was never published in England .
 The most noted version is ""Parzival" written between 1195 and 1216 by Wolfram von Eschenbach, a Bavarian Knight who claimed that Chretien's version was inaccurate because Wolfram received his information from a more reliable source . Wolfram's version of the
 His preoccupation is with the Grail family, the genealogy, or bloodline . But more important is he preoccupations with the family, genealogy and bloodlines .
 The Grail had more to do with blood, and not a cup which held blood . So therefore, the Grail actually had more than a cup of blood . The Grail was more important to the Grail than the cup which was made of a cup .
 In 1964, an ancient parchment scroll was excavated on the western shore of the Dead Sea, at the ruins of the fortress of Masada . The scroll was found in 1964 on the shores of Israel's Dead Sea .
 The Roman Army spent three years with a legion of 6,000 men, and 15,000 Jewish slaves, to build an assault tower in order to destroy the last vestiges of Jewish resistance . The Roman army spent 3 years building the assault tower with the help of a legion and
 Three skeletons found in the palace at the northern end of the complex were believed to be that of Eleazar ben Ja'ir, the Jewish commander, his wife and child . Either the Roman centurions were unaware of this group which were separated from the main complex .
 The document had been written on the evening of April 15, 70 AD, just after the Roman battering ram had compromised the fortress gate, and was pulled back, to await the Roman attack which would come at first light . Chapter Ten was written just before the Roman assault on the fortress
 The document was signed by Yeshua ben Ya'akob ben Gennesareth . Yeshua was the last heir of the Hasmonean Kings of Israel . He described himself as a ""son of eighty years""
 This document was the 15th parchment to be discovered on Masada . It is believed that it was smuggled out of Israel by a rogue archaeologist . It was believed to have been taken to Russia by an archaeologist who smuggled it .
 It is believed that the Last Supper was actually a meeting to plan a way for Jesus to cheat death . Jesus was believed to have been planning to die when he was killed .
 During the crucifixion, what the Bible said was a sponge soaked in vinegar, was said to actually have been a drug that made Jesus appear as though he were dead . The Bible said it was a 'sponge soaked with vinegar'
 Joseph of Arimathea then went to Pilate to ask for permission to claim the body of Jesus . Pilate granted the body to be interred in a tomb owned by Joseph .
 To substantiate these facts, it is pointed out that the place of the crucifixion had to be near the tomb . The place had to have been near the Tomb of Jesus .
 John 19:41 says that he was crucified in a garden, where a new sepulchre had been hewn by Joseph . While the other gospels state that he is crucified at Golgotha, ""the place of the skull""", John says that
 This garden was actually ""Golgeth"", the ""wheel press"", where olives were pressed into oil, which was the Garden of Gethsemane . It was actually a garden of olives pressed into an oil-pressing machine .
 Some have even theorized that Joseph was actually the former husband of Mary, who had left Nazareth, and established himself at Jerusalem . Some believe Joseph was Joseph's former husband .
 Inside the tomb, an Essene physician was waiting to revive Jesus, thereby creating the illusion of a resurrection . Jesus was found dead in the tomb of his tomb .
 In one, the Second Treatise of the Great Seth, it talks about Jesus escaping his death on the cross through substitution, who was identified as Simon of Cyrene . In one of the two treatises, it says Jesus escaped his death through substitution .
 An ancient document, found in 4th century, said that Nicodemus and Joseph conspired to retrieve the body of Jesus so that it could be revived by Essene physicians . The document was found in the library of a building used by Greek monks .
 Chapter Ten text of an Essene scribe reveals Jesus was the son of Mary and the son-of-the-essene teacher who was not identified . The Essene teacher is not identified as Jesus' father .
 Because of the Essene medical knowledge, he was able to survive the Crucifixion, and by appearing to his disciples afterwards, make it seem as though he had risen from the dead .
 In 1963, scrolls known as the Talmud of Jmmanuel, were discovered by a Greek Catholic priest, Isa Rashid, in a cave he claimed was the burial cave of Jesus . The scrolls were discovered in 1963 by a priest who claimed to be Jesus' burial cave .
 Written in old Aramaic, sealed in protective resin, and buried under a flat rock, it is believed to have been written by Judas Iscariot . Written in Aramaic and sealed in resin, it was believed to be written by the Jewish leader .
 Pieces of the scrolls were missing, some unreadable, some deteriorating . Yet, what had survived, was completely contrary to the story of Jesus as related in the Bible .
 Joseph of Arimathea realized that Jesus was still alive, and quickly went to Pilate to request the body . Pilate then took it back to his own tomb, according to the document .
 There was a secret second entrance, and it was through here that his friends were able to bring the herbs and salves necessary to provide medical treatment .
 After a few appearances to his disciples, he went to Syria, then to India, and the area now known as west Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Afghanistan . He continued to teach in the Himalayas, where he continued to do so .
 These scrolls were in the possession of his first born son, who returned to Jerusalem, and hid them in the burial cave of Joseph of Arimathea where Jesus had been taken . Joseph hid the scrolls in his burial cave where Jesus was taken .
 In 367, Bishop Athanasius of Alexandria made a list of writings which were to become what we now know as the New Testament . The list was compiled by Bishop Athanaus of Alexandria .
 His selections were ratified by the Church Council of Hippo in 393, and again four years later, by the Council of Carthage . His selection was ratified in 392 and 393 .
 Certain ""books"" were left out, and were ""lost"" even though they may have been historically accurate . Therefore certain ""books ""were left out" and were "lost" in the book .
 One of the primary duties of the Church fathers between the 7th and 12th centuries, was to obtain manuscripts from collections in Eastern countries . The manuscripts contained information that differed from the version accepted and taught by the Church .
 The first mention of the resurrection of Jesus appears in 1 Corinthians 15:38, because this was written about ten years before Mark was written .
 Paul was unaware of the stories concerning the resurrection of Jesus . Therefore the stories were unknown to Paul .
 The word ""seen"" was translated from the Greek word ""ophthe", which means to have one's eyes opened to realms beyond this physical world, which refers to visions . The word "seen" was translated as "seen", meaning to have eyes opened in the physical world .
 The four gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John were chosen to preserve continuity and protect the new Christian religion . Nearly a hundred ""gospels"" appeared during the first three centuries .
 All the writers of the Gospels had, concerning Jesus, was just an outline of the man . The writers of Jesus' Gospels were 'just an outline', says the author of the book .
 There were no eyewitnesses to consult, so where there was a void in detail, they just referred to the Hebrew Scriptures to fill in the blanks . No eyewitnesses were there to consult .
 It actually ends without the disciples' assertion that Jesus rose from the dead . Instead, it only says that the women were told that he had risen .
 The passage was part of the story about Lazarus being raised from the dead, and hinted that he wasn't actually dead . The passage hints that Lazarus was actually dead, but was actually alive .
 The original manuscript ended with the death and burial of Christ, and the discovery of an empty tomb . Along with the exclusion, there was also an addition, because the original manuscript had ended with Christ .
 The last twelve verses of Mark are fraudulent, making the last twelve of Mark's verses fraudulent . Yet, the version that exists today, includes the Resurrection, which was added in the 2nd century .
 Research by Ivan Panin has done alot to reaffirm the authenticity of Mark . The Last Twelve Verses of Mark is published in a booklet .
 The gospels of Luke and Matthew used Mark as a source for their writings . Mark was used by both of the gospels in the Bible's two major gospels .
 While Matthew's genealogy of Jesus only goes back to Abraham, Luke's of Jesus' genealogy begins with Adam . Luke's genealog of Jesus begins with Abraham, while Matthew's goes back with Abraham .
 Mark mentions only an empty tomb, in Luke, the women actually go in and see for themselves that it is empty . In Luke, Luke mentions only a tomb, but in Luke they actually go into it and see it empty .
 Luke goes more into depth regarding the subsequent physical appearances of Jesus . Luke goes on to discuss the physical appearance of Jesus in the Bible .
 Matthew was put together about 85, and allegedly not by the disciple Matthew . Matthew was allegedly put together by about 85 people .
 It alluded to Daniel in the lion's den, and how he came out alive, when he applied the story to Jesus in regard to him surviving the tomb .
 The disciples were told to baptize ""in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Ghost,"" which it is alleged that Jesus could not have said, because it actually represented a theological premise that didn't occur till much later .
 John has come to be regarded as the most accurate of the Gospels . It is believed to have been written over a period of years by theologians, at the Greek city of Ephesus .
 John has the risen Jesus being seen by only Mary Magdalene, where in other books, other women accompanied her . Also singles her out as being a primary mourner .
 This hint at a more intimate relationship has given rise to a theory as to the actual role that Mary had in the life of Jesus . This theory has led to theories as to how Mary had a role in Jesus' life .
 In the other three gospels, the Last Supper is portrayed as a Passover meal, after which Jesus was crucified . However in John, the crucifixion occurred before the Passover, whereby John puts more emphasis on the footwashing that occurred .
 John's purpose was to present Jesus as the Passover lamb of the Jews, who is killed as their sacrifice . This discrepancy had been explained by saying that John was using the lunar calendar, while others were using the solar calendar .
 In Luke, only Peter goes to inspect the tomb; in John, it was Peter and John . In John, only John goes to the tomb .
 Critics claim that the story of Doubting Thomas wasn't true, based on the premise that Jesus was tied to the cross, rather than nailed . Critics say that Jesus wasn't nailed, and that Jesus died on the death penalty .
 Simon Peter, the ""Rock"" upon whom Jesus said he would build his church, was believed to be the first to ""see"" Jesus after the resurrection . Simon Peter's efforts were through his efforts that Christianity was perpetuated .
 The primary contention is that the New Testament was doctored to present Jesus as being divine . The New Testament is said to have been doctored in order to show Jesus as divine .
 In a 1977 book, The Myth of God incarnate, 7 scholars and professors from prominent American seminaries seriously questioned whether Jesus was Lord . 7 scholars said that the Bible should be updated by having all traces of the deity of Jesus removed from the Bible .
 They said Jesus didn't claim to be divine, but was promoted to that status by early Christians who were under pagan influences . They said that Jesus was not a divine, but a Christian .
 Report by 77 Biblical scholars says Jesus did not say about 80% of the words attributed to him in the four gospels . The report was part of the Jesus Seminar, held in Rome .
 In October, 1994, a Seminar convened and decided that the virgin birth of Jesus was fabricated . The Seminar decided that Jesus' birth of Christ was fabricated.
 This group is now working on a new Bible commentary that will reflect all its findings . The Bible commentary will be based on the findings .
 The Gospel of John doesn't mention the birth of Jesus, but it covers the conclusion of his ministry . Jesus' ministry ended in the end of the Bible's ministry .
 The incident of the wedding at Cana is only mentioned in John, and is unusual in that the bride and groom are not identified . Yet Jesus his disciples, and his mother, were there .
 When they ran out of wine, Jesus performed the miracle of turning water into wine . Jesus was the only person to perform the miracle in the Bible .
 The question was asked why Jesus would use his holy powers for such an insignificant purpose; unless it was his own wedding . The question is asked why he would use such a small amount of power for such a wedding .
 Researchers have analyzed John 2:9-10-10, and feel that where the head of the feast is speaking to the bridegroom, it is actually Jesus that he is addressing .
 Mary Magdalene is believed to have washed and annointed the feet of Jesus . Jesus was married to Mary of Bethany, who it is believed was the woman whom Jesus cast the demons out of, who washed and . annointed him with his feet .
 She figures heavily in the gospels, and is to her that Jesus first revealed himself after the Resurrection . She is believed to have been the inspiration for the creation of Christ .
 Around 70 AD, Mary, the wife of Jesus, took his children, and fled the Holy land to escape the Roman destruction of Jerusalem .
 The lineage of Jesus, through marriage, was joined with the royal family of the Franks, thus creating the royal Merovingian dynasty . They made their way to a Jewish community in Provence, in southern France, where they were joined by the Franks . Jesus's lineage was joined
 It could be that the Holy Grail, ""Sang Raal"", or ""Royal Blood"", could actually represent the womb of Mary Magdalene, which produced the bloodline . The Holy Grail could be a symbol of the womb .
 It is even conjectured that French cathedrals like Notre Dame, were built in honor of Mary Magdalene, and not the mother of Jesus .
 During the 5th century, the Sicambrians crossed the Rhine River into Gaul into what is now Belgium and northern France . The Sicambrian, a Germanic tribe called the Franks, crossed into the region from the 4th century .
 Merovee was the first king of the Merovingian bloodline, and he is surrounded in legend .
 Merovee was born when his mother was already pregnant by King Clodio . She was raped by a sea creature ""similar to a Quinotaur" when she was pregnant . Merovese's blood that coursed through his veins was a combination of both, which gave him superhuman
 The Spartans lived in the southern Greek peninsula of Arcadia, Arcadia . They later migrated across the Aegean Sea to build the city of Troy .
 According to the Iliad, by the Greek poet Homer, the founder of Troy was Dar-dan-us . According to Homer, Troy was the first city of Troy and the first of Troy .
 The Trojans moved north and west into Germany, Belgium and northern France, following the Danube River . Over the centuries the Spartans made their way into southern France, followed by the Trojan . The Spartans settled in the province of Lorraine, eventually settling in Lorraine .
 In the apocryphal book of 1 Maccabees, it was written that the Spartans were related to the Jews and were of the stock of Abraham, and for various reasons, were believed to have been from the tribe of Dan .
 In the Bible, the Danites were represented by a serpent, an eagle, a lion, and bees . Danites are represented by serpent, eagle, lion and bees in the Bible .
 The eagle's wings on the back of the lion in the 7th chapter of Dan may symbolize Dan breaking away from the tribe of Judah . Dan may have broken away from his tribe .
 Bezaleel, of the tribe of Judah, and Aholiab, of Dan, were chosen to head up the project . After it was completed, the tribes were positioned around it, and instructed to display their standard .
 Ahiezer, captain of the tribe, chose an eagle, considered a hunter of snakes . Dan was in the north, and given the symbol of Scorpio, which according to the Egyptian Zodiac was a snake .
 The symbol of ancient Spartan Greece was an eagle . Ancient Trojan Rome was the symbol of Trojan Rome .
 Merovee were noted for a birthmark, a small red cross, above their heart or between their shoulder blades, which became their symbol . Merovees were also noted for their birthmarks, which they used as a symbol of their identity .
 Merovingians were known as sorcerer-kings, who could heal, had clairvoyant powers, and could telepathically communicate with animals . They were also known as sorcerers, who were able to heal and communicate with the animals .
 They wore powerful amulets, and were called the ""long-haired Kings"" because they didn't cut their hair . They were called "Long-haired King" because of their hair, and wore powerful amulets .
 Childeric's son, Clovis 1 adopted Christianity, converting to Catholicism, and in 496, he was given the title ""Novus Constantinus" by the Bishop of Rome, giving him the authority to preside over the rebirth of a ""Christianized"" Roman Empire .
 During his rule, the Frank kingdom grew to cover most of France and Germany . During his reign, he ruled over France, Germany and the rest of Germany .
 The Church had a hand in the assassination of Dagobert II . Childeric III was deposed by Pepin III, the first of the Carolingian dynasty .
 Sigisbert IV, who fled southward, took on the surname ""Plant-Ard"" and the title of the Count of Razes . But the bloodline continued in the personage of Sigisber IV .
 In 1976, the excommunication of Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre by Pope Paul VI was expected . In 1976 he was expected to be excommunicated by the Pope .
 He represented the conservative branch of the Roman Catholic Church . He fought against the modernization of the Church .
 The Order held a convent at Blois on January 17, 1981, the first since the one in Paris in 1956 . The convent in Blois was the first to be held since 1956 .
 A man named Pierre Plantard de Saint-Clair was elected as their Grand Master . He was elected to be the Grand Master of the Order of the Grand Masters .
 He is the lineal descendant of King Dagobert II and the Merovingian dynasty . He is also a descendant of Dagoberts II and Merovingians . He has been married to the king of Saxbaldt II .
 His grandfather was a personal friend of Berenger Sauniere, and he owns land in the area of Rennes-le-Chateau . His grandfather is also a friend of the French president .
 In French records, he was listed as the Secretary-General of the Prieureure' de Sion . He was listed in French records as a secretary-general in Sion, France .
 The organization is not limited to just restoring the Merovingian bloodline . The organization has many Jewish members, though the full extent of the membership is unknown .
 He claimed that the real treasure was ""spiritual"" and consisted of a ""secret"" that would create a major social change regarding the restoration of the monarchy . The real treasure is said to be a 'secret'
 He revealed that their Order is on a timetable, and that their plans were unstoppable . He said that they were unstoppable and that they are on a 'timeline'
 Plantard talks about unrest within the membership of the Prieure's AngloAmerican contingent . Plantard talked about unrest in the Anglo American contingent .
 The signatures of Gaylord Freeman, John Drick, and A Robert Abboud were found on their official correspondence .
 Drick was the President, and on the Board of Directors of other companies, including Stepan Chemical, MCA, Oak Industries, and Central Illinois Public Service . Drick also served as the President of Stepan and MCA. Drick served as a member of the Illinois Public
 Freeman, an Illinois lawyer, was Chairman of the Board of First National, and on the Boards of other companies, including First Chicago Corporation, Atlantic-Richfield, Bankers Life and Casualty Co., Baxter Travenol Labs, and Northwest Industries . Freeman was a lawyer and lawyer
 He chaired a Committee on inflation for the American Bankers Association . He also chaired a committee on inflation on inflation .
 Chapter Ten member of the MacArthur Foundation . Trustee of the Aspen Institute of Humanistic Studies .
 Robert Abboud had also been Chairman of the Board of First National, and later became President of Occidental Petroleum Corp. He was also Chairman of The First National and later President of The Occidental .
 It was originally believed that the signatures were forged from a 1974 Annual Report, but it was later discovered they were produced with rubber stamps .
 Freeman denied membership in the Prieureure' de Sion, or of having any knowledge of their activities . Plantard has corroborated the information and said that their association with Freeman and other financiers, had more to do with their goal of European unity, which had become
 During the 19th century, the Prieureure' de Sion attempted to establish a revival of the Holy Roman Empire, a theocratic United States of Europe, ruled simultaneously by the Hapsburgs and by a radically reformed Church . During the same period, Freemasonry and
 Their goals were thwarted by World War i and the fall of Europe's reigning dynasts . World War I and World War II saw the rise of World Communism .
 They continued to work for a United Europe as a protection against the Soviets, and as a neutral power to serve as a balance between Russia and the U.S. However, they continued to push for a united Europe .
 Merovingian bloodline has come most of the ruling families of Europe, and some Roman Catholic Popes . Merovingians are descended from some of the world's most powerful aristocrats .
 The genealogy of Dagobert's son, Sigisbert IV, can be traced through a dozen families, including the Houses of Luxembourg, Montpezat, Montesquiou, Sinclair, Stuart, Devonshire, Plantard, and ending with the Hapsburg
 When the first parliament of the European Economic Community met in 1979, one of its primary delegates was Dr. Dr. Alexander von Hapsburg . Dr. Hapsberg was one of the delegates at the first European parliament meeting in 1979 .
 Otto von Hapsburg was the oldest son of Charles I, the last Hapburg emperor . He was the son of the last emperor, Charles I . He died in 17th century .
 He and son Karl have been among the leading proponents of a United Europe .
 His obsession for the Spear ended, when he began his European military campaign against Austria for the purpose of getting this holy relic, which he did .
 The Spear and other treasures were secured in a protective vault . When the War got closer to Germany, the Spear was placed in a secure vault .
 The holy spear was accidentally left behind, where it was found by the Americans . On March 30, 1945, when the American invasion was expected, the treasures were moved again, however .
 It is believed that the Prieure' de Sion has ""incontrovertible proof" concerning Jesus and his continuing bloodline, and has been working to again bring this bloodline to power .
 When my research started to head in this direction, and I began to read all of the ""evidence"" regarding the theories I have just outlined, I was in shock . Satanic Intentions. Satanic intentions . Satanic intentions. Satanic intentions . Satanic intent? Satanic intentions? Satanic intent .
 "These revelations were so incredible, that they bordered on the impossible," says CNN's John Sutter .
 I say that, because these theories run completely contrary to everything I have been taught to believe, I say . 'I say that . These theories run totally contrary to what I have learned to believe,' she says .
 "I believe that God had his hand on me, and He enabled me to separate fact from Satanic lies and deceit," she says . She says she believes that God's hand on her was that she separated herself from Satan .
 "There seemed to be something here, but for the longest time I just couldn't put a finger on it," he says . "There was something here," he adds. "I just can't put it on the surface"
 By approaching these theories as being untruths, which they are, and isolating certain aspects of the premise, I think that the Prieure' de Sion becomes an important piece of the puzzle which I have been trying to assemble .
 My theological beliefs are based on the fact that Jesus Christ, was, and is the Messiah, the son of God; that he was crucified, and died on the cross for the sins of the world . After three days, he rose from the dead, and commissioned his disciples to
 "I was raised to believe that, and as I have gotten older, it continues to be an undeniable fact," she says . "As I have grown older, I have always believed that," she adds .
 There must be a reason why people would go to such lengths to disprove the resurrection of Jesus, he says . Since I consider this to be the truth, there must be an answer to this question .
 For years, the story has been building that Jesus planned the crucifixion to fake his death in order to fulfill Old Testament prophecies . The story has built up to the idea that Jesus faked his death to fulfill prophecy .
 This basically says that the concept of Christianity is based on a lie, and that Christ was only a man . Christ was transformed into the son of God by early Church leaders, he says . This basically means that Christianity is a lie .
 The liberals have been successful in spreading this propaganda, says the author . However, with knowledge gleaned from archaeological excavations and the discovery and translation of new apocryphal and biblical texts, they have succeeded in spreading it .
 Jesus has been accepted as a great man, a great teacher, and credited for the establishment of the largest religious group in the world . This movement has sought to strip away his divinity by saying that the Resurrection was concocted to draw people into the Church .
 Jesus was married to Mary Magdalene, and had children whose descendants became part of the Merovingian Royal Family . Chapter Ten that not only was the Crucifixion planned, but also that Jesus had children with Mary .
 There seems to be evidence that they may have found much of the Temple treasure . They may have used this wealth to establish themselves as a financial power in the world .
 The Prieure' de Sion has been working behind the scenes to unite Europe under a single form of government . The Merovingians ruled in Europe, ruled in the Middle Ages .
 After all these years, why does this group continue to work towards this goal? "It's not the first time I've seen this group try and find a way to get back to the top of the world," he says .
 The implication has been made that the group represents the Merovingian bloodline, and by extension, are the living descendants of Jesus Christ .
 Daniel and Revelation talk about the rise of a future leader of the reestablished Holy Roman Empire, which is actually Europe . Now, go back to the Biblical references in Daniel, Revelation and Revelation .
 This leader will have to be a man capable of gaining the political support of all the European states . This leader must be able to gain the support of every European state, he says .
 He will be a military genius who will be able to give Europe a sense of security . He will also be a champion of justice, says David Cameron .
 "He will understand the problems of Europe, and bring peace to the land," he says . He will understand Europe's problems, he says, and will bring peace .
 As time goes on, and more propaganda is spread concerning this bloodline of Jesus, more people will begin to believe it . More propaganda will continue to spread concerning the bloodline .
 Only two of the four documents discovered by Sauniere have been revealed; plus, it is believed that the Prieure' de Sion is also in possession of documentation that will prove their contention .
 The Dead Sea Scrolls are the subject of much controversy and secrecy surrounding the Dead Sea Scroll . Archaeologists say they have to consider whether there is something there that will contribute to this massive deception .
 When the time is right, this information will be revealed, and it will be the final blow which will allow all of their plan to come together . It will be a final blow that will allow them to get their plan in place .
 Who better to lead a united Europe, then a living descendant of Jesus Christ? Says New Age philosophy .
 A man who will embody everything they have been looking for in a leader, says Obama . Obama will be a great leader for America, says White House .
 A man whose rise to power seems to fulfill the Biblical prophecies of a coming Messiah . The rise of the Messiah is seen as a fulfillment of the Bible's prophecies .
 The Prieureure' de Sion could be the ultimate power behind the Illuminati, using them to bring the world to a point where this man would be accepted with open arms, as the answer to the world's problems .
 Once this leader takes his place as the head of the revived Holy Roman Empire, it will not be long before he is revealed to be the antagonist referred to in the Bible as the Antichrist . Once he takes his post as head, he will be revealed as the leader of the
 It is my belief, that the purpose of the movement towards a New World Order, is to establish a one-world government, and to set the stage for the rise of the Antichrist .
 The ruins of the settlement of Khirbet Qumran stand on a cliff, a mile from the northwest shore of the Dead Sea, in Jordan Valley .
 One of the most important archaeological discoveries in religious history has been made . Archaeological discoveries were made just south of Jericho and east of Jerusalem . The discovery is one of the world's most important religious discoveries .
 Bedouin shepherds from the Ta'amireh tribe had their flock in the area, and while Jum'a Muhammad was looking for a stray goat, he discovered a cave in the cliffs .
 He threw a rock into a hole, and heard the sound of breaking pottery . He threw the rock into the hole, which broke pottery, and then heard the noise of breaking it .
 Muhammed Ahmed el-Hamed crawled into the cave, which measured 6 feet by 20 feet . Two days later, his cousin returned and crawled in the small cave . The cave measured 6-by-20 feet, the cousin said .
 The cave contained many earthenware jars, about 2 feet high and 10 inches wide . The cave was filled with jars, some of which were about two feet high .
 Inside one jar, he discovered three leather rolls wrapped in linen . Inside one of the jars, he found three leather roll wraps wrapped in leather .
 These rolls turned out to be ancient scrolls, which have been referred to as the Dead Sea Scrolls . The scrolls are believed to have been found in ancient scrolls .
 A Christian shopkeeper, Khalil Iskander Shahin, and George Ishaya Shamoun, members of the Syrian Jacobite Church in Jerusalem, heard about the discovery . They went to Qumran to verify the Bedouin's claims, finding some scroll fragments .
 4 were sold to the Syrian Metropolitan Athanasius Yeshua Samuel, head of the Syrian Jacobite Church . These 4 were in turn sold to a Syrian Metropolitan . The 4 sold in turn to head of Syrian Jacobites .
 Samuel sent George Isaiah back to Qumran to carry out extensive excavations . Samuel later sent him back to work in secret excavations of Qumramran .
 It is believed that other scrolls were discovered, the contents of the scrolls have not been revealed .
 In September, 1947, Samuel took the four scrolls to Hems, Syria, where he met with the Patriarch of the Church . Samuel traveled to Syria to meet the Patriarch .
 In January, 1948, Sukenik received one of Samuel's scrolls, which turned out to be the Isaiah scroll . The Isaiah scroll was able to inspect .
 Although he was interested in purchasing the four scrolls, he couldn't raise the money necessary to make the transaction . He was unable to raise enough money to buy the scrolls .
 Samuel contacted the William F Albright Institute of Archaeological Research in Jerusalem, where the scrolls were inspected by John C Trever and William H Brownlee . They felt they were as old, if not older than the Nash Papyrus fragment, which was the oldest known example of Biblical Hebrew
 Samuel, labeled a 'smuggler' was anxious to sell the scrolls, and would not allow the fourth to be published until all of them had been purchased . Samuel would not be allowed to publish the scrolls until all the scrolls had been bought .
 In 1949, Gerald Lankester Harding and Father Roland de Vaux found the remains of 30 identifiable texts, and a number of unidentifiable fragments . The remains were found in a cave at Qumran, Jordan .
 Harding made it known that he was interested in all subsequent finds made by the Ta'amireh tribe . Harding was also interested in any other tribal finds made in the area .
 They would sell the results of their excavation to Kando, who would then sell the items to Harding . Harding and Kando would excavate the items and sell them to Harding. Harding was the first person to excavate an excavation site .
 de Vaux, Harding, and a group of fifteen workers continued to excavate around Qumran until 1956 . In 1956, they uncovered the buildings of what they felt were an Essene community .
 For nearly two weeks in mid-March, 1952, de Vaux, three members of the Ecole Biblique, William Reed, and 24, Bedouins under the supervision of three Jordanian and Palestinian archaeologists, conducted a survey .
 The umbrella term of the Dead Sea Scrolls refers to the scrolls and fragments that were found in eleven of the caves . This survey indicated the existence of 40 caves, and the term "Dead Sea Scrolls" is the umbrella term .
 By 1959, all the scroll fragments were kept in a room known as the 'Scrollery' in the Rockefeller Museum, which had been built with funds provided by John Rockefeller .
 The Museum was run by an international Board of Trustees . It later fell under the control of the Jordanian government . The Museum is now owned by the government .
 The contents of the Museum were considered spoils of war, so the Israeli government became the guardian of the fragments . After the Six Day War in June, 1967, when Israel took over control of the entire city of Jerusalem, the Museum was considered a war spoils .
 The Museum contained laboratories, photographic facilities, and the Department of Antiquities . The headquarters of the entire operation was actually located at the Ecole Biblique, which contained a research library totally dedicated to Qumran research .
 Revue Biblique printed since 1892, and Revue de Qumran started in 1958 to publish information on the scrolls . They also published two journals, the Revue of Bibles and the Revues of France and Bibles . The Revues Bibles were printed since
 This may be one of the keys to understanding what may be going on here behind the scenes, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A French Dominican monk established a Dominican church and monastery in Jerusalem . Stephen Stephen, the first Christian martyr was stoned to death, was the first martyr of the martyrdom .
 At the urging of Pope Leo XIII, a Biblical school was begun there in 1890 by Father Albert Lagrange to train scholars with the knowledge necessary to protect the Church against potential archaeological discoveries .
 In 1956, de Vaux became a consultant to this Commission until his death in 1971 . Father Benoit Benoit, Father Vesco and JeanLuc Vesco were also consultants to the Commission .
 The head of the Pontifical Biblical Commission is Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger . Prior to 1965, the Holy Office had been known as Holy Office, and prior to 1542, as the Holy Inquisition . The Vatican's highest-ranking church body is the Vatican's Vatican Council .
 After 1971, with many common members, the two groups were virtually combined, sharing the same offices at the Palace of the Congregation at the Holy Office Square in Rome .
 The implication has been made that the Vatican is exerting its influence over the Scrolls, in order to control what information is released . Because of this connection, the Vatican has been accused of exerting influence .
 Father Emile Puech of the Ecole Biblique. From France, who, after his death, was replaced by . Emile . Pueches .
 Father Maurice Baillet was a priest from Germany who was later replaced by a French priest . Father Baillets was a German priest who was replaced by French priest, who was German .
 A self-proclaimed agnostic from Oxford, who revealed that certain material was being kept secret because of the controversial nature of the material .
 Father Pierre Benoit was the head of the Ecole Biblique until his death in 1987 . After Vaux's death in 1971, his handpicked successor was another Dominican . Father Benoit's successor was Pierre de Vaux .
 Strugnell, who converted to Catholicism, then became the leader of the team . He converted to Roman Catholicism and became the team's leader .
 Catholic scholars had complete control of all of the Dead Sea Scroll fragments that were found .
 While the Israelis worked on these scrolls, across town at the Rockefeller Museum, de Vaux and his group of international scholars were working on fragments they discovered .
 In 1967, Yadin interrogated Kando, who relinquished possession of a scroll he had for six years, which had been found in Cave 11 . Kando relinquished his scroll to Yadin Yadin in 1967, which he had held for 6 years .
 Temple Scroll is now considered a supplement to the Torah . Five separate sources were compiled to form the Temple Scroll .
 In all established Biblical books, the name of God, YHWH, is written in the square Aramaic script like the rest of the text . While in non-Biblical writings,  the name is written  in PalaeoHebrew, while the rest is in Aram
 The cave fragments were found in the original cave, known as Cave 1, in 1955 . Cave 1 contains fragments of the fragments found in Cave 1 . The first cave contained the fragments in 1955, Cave 1.
 This find included the Hebrew versions of all the minor prophets, including Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi . This
 The fourth volume, in 1965, was a collection of Psalms found in Cave 11 . The Psalms were found in the cave .
 The fifth volume, in 1968, under the direction of Allegro, contained some material from Cave 4, however, most of the scrolls from this cave continued to be withheld from the public . Allegro had said in 1964 that the compilation and translation had been nearly completed by 1961 .
 The sixth installment of the series appeared in 1977, the seventh in 1982, and the eighth in 1990 . The eighth didn't even deal with the texts of Qumran, was released in 1990.
 These eight volumes are said to represent only 25% of the information contained in the Scrolls, even though Father Benoit had said in December, 1985, that everything would be published by 1993 .
 Edmund Wilson, author of The Scrolls of the Dead Sea, said in 1955 that de Vaux's team wanted to isolate the sectarian non-Biblical scrolls from being connected with Christianity and Judaism .
 In 1989, he said that during the last 40 years, all of the research on the Dead Sea Scrolls was controlled by a handful of scholars who had revealed only a small portion . In 1989 he said publicly, that .
 He called for access to the Scrolls by qualified scholars, and for AMS Carbon-14 dating to be performed on documents to verify the dating . Up to that point had been relying on the original, obsolete form of dating .
 After Israeli government took full possession of Jerusalem in June of 1967, many were surprised that de Vaux was allowed to continue in his capacity as the leader of the team of scholars, even though it was a known fact that he was anti-Semitic .
 In November, 1990, without informing Strugnell, the Israeli government assigned Emmanuel Tov to become the 'joint editor-in-chief of the project to finish the translation and publication of the Scrolls .
 Tov became chief editor, along with Professor Eugene Ulrich and Emile Puech. Tov was chief editor of the book . The book was published in 1998 .
 In September, 1991, Professor Ben-Zion Wacholder, and one of his doctoral students, Martin G Abegg, from Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati, Ohio, released their compilation of the Qumran texts .
 In 1988, Strugnell had printed 30 copies of a 52,000 word concordance of words found in the scroll . The scroll had been created by de Vaux's team in the 1950's, so it could be used by team .
 Wacholder and Abegg used a computer to reconstruct these words, and it was purported to be 80% accurate . The words were reconstructed using computer technology .
 Huntington Library in San Marine, California, revealed that it had a complete set of negatives, from photographs of photographs, of the original scrolls . The Huntington Library had been given to them in 1987 by Elizabeth Hay Bechtel, founder of the Ancient Biblical Manuscript Center in Claremont,
 Oxford Centre for Postgraduate Hebrew Studies in England has a full set, which had been given to them in May, 1991, by the Israeli Oversight Committee . The Hebrew Union College also have a partial set; and the Oxford Centre has full set; .
 The nonBiblical fragments consists of hymns and psalms, biblical commentaries, legal documents, a letter, apocryphal writings, and an inventory of the Temple treasure . The fragments are a collection of nonbiblical fragments .
 Of the non-Biblical texts, there are texts referred to as sectarian writings, which were produced by a unique sect of Jews who have been identified as the Essenes . The Essenes are a sect of Jewish Jews who were identified by the Essene .
 The seven intact scrolls that were found in Cave 1, were quickly published by Israeli and American scholars, but the fragments collected by de Vaux were a different story . De Vaux collected the fragments from Cave 1 .
 Of the Biblical writings, 25 copies of Deuteronomy were found, 18 copies of Isaiah, and 27 copies of the Psalter . Of the Bible writings, . 25 copies were found .
 Among the non-Biblical, 11 copies of the Community Rule, 9 Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 8 of the Thanksgiving Hymn, and 7 of Sons of Light Against the Sons of Darkness .
 The oldest known Old Testament texts, were copies which dated back to 1100 AD, yet they were nearly identical . Prior to the discovery of the Scrolls, the oldest known texts were copies of each other . The Scrolls are nearly identical to the original texts .
 Archaeological dating was also done with the help of several hundred coins which were found in the Qumran complex . Several hundred coins were also discovered in the complex .
 They discovered evidence of an earthquake which had been recorded as occurring in 31 BC . They rebuilt the settlement and occupied it until 68 AD when it was destroyed by Vespasian's Roman legions .
 During the Maccabean period, in the 2nd century BC, there were three main Jewish groups, the Pharisees, the Sadduccees, and the Essenes . During the two-century BC, the three main groups were the Saduccees .
 Early historians indicated that the Essenes lived in the area between Jericho and Ein Gedi, on the shores of the Dead Sea, which is where the Qumran ruins are located . Early historians, such as Pliny the Elder, Josephus, and Philo, indicated that
 Sadducees, whose religious principles differed from the Pharisees, separated from them after the Maccabean revolt . The Saddues were the first group of Sadduces to separate from the Pharisees after the revolt .
 A document identified as Miqsat Ma'aseh he-Torah, or ""Some Rulings Pertaining to the Torah"", was found in Cave 4 . It contains about 22 religious laws, and appears to be the basis of the Qumran philosophy .
 Dated between 80 75 BC, a copy of a copy was found in Cave 6, and 7 copies in Cave 4 . A copy of the book was found at Cave 6 and Cave 4, and a copy at Cave 4 was found between 80 and 75 BC .
 The fragments recovered at Qumran have proven the Cairo text to be incomplete . The fragments have proven that the text is not complete .
 Text refers to a contingent of Jews that remained faithful to the Law . The text refers to Jews who remained faithful .
 A 'Teacher of Righteousness' came to them, and led them into Damascus to renew their 'Covenant' with God . A teacher of righteousness led them to Damascus so they could renew their covenant .
 It is believed that there was an Essene community in Damascus, Syria . This Covenant is referred to in the Community Rule .
 When the Jews returned to Jerusalem after the Maccabean victories, they became disenchanted and went to Qumran . The Jews were disenchenchanted with the victory, and went back to the city .
 It was believed that the Essenes were a pacifist, monastic Order who wanted to separate themselves from the revolutionary-minded Zealots . However, some of the evidence seems to indicate otherwise .
 Originally thought to have been celibate, the graves of two women and a child were discovered . The Community Rule contained marriage laws .
 The Essenes did not engage in animal sacrifice, yet the Temple Scroll contains instructions for such rituals, and animal bones have been found . The Essene did not .
 Thought to have been peaceful, their scrolls seem to indicate the knowledge of military strategy . The ruins of a military defense tower and a forge have been excavated .
 de Vaux and his team were trying to distance the Scrolls from Judaism and Christianity, saying there were no connections . But texts which were already published seem to indicate otherwise .
 Early Christians and the Qumran community were one, and the same . The early Christians were just living at the community, or the early Christians . Early Christians may have lived in the same community as the early Christian community .
 The group in Qumran has been compared to the early Church, which was based in Jerusalem . Though Essene in nature, the group is Essene .
 The Habakkuk Commentary said that Qumran's governing body, the Council of the Community, was in Jerusalem, in fact, it is believed that the scrolls were taken from Jerusalem for protection . It is believed the scrolls had been taken from the scrolls from Jerusalem to Qum
 The vital link to this belief comes from the Copper scroll, which lists 64 locations of hidden Temple treasure . The scroll is believed to have led to the discovery of the treasure .
 This seems to indicate that perhaps the Qumran settlement was a retreat for the early Christians . The settlement is thought to have been the site of a retreat from early Christians in the region .
 This is one of the controversial developments that has emerged from the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls . This is the latest in a long line of controversial developments to emerge from the scrolls .
 The Qumran texts are written in Hebrew, and sometimes Aramaic, and has been shown to contain information that is echoed in the New Testament . The texts are found in Hebrew and sometimes in Aramaic .
 Prior to the discovery of the Scrolls, the teachings of Jesus had been considered original, though influenced by Old Testament teaching .
 The Qumran documents now indicate the existence of a basis for his message . However, they also indicate that there was no basis for the message .
 The Community Rule, discovered in Cave 1, has proven to be one of the most important discoveries in Qumran . Community Rule was discovered in the cave of Cave 1 .
 One of the basic tenets of Christianity, the baptism of purification, is discussed . One of Christianity's basic tenets is discussed in the book .
 John the Baptist lived at Qumran until he was called by Cod to be the forerunner of Jesus . This has led to the theory that he had lived there until he had been called to be Jesus .
 This shows that common ownership was part of the early Christian philosophy . Common ownership was a key part of Christian philosophy, says Christian historian .
 In Acts, the Church leadership is shown to be made up of twelve Apostles, which according to Galatians, were led by James, John and Peter . Also in Acts, it is shown that the Church was led by the Apostles .
 In the Community Rule, the Qumran group were governed by a 'Council' of twelve people . Three priests were in leadership roles, though it is not known if they were part of the twelve .
 Documents contain parallels with Sermon on the Mount and the battle between the darkness and light . It also talks about a 'Meal of the Congregation' which is a ritual very much like the 'Last Supper' and the subsequent communion ceremony .
 The Qumran texts contain references to a messianic figure known as the 'Teacher of Righteousness' However, there are no references as to the divinity of this person, so it couldn't be Jesus .
 This person would have been living well before the time of Christ . Because of the age of the document, this person would be well before Christ .
 An unpublished Aramaic scroll fragment out of Cave 4, mention the ""Son of the Most High"", in a similar manner as Luke 1:32, 35 . An unpublished scroll fragment from Cave 4 mentions the "Son of God" and the "Most High"
 It is the first time these references have appeared in any outside text .
 Newly released fragments out of Cave 4 even prophecy the coming of Jesus, as the Messiah, as a Messiah .
 For forty years, the Dead Sea Scrolls were silent about the contents of the scrolls . They were discovered by a group of men who had been silent for 40 years .
 The Scrolls are contrary to the Bible in respect to the origin of Christianity, or was it, as some maintain, because of the power it gave them . Chapter Ten emissaries of the Catholic Church .
 I think it may have more to do with the implications concerning Christianity. I think that may have been the case for Christianity .
 Those who have tried to prove that Jesus faked his crucifixion, have also tried to link him with the Essenes . As we discussed in the previous section of this article, we also discussed the link between Jesus and Essenes.
 The inhabitants of Qumran engaged in the study of astrology and mysticism . This group has been identified as the starting point for the philosophy which became Christianity .
 If we are to believe the Scrolls, the teachings of Jesus were based on the philosophy of the Essenes . Jesus' teachings are thought to have been based on philosophy of Essenes, the Scrolls say .
 This seriously damages his image as being the father of a Religion that bears his name . "This seriously damages [his] image," he said .
 It further diminishes his divinity, which has increasingly come under attack . Not only that, it also diminishes the divinity of the Christ Christ, but it also undermines his humanity .
 During the next few years, the last remnants of the Scrolls will be published . In the near future, new versions of the Bible may be produced which will reflect the ""new"" information gleaned .
 These new versions may further contribute to the taking of Christ out of Christianity, so that the role of Jesus is reduced to that of a political visionary . The new versions of Jesus' role in the Bible may be taken out of the Christian faith, he says .
 Since I believe that Jesus taught only what was given unto him through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, what legitimacy should be given to the Dead Sea Scrolls, if any . I believe this legitimacy should not be given, as does the legitimacy of Jesus' teachings .
 "Beyond a shadow of a doubt, they are legitimate documents, and not the result of an incredible forgery, as far as being done shortly before their discovery," the author says .
 Any incorrect translations would be revised . Now that other scholars have access to them, any incorrect translations are likely to be updated .
 We have to rely on the accuracy of de Vaux's team, and their ability to fit these pieces together into some sort of coherency . We have been forced to rely upon the accuracy and coheality of the car .
 It would seem that gaps in the assembled fragments of text, would make it difficult to actually grasp its full meaning, especially since missing words may have a bearing on how other words are translated . Missing words may be a clue to how others are translated, especially in English .
 The complex techniques utilized in this process have brought very little criticism in regard to its accuracy . This technique has been used in the U.S.
 Originally only the wrapping around them were tested, because they didn't want to destroy any text in order to date them . The wrapping around the wrapping was tested, but only the wrap around were tested . Originally only they were tested for dating purposes .
 New techniques need less material to achieve the same results . However, new techniques can use less material than traditional techniques .
 This knowledge makes it difficult to assume the accuracy of any dating . It also makes it impossible to assume that any dating is accurate .
 Some apocryphal books such as Tobit, and Bel and the Dragon were works of fiction, and for that reason were not included in the Bible . For example, Tobit was a work of fiction .
 If you don't know the intention of the writer, or even who the writer was, how do you decide that it is a historically accurate document? How do you know that a text is historically accurate if you can't know who it was?
 Some of the Qumran texts contain the same sort of embellishments as some of the Gospels . Just as the writers of the . Gospels have been accused of embellishment, do some of them also?
 Because of secrecy surrounding the Scrolls, how will we really know that all of the fragments found, will be released? Because of the secrecy surrounding it, how do we know all fragments will be found?
 Scroll team discovered something that would have shaken the very foundation of the Christian Church . Would the Scroll team have allowed it to remain, or would it have found its way into the dark recesses of the Vatican, never again to see the light of day?
 Other scrolls that haven't made its way into official hands may also exist . Or how about the existence of other scrolls?
 On his deathbed, Lankester Harding, the director of Jordan's Department of Antiquities, claimed to have seen two more scrolls that Strugnell had not seen . Harding also claimed that he had seen two other scrolls .
 Stories have circulated about Bedouin discoveries which have yet to surface . Stories have also circulated about discoveries which were not given to de Vaux .
 Archaeologists have found Qumran's remains . Archaeologists say they have not heard of the discovery of the site . Archaeologist Dr. David Perry says he is still working on the site in the region .
 Aubry L Richardson, using sophisticated equipment developed by NASA, claim that there are still unexplored caves there . They claim that one may contain up to 40 intact jars, of the kind used to store manuscripts, and evidence of another copper scroll .
 A dig was initiated, sanctioned by the Israeli government, to reach this cave, which have not, as yet, turned up anything . A dig has not turned up any of the cave's caves .
 "We haven't been able to produce enough substantiation from the Scrolls to make the kind of claims that have been made," says the author .
 Various books in the Bible contain the same information, and are used to cross reference each other . For example, various books in Bible contain information that is cross-references .
 That wasn't possible with the Scrolls, and because of that, they may never be fully accepted . The Scrolls may never fully accepted, and that may never happen again .
 The fact that some of their rituals are similar to the early Christian Church, may be nothing more than natural progressionor theological evolution, says author .
 Archaeological excavations in Qumran may continue for years to come . How it will affect the perception of Christianity is yet to be seen .
 It would be nice to know how much influence the Rockefeller family has on the Rockefeller Museum, where all the fragments were housed . Chapter Ten .
 Their name figures prominently in the talk about the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple . Their name also figures prominently .
 Knowing that they have had a huge role in establishing the New World Order, their involvement in the various affairs of Israel has ominous overtones . Knowing that their involvement has had huge overtones, it is not surprising that they are involved in Israel's affairs .
 In the previous chapter, we discussed the development of the World Church . Now, we'll talk about what role they will have when the New World Order is established .
 Bible talks about a religious leader joining forces with a political leader who will rise out of western Europe . The Bible talks of the religious leader coming to power and joining forces .
 And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship him . The first beast, whose deadly wound was healed, was healed .
 "He doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men," says the Bible . And he deceives them that dwells on earth, by the means of those miracles he had power to do in the . sight
 The identity of this individual, who has been labeled the False Prophet, has been the subject of speculation .
 Chapter Ten Pope being the leader of this World Church, and perhaps the one who will be known as the False Prophet . The Pope will be the leader .
 Rome is home to the Vatican, which is recognized as an independent government apart from the Italian government . Rome is also the home of the Vatican and the Vatican's government .
 The Pope is literally a God to the Catholic Church, having the authority to forgive sins . The Pope has the power to forgive anyone who sins sins .
 The primary color of the papacy is red, said to signify the blood of Jesus . The papacy's primary color is said to be red, the Pope's blood .
 It was alleged that Pope Benedict IX practiced sorcery and magic . Pope Boniface Vlll was said to communicate with demons . Pope Sylvester 11 and Pope Sixtus V were also believed to have practiced sorcery .
 All of these clues could indicate that the False Prophet could be a Pope . The False Prophet may have been a Pope.
 Benedict Benedict requested that Baruch convert to Catholicism, which Baruch did . Baruch changed his name to that of the Pope, changing his name into that of Pope Benedict XVI .
 The name 'Benedict' is Latin for ""blessed" while the name 'Baruch' is Hebrew for the same thing . The name is Latin and Hebrew .
 The conversion was in name only, because Baruch still financed a synagogue in the Jewish quarter of Rome . Baruch's conversion was only in name, because he still financed the synagogue .
 Baruch's son, an aide to Pope Leo IX, converted, changing his name to Lee . Baruch also converted and changed his name from Baruch Baruch .
 His family became an established financial power in the late 11th century . His family was active in the affairs of the Catholic Church .
 His son, Pietro, was sent to a monastery where he worked his way up, attaining the position of cardinal . Pietro's son Pietro was sent into a monastery .
 When Pope Honorius 11 was on his deathbed, preparations were made to elect a new Pope . Preparations were made for the Pope to be elected in his dying days .
 The Pierleone family offered their son, the cardinal . The Frangipani family, a traditional Catholic family, offered its own candidate . The family also offered their own candidate, the Cardinal .
 The Pierleone family held an election the same day, with a greater number of cardinals present, and elected Pietro, who took the name Anacletus 11 . Pietro was the first Italian cardinal to take the title of Anacoelus 11. Pietro took
 Despite efforts to remove him, Anacletus remained Pope till he died in 1138 . Despite efforts he remained Pope until he died of his illness in 1139 .
 Innocent II returned, and after Victor IV resigned, was elected, and served till his death in 1143 . Innocent II was Innocent II's successor, Victor IV .
 The Vatican now refers to Anacletus II as an ""anti-pope"" (""one who uncanonically claims or exercises the office of the Roman Pontiff""), and has eliminated him from papal history .
 Lucia dos Santos and her cousins Jacinta and Francisco Marta saw their first of 6 visions of the Virgin Mary in the hilly terrain of Fatima, Portugal, in May 17,1717 . The vision took place on May 13,1917 .
 Mary gave three prophecies concerning the end of World War I, World War II, and Russia . Mary gave the prophecies about the end and end of Russia .
 One prophecy said that when an unknown light was seen in the sky, it would be a sign from God that he would punish the world through war, persecution, and famine . The light was a sign that the world would suffer from war and persecution .
 On the day of Mary's sixth appearance, October 13, she had promised a miracle . Mary had promised to give birth to a baby girl on October 13 .
 The sun came up, spun in the sky, plunged downward, then rose again . In a ten-minute display, the sun spun in and out of the sky and spun downward .
 Lucia later became a Carmelite nun in Coimbra, Portugal . In 1927 she reported that Jesus had appeared to her and made several prophecies .
 It was sent to Rome, where it was kept on the mantle of the Pope's apartment in the Apostolic Palace . It was kept in the Vatican's apartment .
 Lucia's letter contained the third prophecy . Many believed it had to do with Armageddon, and many believed it was related to Armageddon .
 The prophecy indicated that the world was to be punished for disobeying the laws of God and turning away from him . The world will be punished if it disobeys the laws, according to prophecy .
 When the prophecy was unsealed by the Pope in 1960, it was to published so that the whole world would know about it . Then the country of Russia was to be consecrated to Mary, and then the Pope and all the bishops .
 If these two things were done, the wrath of God would not fall upon the Earth. God's wrath would not have fallen upon the earth, says the author of the Bible .
 Russia was to become the instrument of God's punishment upon the nations. It wasn't done, therefore the country of Russia was . Russia was not done, and therefore the . country was to be . God's . punishment .
 In 1980, while speaking to a group of German Catholics, John Paul II admitted that the ""Third Secret"" did indeed refer to impending punishment from God . Pope John XXIII, for diplomatic reasons, failed to honor the stipulations, and that because Pope John . XXIII failed to
 She saw a Pope, with blood running down his face, dripping over his left shoulder . Off to one side, she saw a pope, dripping blood over his shoulder . The Pope's face was bloodied and bloodied .
 She interpreted this vision to mean that within this century, a Pope will be bodily harmed . The vision was interpreted as a vision of a bodily harm to the Pope .
 She said the new head of the Church would have a different insignia than that of the Pope . She said that the new leader of the church would not have the same insignia .
 Because of the unearthly light, she knew that the power would still be there, but not in the person of the Pope . She knew that because of the light, the Pope would not be in power .
 On April 7,1970, it was reported that Mary appeared to Veronica Lueken, and has made subsequent appearances to her at the St. Mary's Hospital .
 The messages received during these visitations were recorded on tape . The messages were recorded in a newsletter known as Directives . portions of the newsletter are revealed in a weekly newsletter .
 Malachy, Archbishop of Armagh, had made prophecies concerning future Popes . Malachy made predictions about future popes . He died at the age of 80 in 1877 .
 The seventh Pope is John Paul ll, from Krakow, Poland, who began his reign in 1978 . He is the current Pope, who was born in Poland in 1963 .
 When Pope John offered free tickets for papal audiences in Rome, the ticket displayed a group of numbers followed by the number 666 . The lower left portion of the ticket showed the 666 after the number .
 Revelation 13:18 tells us about the connection between the False Prophet and the number 666, and I will talk about that in the next chapter . Revelation: The False Prophet is the son of the prophet and the prophet of Christ .
 On January 24, 1979, at the Vatican, the Pope met for two hours with the Soviet foreign minister, Andrei Gromyko . The Pope met with the Russian foreign minister at the end of that day .
 Vatican's establishment of diplomatic relations with Israel on December 30, 1993 . Israel was also trying to work out their own peace accord in the Mideast .
 The Vatican will have a seat at the negotiations on the final determination of Jerusalem . This agreement will allow the Vatican to have a voice in the negotiations . The Vatican is expected to be involved in the talks .
 The Vatican embassy will be in Tel Aviv, where most other embassies are located, because Jerusalem is not recognized as Israel's capital . Most other embassies will be located in Jerusalem, not Jerusalem, because of that .
 In March, 1994, the Vatican established relations with the Moslem country of Jordan, on Israel's eastern border . The move may indicate the beginning of a move by the Vatican to become more involved in the Middle East situation .
 Vatican hardliners have criticized the Pope's growing role as the ""protector of Jews" But maybe this is just a fulfilment of prophecy . Vatican hardliner has criticized his growing role .
 In outlining the theory that the Pope is going to be the False Prophet, do not misconstrue this as antiCatholic rhetoric . The Roman Catholic Church will be part of the World Church, according to the theory .
 As I stated earlier, the Catholic Church, as well as the Protestant churches which make up the World Council of Churches, in the coming years, will be radically different . The Catholic Church and Protestant churches in the world council of Churches will be drastically different .
 The liberalism that is becoming so pervasive in Religion today, will turn these churches into shadows of their former selves . The liberal that is . becoming so . pervasive in . Religion today will turn churches into . shadows of former selves, says author .
 The Pope of the future, will not be the Pope as we know him today, and therefore the actions to which the Bible attributes to him, should not reflect on the respect that is due to a leader of a religion, that today, theologically is Christian .
 The real history of the Catholic Church is not known to a large majority of its membership . Even though they have been deceived, it is wrong to indict those who have sincerely tried to live their lives according to the basic Christian tenets .
 "It is my hope, that the truths contained in this book will help people find the true path to salvation through Jesus Christ"
 There are many theories as to when the end will come, and this New World Order is established . There are also many theories regarding the end of the world .
 The Bible is the root of most of these theories, yet they are only interpretations, and for the most part, they have been wrong . The Bible has been wrong for most of the theories, but they are interpretations of the Bible .
 Archbishop Jacob Ussher of Armagh in Ireland attempted to calculate when the Creation took place by using chronological information from the Bible and counting backward from the date of the birth of Christ .
 Ussher theorized that the Creation took place in 4004 BC, and the passing of four ""days"" (two thousand years before the law, and two thousand years after the law) took us to Christ's birth in 4 BC . Two more ""days" would end the
 The Sabbath, or the seventh ""day"", is the Millennium, or a thousand-year reign of Jesus Christ upon the Earth . It is referred to in the 20th chapter of Revelation in Revelation .
 "He finished them in six days. Consider, my children, what that signifies," he said . Consider, children, why that signifies, He finished them six days .
 He testifieth, saying, behold this day shall be as a thousand years. For with him, one day is one thousand years; . One day is a thousand days; as God testifies, testifies .
 Children in six days, that is, in six thousand years, shall all things be accomplished. Therefore children, in . six thousand . years, will all things . be accomplished . Children . in six . days .
 Other writers during the early Christian era also reflected this premise . Other writers in early Christian period also reflected the premise .
 In 1583, the Gregorian calendar was adopted, which added an extra 5.25 days to that year . The Gregorian Calendar was added to the calendar in 1583 to make it easier to read .
 When you deduct from that figure, the seven year period which is commonly referred to as the Tribulation period, that leaves us with the year of 1995 as the culmination of the efforts to establish a New World Order . 1995 is the year when the events occurred in 1995 .
 There is another theory, which has to do with the amount of time that the Jewish race would be dispersed across the Earth . There is also a theory that the Jews would have been dispersed around the world .
 Ezekiel 4:1-8 was meant to show how long the Jews would be scattered as a people . The purpose of the prophecy was to show that the Jewish people would not be scattered .
 From 430, subtract the 70 years they were punished in Babylon, and what God was telling Moses, was that the Jewish people would be dispersed for 2,520 years . The Jewish people were punished for 70 years, subtracting from 430, from the 70 .
 These calculations can be somewhat correlated to the six ""day"" theory, in that it indicates a time frame for events .
 Jesus was speaking to his disciples concerning the last days, and had just told them about the parable of the fig tree . The parable was a parable that Jesus had told his disciples of the days .
 Some Bible scholars have interpreted Ezekiel 36:8 to mean that the fig tree represented the nation of Israel . Others have interpreted the Bible to mean the tree represented Israel .
 It is believed Jesus was referring to the generation that would be alive when Israel became a nation on May 14,1948 . Jesus believed to have been referring to Israel's generation .
 Job 42:16 refers to a generation as being 35 years, while Webster's Dictionary indicates that it is forty years . Job: The generation is 35 years old, according to the Bible .
 Adding 40 years to 1948 would give us the year 1988, which puts us in the general area of the above calculation . The year 1988 would be the year of the first time the country had been in existence .
 If you add 50 years to 1948, you get the year 1998, which is more closely aligned with the other calculations . So if you interpret this as being symbolic, you can add 50 to 1948 to 1998 .
 The first came during the first year of the reign of Cyrus, who ruled for nine years, after which his son Cambyses took over, and all the work on the Temple was stopped for seven years . The Temple was built during Cyrus' reign of nine years .
 The second decree was made by Darius I, in the second year of his 35-year reign . Darius I made the decree in his 35th year of the reign .
 Marler believes that the other seven ""weeks"" or 49 years apply to the second coming of Jesus . Marler also believes that Jesus' second coming is the end of the Bible .
 Adding 49 years indicated a date of November 29,1996, as the end of man's rule on this Earth . Adding 49 . years indicated that man's reign on Earth ended in 1996, adding 49 .
 By counting back 31/2 years, he theorized that the period known as the Tribulation would begin May 29,1993 . The Tribulation is believed to have begun on May 29 1993 .
 The irony here is a story that was reported on the news on May 19,1993 . The irony is that the story was reported in the news .
 Big Ben was installed in 1859 at the eastern end of the Houses of Parliament in London . The clock was installed at the end of Parliament at the east end of London's Parliament . Big Ben is famous for its accuracy and accuracy .
 From the initiation of Christ's ministry, in the fall of 28 AD, and adding two ""days"" would give us 720,000 days, which adjusted to our calendar by dividing into that 365.25 years, which added to 28.75 years, takes us to the year 2000
 Daniel 8:14 refers to 2,300 morning and evening rituals, or 1,150 days . Some scholars feel this refers to the ritual cleansing performed by Judas Maccabaeus three years later . The period till cleansing, according to Daniel 8,14, was .
 According to the book of the Maccabees, the Temple was cleansed in 1,080 days . However, according to the Bible, the temple was cleaned in just over a few days .
 King James version states 2,300 days for this period . Greek Septuagint, which was used during the time of Christ, says 2,400 days . King James' version of Christ's time is 2,200 days .
 In 1754, Bishop Thomas Newton wrote about the existence of a third manuscript of the book of Daniel . It was mentioned in a Commentary of Jerome, the early church leader, Jerome .
 Since this figure can not be applied literally to the events of that time, it is believed that the figure should be considered as years . Chapter Eleven: Chapter Eleven. Chapter Eleven .
 The Times of the Gentiles is a weekly feature on CNN iReport.com . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Visit CNN Living at 9 p.m. ET .
 It would take a separate book just to deal with all the theories which seek to use the Bible to calculate when the last days will occur .
 It is all a matter of interpretation, and numbers can be manipulated in many ways to prove a point, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Many theories have been proved wrong, and other theories, with varying dates, have been proposed . However, though many theories have since been proven wrong, many have been wrong . Other theories have also been proposed.
 1978-2000 will be the time when events brought on by the establishment of the New World Order will occur, say experts . They all seem to point to the same period as the '78-2000' period .
 Israel is going to take a prominent role in world affairs in the near future . Let's take a brief look at their historical development to see why tensions are going to continue to increase .
 The other two tribes, Benjamin and Judah, remained in the south . The word ""Jew"" came from the word "Jew" came from .
 Babylonian, Medo-Persian(536 BC-533 BC), Egyptian, Egyptian, Syrian, and Roman. Babylonian . Medo . Persian . Persian . Babylonian and Egyptian . Egyptian, . Egyptian and Roman .
 Through the years, most of the Jews had fled from the land, and only a small group remained in Jerusalem until 70 AD, when the Romans burned the city .
 The area continued to be the subject of contention as it was conquered by the Byzantine, Mohammedan(6391099), Crusader, Moslem, Egyptian-Mamaluke, and Turks . Still the area was subject to contention as well .
 In 1895, Theodor Herzl, an Austrian Jew, wrote a book called The Jewish State ( Per Judenstadt) that began the movement towards the establishment of an independent Jewish state . Herzl's book was published in 1895, and Herzl was the founder of the Jewish State
 In 1897, he arranged the first World Zionist Congress in Basle, Switzerland, in Switzerland . He was a pioneer of Zionism and Zionism .
 A fund was started to raise money to buy land, and a blue and white flag was chosen, the colors of the tallith prayer shawl . Now known as ""Zionnsts", a fund was set up to raise funds for land purchase .
 Herzl traveled around the world, especially in Europe, to lobby for his group . Herzl died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 England offered Jews the African country of Uganda, which they rejected, because they knew that Palestine was their country . In 1903, a year before he died, England offered them Uganda, but they rejected it because of Palestine .
 According to the Bible, Israel's promised land stretches from the Nile River in Egypt to the Euphrates in Syria . The Bible says the land includes the countries of Syria and Lebanon .
 The Polish-born Jew had studied Chemistry in Germany, and taught in Switzerland and England .
 During World War I, Germany was producing 250,000 shells a day, while England was only producing 2,500 . The shortage of acetone was due to the lack of wood alcohol in the shell shells .
 Weizmann isolated an organism capable of transforming the starch of cereals, most notably that of maize, and later chestnuts, into acetone butyl alcohol . The starch of maize and chestnuts was transformed into acetones butylalcohol .
 Weizmann credited with saving the British Army . Chapter Eleven the allied cause . Chapter 11 .
 The only thanks he wanted, was for Palestine to be established as a national homeland for the Jews .
 Edmund Allenby marched into Jerusalem, and when the Turks heard that he was on his way, they interpreted ""Allenby"" to mean ""Allah Nebi" The Turks took it as a sign that God was against them, and took it a sign .
 They were also worried about the accompanying airplanes, which they had never seen before . The 14th Bomber Squadron of the Royal Flying Corp. was also worried .
 Daniel 12:12. An interesting fact to add to this narrative can be found in Daniel 12.12. Daniel's 12:11.
 Some believe that the 1335 ""days"" may refer to the actual date that Palestine was delivered from Moslem rule . The 1335 "days" refers to the date of the liberation of Palestine .
 Daniel's date would most likely be in Moslem terms, not Jewish or Gregorian . The land in Daniel's day was under Moslem rule .
 A coin minted in Turkey showed the Gregorian date of 1917 on one side, and the Moslem date of 1335 on the other side . The coin was minted with the date of 1913 on the side .
 After the War, the 1919 Paris Peace Conference at Versailles established the League of Nations . It approved the Balfour Declaration and granted a mandate for Great Britain to govern Palestine .
 A Select Committee on Estimates, of the British House of Commons, reported that large numbers of Jews, almost amounting to a second Exodus, have been migrating from Eastern Europe to the American zones of Germany and Austria .
 In 1937, a Royal Commission was established by England which divided the country of Palestine into three sections: Jewish, Arab and English .
 Jewish terrorist groups, such as the Stern gang, and the Irgun Zvai Leumi, worried that a Jewish State would not materialize, began attacking Arabs . Menachim Begin led the group .
 Time magazine reported that they ""stormed the village of Deir Yasin and butchered everyone in sight" Time magazine said they "stormed" the village and "butchered" everyone .
 Arab settlers fled the country to live in neighboring countries . Rather than risking the possibility of further massacres, the Arab settlers left the country .
 On April 29,1947, the United Nations took on the responsibility of settling the Palestinian situation .
 David Ben-Gurion read the Declaration of Independence over the airwaves in a radio broadcast from the Tel Aviv Museum . On May 14,1948, the British Union Jack in Jerusalem was lowered, and at 4m, David Ben Gurion read it .
 President Truman made an official statement of recognition, making the U.S. one of the first countries to extend diplomatic recognition to the new independent state of Israel . Israel became the first country in the world to recognize Israel .
 Andrei A Gromyko, the Russian Ambassador, announced his support for an independent Jewish State in Palestine . He urged the Arabs to accommodate them .
 They followed their show of support with a strong program which included financial support and military equipment . The program was followed by financial and military support .
 The Soviet Union was hoping that Israel would become another communist satellite . Israel was the focus of the Soviet Union's efforts to create a stateless state .
 Another variation of the numerical theories purports to indicate the foretelling of the establishment of Israel as an independent Jewish State, and the end of the dispersal of the Jewish people .
 When British troops left the area, they said it would be a matter of weeks before the Arabs would take over the new country . When British forces left the region, they warned that it would take weeks to take over .
 An Arab alliance of Egypt, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, and Jordan had attacked Israel . Israel was attacked by the Arab Arab alliance .
 Chapter Eleven 1949 Armistice gave them 21% more land that they had originally been given by the United Nations . Chapter Eleven was the first chapter of Chapter Eleven . Chapter 11 was the last chapter of the War of the Great Depression .
 Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nassar seized control of the Suez Canal on July 26,1956, and announced that the profits would go towards building the Aswan Dam . The profits would be used to build the dam .
 Egypt moved into a close alliance with Russia as billions of dollars worth of military equipment, along with Soviet advisors, poured into the country . Egypt's relationship with the Soviet Union ended in 1979 .
 On October 29th, Israeli forces overran the Gaza Strip, and had it not been for the UN Resolution that ordered a cease fire, Egypt would have fallen to Israel . The UN Resolution was ordered by the UN to cease fire in Egypt .
 Moshe Dayan radioed to twenty of his soldiers stationed in the Sinai Desert, that three Egyptian divisions, 18,000 men, were on their way . On November 7,1957, the Jerusalem Post reported that at 6:03m.m., Moshe .
 The men bowed down, and prayed to the ""God of their Fathers"" to have the strength to die, rather than face being captured . They bowed down .
 When they got up, they saw the Egyptian strike force engaged in retreat . "They got up and saw the ... retreat," the soldiers said .
 Inside the car was one of Nassar's commanding generals, who said they were retreating because they had been surrounded by an army dressed in white . Nassar said they had retreated because they were surrounded by a white army .
 National Geographic reported that on November 7,1957, at 6:33m. there was an earthquake of substantial proportions on the Sinai peninsula, which lead to speculation that the army could have been swallowed up by the earth .
 Most certainly this was a sign that the Jews were indeed God's chosen people, says Rabbi David Cohen . Cohen: "Most certainly this is a sign of God's love for the Jews"
 The Soviet Union began sending equipment to Iraq and Syria, while they continued to interfere in the internal affairs of other Arab nations through military coups and political assassinations .
 Only U.S. and British intervention prevented Communist takeovers in the Middle East . Marines landed in Lebanon in July 1958, and British forces, supporting King Hussein, landed in Jordan .
 Nassar promised the Arabs an all-out offensive effort against Israel, if they would unite under him . Nassar hoped to become the President of the United States of Africa . He was assassinated in 1965 .
 Russia sent exaggerated reports to Egypt and Syria that Israel was preparing for war against Syria in 1967 . In 1967, Russia sent false reports that Israel and Syria were preparing to go on to war .
 Nassar revealed that his chief goal was to eliminate Israel as a nation, and to push them into the sea . Nassar said that he wanted to push Israel out of the sea and eliminate them .
 Nassar closed the crucial port of Eliat, on the Gulf of Aquaba, and blockaded the Tiran Straits . Nassar ordered the UN to remove their troops, which they did; and he closed the key port of . Eliat .
 The armies of Egypt, Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon surrounded Israel on all sides . The battle was fought between the Egyptian and Syrian armies .
 Iraq, Algeria, Kuwait, Sudan, and other Arab nations represented 25 times more manpower than Israel could field . Joining them were Algeria, Algeria and Kuwait, Kuwait and Sudan . The Arab nations had 25 times the manpower they needed to field .
 Nassar moved his Russian-made tanks and artillery into position on June 4,1967 . Nassar's tanks, artillery and tanks were deployed in the Soviet Union invasion .
 He knew, that with America caught up in the Vietnam War, there would be no help for Israel . He knew that with U.S. caught in Vietnam War there would no help .
 As daylight broke on June 5th, Israeli jets flew low from the north and began bombing the Egyptian Air Force .
 Israeli ships traded fire with Egypt's naval power, and Israeli tanks rolled into Sinai . Israeli ships trade fire with Egyptian naval power . Israeli tanks roll into the Sinai .
 Russia warned the major countries of the world to back-off, so the world sat back and waited, expecting a swift Arab victory . As the events unfolded, Russia told the world's major countries to back off, so did the world sit back and wait .
 By the second day, Arab leaders watched their military being ground to bits . Arab leaders were watching their military ground up to bits by the end of the day .
 After six days, the Arab alliance was in retreat as Israeli soldiers captured the Sinai, the Golan Heights, and reclaimed the city of Jerusalem .
 Schlomo Goren, Ashkenazic(of Eastern European origin) Chief Rabbi of Israel, carried the Scrolls of the Law, and sounded the ram's horn of repentance . Schlomo . Goren . carried the scrolls of the law and sounded . the horn of repent . Schl
 Allenby entered Jerusalem, and 1967, when the Jews took complete control of the country . Allenby visited Jerusalem in 1967, and entered Jerusalem in order to help Jews take control .
 Arabs lost three billion dollars of military equipment in six days . Israelis captured $700 million in new Soviet military hardware . Arabs also lost $3 billion in military equipment .
 In the years that followed, Russia continued to arm Egypt, Syria, and other Arab countries . Russia continued armamenting Egypt and Syria in the years following .
 By 1972, Enwar Sadat, the President of Egypt, felt that Russia was trying to control the Middle East, and he ended his country's alliance with them . However, by 1972, he felt that they were trying to take over the region .
 Egypt and Saudi Arabia joined forces so they wouldn't have to rely on Russia . Egypt joined forces with Saudi Arabia in order to protect themselves from Russia .
 In 1973, Egypt's War Minister announced that the headquarters for all Arab fronts would be established in Cairo . Egypt's Arab fronts were established in 1973 .
 Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and eight other Arab nations attacked Israel . Chapter Eleven Atonement: The Arab Spring is the result of the Arab Spring . Chapter 11: Egypt and Syria attacked Israel.
 Sadat's terms for a ceasefire were for Israel to withdraw from all territory it took during the 1967 war . Israel withdrew from all territories it took in Israel during the war .
 American and Soviet pressure turned this Israeli victory into a negotiated compromise . Israeli victory was turned into a compromise with the West .
 Arabs punished the world for their support of Israel by initiating an oil embargo against all the nations, such us the U.S. who were partial to Israel . The Arabs started the embargo against the world, such as the United States .
 In 1977, Israeli Chief of Staff Mordechai Gur said publicly that Egypt was again preparing for war . He based his assumption on an unprecedented military buildup that was part of a two-year plan .
 In 1988, President Carter was able to get Israel and Egypt to sign the Camp David Peace Accord . The agreement was signed by President Carter in 1988 . The two nations signed a Camp David peace agreement in 1988, which was signed in Israel .
 The 21-nation Arab League established a $3.3 billion war fund in 1978 to continue the armed confrontation with the Jewish State . In 1980, a 37-nation Islamic Summit called for a ""Holy War"" to liberate all Arab land, including Jerusalem, to establish an independent Palestinian
 The proposal was rejected by Egypt because of their commitment to the Peace Accord . Egypt rejected the proposal because they are committed to the peace accord .
 Russia had enough arms and foodstuffs in huge caves under the town of Sidon to supply a million-man army, including uniforms, assault rifles, ammunition, shells, missiles, and tanks .
 They found two huge digging machines that were used to dig the underground fortress . They were used in the construction of the fortress in the 1970s .
 The smaller one of the two can dig a hole 30 feet wide, 24 feet high, and 60 feet deep, in eight hours . The smaller hole digger can dig 30 feet .
 The six machines were part of a six-machine shipment to Austria by a U.S. manufacturer . They were among six machines shipped to Austria from the United States . The machines are part of the shipment of six machines .
 The shelf life of the K-rations were only six months, which led many to believe the Israel thwarted a Russian invasion of Israel that was planned for the fall of 1982 .
 The Israeli military force is probably the most respected in the world, despite its small size . Today, it is probably one of the world's most respected military forces . Israel is now the most powerful military force in the Middle East .
 This commitment has nurtured that incredible fighting spirit, making them the most elite fighting force in the world literally unbeatable . This commitment is nurtured by the team's commitment to the sport, and it is now the world's most elite force .
 Israel will never fall, but that won't stop someone from trying to do it . They are God's chosen people, and because of that, Israel won't fall . Israel is the nation of Israel, and that's why they won't ever fall .
 In 1930, the Soviet Union released a 14 kopek postage stamp to commemorate their future invasion of Palestine . The Soviet Union issued the stamp in 1930 .
 According to Ezekiel 38:8,11, and 14, this invasion will not occur, until Israel has been placed under the protection, of what seems to be, some sort of diplomatic treaty . According to the Bible, Israel will not be invaded until Israel is placed under a diplomatic protection
 A treaty between Israel and the P.L.O. has been worked out . Chapter Eleven Egypt has been signed by Israel and Egypt . Chapter 11 Egypt is the first chapter of a treaty between the two countries .
 This invasion will be World War III, and will include the Arab nations(Esau's descendants) who will go against lsrael for stealing their birthright . The Arab nations will fight against the Israeli government .
 In order to decipher the line-up of participants given in the 38th chapter of Ezekiel, we need to analyze it geographically . We need to decipher it in order to find out who the participants were .
 Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubul, Meshech, and Tiras, who repopulated the Earth after the Flood . Gomer was Magog .
 Magog's descendants settled in the area of Armenia, which is in southern Russia . The descendants of Magog are now in the region of Armenia .
 This race came to be known as the Scythians, and were called 'Magogites' by the Greeks . They were called Magogites by the ancient Greeks . This race became known as 'Scythians' and later known as Magogite .
 The Arabic term for the Great Wall of China is 'the wall of Al Magog', because it was erected with the intention of keeping out the armies of Magog . The wall was erected in order to keep out Magog's armies .
 Their descendants include the Tarters, Cossacks, Kalmuks, and the Mongols . The Mongols are descendants of the Cossols, the Crimean Tatarans, the Kalmars and the Tars .
 The King James version translated 'Rosh' to mean 'chief prince', because in Hebrew it means 'head' But in the Septuagint version, it is used as a proper name, as it should be . The Septiagint means 'rosh' in Hebrew
 The descendants of Meshech settled in western Russia, where they established a city called Mosach, later known as Mosach . The descendants established the city later called Moscovi, which is the capital of Russia .
 Tubal's descendants lived in the area of the Black Sea, then moved north, settling in the eastern part of Russia, establishing the city of Tobolsk . Tubal was the first to live in the region, and his descendants moved north and west .
 Their descendants include the Iberians, Georgians, Cappadocians, as well as other Asiatic and European peoples . The Iberian and Georgian people are descendants of other Europeans .
 Gomer's desecendants settled in central Asia Minor, north of the Black Sea, in southern Russia . They then moved west along the Danube River, to the area now known as Germany .
 Their descendants include the Galatians, Phrygians, Gauls, Celts, Germans, French, Welsh, Irish, Britons, and other Anglo-Saxon peoples .
 In addition, Togarmah, a son of Gomer, is singled out . In addition to the Assyrians as 'Tilgarimmu', Togarah is also singled out in the Bible .
 Togarmah's 'bands' could also refer to Armenia and Syria, whose ancestors claimed that Haik, the father of their race, was the son of Haik .
 The descendants of another son of Gomer, Ashkenaz, settled in Germany and Austria . Gomer's descendants also settled in Austria and Germany .
 These countries represent a total military force of nearly 6,000,000 men . These countries are represented by more than 6,500,000 troops .
 In light of Russia's past history, they have never been able to be trusted . Russia has never been trusted in the past, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is likely that during this period, when democracy seems to be taking root in the former Soviet Union, it is actually only an illusion . Democracy is likely to be an illusion during this time of democracy taking root .
 Even though drastic changes have been made, maybe they were done only to project the image of weakness, so they can regroup and retool their military machine in preparation for their biggest assault yet . Maybe they're doing so to prepare for the big assault yet.
 In Russia, there is a growing anti-Jewish sentiment, which was enflamed by nationalist leader Vladimir Zhrinovsky, who seemed to be building support needed to win the presidency of Russia .
 In his book The Final March to the South, he states that it is Russia's destiny to capture all of the lands to the south including Israel .
 History has shown that Russia has supported the Arab nations in their quest to conquer Palestine . The group will join the Russian invasion force that will sweep across the mountains of Lebanon into Israel .
 A map drawn by monks during the Crusades, still hangs in the Herford Cathedral . It identifies Jerusalem as the geographic center of the world, which is so marked on the floor of the Holy Sepulcher .
 The attention will become more focused on this area of the world as this nation becomes prosperous, says President Obama . The attention of the . world will become . become more . focused on the area of . the world .
 The Dead Sea is located between Israel and Jordan, which is 1,296 feet below sea level . It is the lowest spot on the surface of the Earth, located between the Dead Sea and Jordan .
 It is fifty miles long and eleven miles wide, and has a depth of 1,200 feet at its deepest point . It is 50 miles long, 11 miles wide and 11 miles deep .
 Known as the 'Sea of Salt', it is ten times saltier than ocean water . It is fed by the Jordan River, and has no outlet . Known as 'sea of Salt' because it has no outlets .
 Water contains potassium chloride, or potash, which is used as a fertilizer and for making explosives . Potash is also used in making explosives and fertilizer .
 It is believed that this ingredient will become a very valuable commodity . The ingredient is believed to be worth a lot of money .
 Because of its sulfuric content, the water is said to have therapeutic properties . Because of the water, it is believed to have medicinal properties .
 The sun heats the shallow salt water, and the heat is trapped in the dense salt layer on the bottom, and becomes hot enough to turn a turbine, thus producing electricity . The process is similar to the process of turning a turbine into electricity .
 Scientists have also discovered an algae, known as Dunaliella, which can survive in, and has adapted to, the extremely salty conditions . The algae is also found to be adapted to the salty conditions of the environment .
 It is being grown in algae farms where they double their numbers every two days . The algae farms are doubling their numbers in two days to produce the product .
 The algae is used to produce a green paste, which, when dried, makes an excellent animal feed because of its high protein content . It is easy to digest because the algae have no cell walls, and it's an easy digest .
 Chapter Eleven glycerol is used for eye shadow and other cosmetics, paints, resins, and toothpaste .
 When algae decomposes, it forms the raw material that nature uses to form oil . The algae is used as raw material for oil production .
 The value of the mineral deposits in the Dead Sea has been estimated at over a trillion dollars .
 The Dead Sea has been shrinking in size as the sea level has fallen . However, the Dead Sea is still growing in size . Sea level has also shrunk in size since it was formed .
 The Mediterranean Dead Sea Co. initiated a $1.1 billion project to funnel water to the Dead Sea from the Mediterranean . The Mediterranean project is about 70 miles away . The project is expected to cost $1 billion .
 Geological surveys have indicated that there is plenty of steam under Israel to provide power through the harnessing of geo-thermal energy . Geological surveys show there is enough steam under . Israel to harness the power through . harnessing geo . energy .
 Cutting diamonds is a major industry, as is exporting citrus fruit to Europe and Japan . Cutting diamonds and citrus fruit are also a major export industry .
 With Russia experiencing financial hardships, there is plenty of resources in Russia that could be garnished for their benefit .
 No doubt, Israel will offer tremendous resistance, causing Russia to change their plans, and circle around Israel . Russia will likely change its plans, causing it to circle around the country .
 Daniel mentions that ""Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon"" will not be overrun . Daniel mentions the battle for Ammon . Daniel also mentions that Moab and Ammon were not overrun .
 They, along with the Israelites, Arabians, Ishmaelites, and Midianites, were the descendants of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the middle son of Noah . Ironically, they were also descendants of the Israelite .
 Peace Treaty with Israel was signed in October, 1994 . Peace Treaty signed on September 14,1993 . Jordan signed agenda for peace with Israel . Land was on eastern shore of the Dead Sea .
 This seems to be an indication that even though they sided with Iraq during the Gulf War, they will stick to their treaty with Israel and not become part of the invasion . This is a sign that Israel will not join in the invasion of Iraq .
 Russia will then double-cross their allies, and strike the country of Egypt, in order to control the land bridge, giving them a three-way advantage to attacking either Europe, Africa, or Asia . Russia is then expected to strike Egypt, and control the country's land bridge .
 Egypt, along with Saudi Arabia, were the two main Arab countries who broke their military ties with Russia; plus, since they are not mentioned, they may also continue to honor their Treaty with Israel .
 The target most likely will be Saudi Arabia, and the world's oil supply . The world's largest oil producer is expected to target Saudi Arabia in the Middle East .
 Chapter Eleven became known as the British colony of Aden, known as Aden, until achieving independence as South Yemen . Chapter Eleven was known as a British colony in Aden .
 Dedan was the name of a Sabaean oasis in the northern part of Saudi Arabia . Oasis was one of their many colonies in northern Arabia .
 Cush, the son of Ham, was the father of Ethiopia, and other tribes who settled south of Egypt, in Arabia, Babylonia and India . Cush was the first tribe to settle in Egypt and Arabia .
 They were an ally of the Coalition against Iraq during the Gulf War . They will not be part of the Russian invasion force against Israel .
 According to Jeremiah 10:9, Tarshish is identified as a land rich with precious metals . In other passages, such as Isaiah 2:16, are associated with possessing a prominent shipping empire .
 Recent archaeological evidence has shown that they possessed sailing capabilities far beyond what was originally known . Archaeological evidence has revealed that they were capable of sailing far more than previously thought .
 Tarshish was a great-grandson of Noah, whose descendants migrated to the areas which later became Spain and Great Britain . His descendants later migrated to Spain and Britain .
 Chapter Eleven make up the European Community at the time; and the ""young lions" refer to the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, their possessions and allies .
 Scholars have identified the twelve princes of lshmael which scholars have identified as Egypt, Persia, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Sudan, and Tunisia . This confederation, will include the countries of Ethiopia, Bahrain, Djib
 According to the 35th chapter of Ezekiel, they are referred to as Mount Seir . They will be destroyed because of their hatred of Israel, according to Ezekiel .
 Russia will receive reports concern troop movements in China, and the initiation of retaliatory strike by the coalition of Western nations; and they will regroup to attack Israel again . After their defeat of the Arab nations, Russia will get reports of troop movements .
 They will position themselves in the ""valley of the passengers on the east of the sea,"" which is east of Sea of Galilee and the Dead Sea . The passengers will be positioned in the "valley" of passengers .
 Ezekiel's description of the fire of my wrath appears to be the result of a one day nuclear attack by the coalition of nations from the West, that destroys 5/6 of the Russian forces . Ezekiel described the description of a great shaking...great hailstones, fire, and brim
 So many men will die, that it will take seven months to bury the dead bodies . The dead bodies will be buried in seven months .
 Russia reportedly making war equipment out of wood treated with lignostone . Chemical developed in Holland as a fuel substitute in Holland .
 The British are using a similar substance for gears in their large vehicles .
 Material treated with this chemical burns brightly with intense heat, and will make it easier for the weapons to be burned . Material is treated with a chemical that burns brightly and burns brightly .
 The incredible defeat of the Russian military machine, will make a star out of the leader of the Western European Alliance, just as the Gulf War did for Gen. Gen. George W. Bush .
 He will appear to be a man who will finally be able to bring peace to the world, he said . He said: "I'm not scared of the future. I'm looking forward to peace"
 He will claim that Israel has a special place in his heart, and he will make a seven-year treaty with them to guarantee the Jew's national security, he said .
 If, according to my theory, this man does come from the Prieureure' de Sion, and claims to represent to the bloodline of Jesus, this revelation will greatly increase his international stature .
 It won't take long for this western European leader to be heralded as the Messiah they have been waiting for . However, it won't be a long time for this Western European leader .
 There is a school of thought that believes that only the Messiah can rebuild the Temple, because he would be the only one who knows the actual location of its foundation .
 Evidence that seems to indicate that the Temple will be rebuilt prior to the return of Jesus . However, there is some evidence that the temple will not be rebuilt before Jesus' return .
 This indicates that the Temple will already be in existence by this time . The Temple is expected to be built by the end of this year .
 In 1948, the nation of Israel was established; in 1967, they took complete control of the city of Jerusalem . Only one prophecy unfulfilled, which is the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple . The nation was established in 1948 .
 God made his presence known in a miqdash, a temporary structure known as the Tabernacle, which was erected in various locations around Israel . The miqdis was erected around Israel, such as Shiloh, Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, Mizpah,
 David conquered Jerusalem, creating a central location for their civil government and religious worship . This continued until the Israelites became united, both politically and spiritually, which took place in Jerusalem .
 Davidic Covenants Sam.:4-17 seems to indicate that the site chosen would be a permanent location . Chapter Eleven protected only by a tent, he knew that he had to build a house of God, which according to the Davidic. Covenants, seems to suggest that the
 In the 24th chapter of 2 Samuel, it is recorded how David counted his men to see if his army was going to be of sufficient military strength . In the Bible, the king counted his army to see how much of it was needed .
 Because he didn't trust God for his victory, the Lord sent a destroying angel that brought a plague against the people of Jerusalem . The plague was a plague that brought out people from Jerusalem, the Bible says .
 This area on Mount Moriah, was the site where God tested Abraham's faith by commanding him to sacrifice his son Isaac, and was known as the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite . This area was known to be the site of the Abraham sacrifice .
 It took a workforce of 200,000 men, seven years to complete this magnificent edifice . Funds gathered by David in a royal treasury, with funds gathered in the royal treasury .
 All the Temple vessels had been returned, the altar built, and the sacrifices resumed . The Temple vessels were returned and the altar was built .
 Nehemiah repaired the walls to protect the Temple, and began rebuilding the city . Another Persian king, Artaxerxes, appointed a Jew as governor of Jerusalem, and repaired walls .
 Judea soon came under the control of the Greeks; and the Egyptian Greeks, who allowed governorship by the high priests . Judea was ruled by the High Priests of Judea .
 A third ruler, a Syrian Greek known as Antiochus IV, appointed a high priest who initiated pagan worship in opposition to the Orthodox faction . The high priest was appointed by a third ruler who sided with the Jewish faction of the Hellenists .
 Antiochus desecrated the Temple by sacrificing a pig on the altar, placing a pagan idol in the Holy of Holies, and burning copies of the Torah . The Temple was destroyed by Antiochus .
 The rebuilt Temple, known as the Temple of Herod, was twice as high, and much wider . The new Temple was twice the high, wider and twice as tall as the original .
 During this period of Roman rule, an imperial sacrifice had to be offered to the emperor, in addition to the traditional Jewish sacrifice . An imperial sacrifice was also offered during the Roman rule .
 Eleazar, the son of a captain of the Temple, initiated an uprising of Jewish zealots, which brought the Tenth Legion from Rome . This came to an end in 66 AD, when Eleazar started an uprising against Rome . Eleazar initiated the uprising, which ended in the death
 They failed to defeat the Jewish freedom fighters and a massive revolt ensued, resulting in Judea being returned to the control of the Jews . The revolt ended in the death of the Jewish people .
 Emperor Nero sent Vespasian, Rome's best military leader, and his army, to end the rebellion . Emperor Nero then sent his army to stop the rebellion, ending the rebellion in Rome's favour .
 Vespasian, who became the new emperor, gave his son Titus the task of securing Jerusalem . Titus was tasked with securing the city of Jerusalem .
 A military operation was launched which ended in 70 AD, when the Temple was set on fire by the Roman Tenth Legion under Titus . Titus pried the Temple apart stone by stone, and threw them into the valley southeast of Jerusalem . The Temple was destroyed by Titus, who pried it
 A portion of the Western Wall, known as the Wailing Wall, was left standing by the Romans as a symbol of how powerful they were . The Romans left the wall standing as a sign of their power .
 When Constantine died in 361, his nephew, Flavius Claudius Julianus, the last emperor of Rome, ruled for 19 months, and attempted to reinstate paganism, and emperor worship .
 He had grown up under the teachings of Eusebius, Bishop of Cesarea . He turned away from those teachings and pushed for religious tolerance .
 His hatred of Christianity drove him to return Jerusalem back to the Jews, to restore Jewish law, and to advocate the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple .
 He freed the Jews from taxes, and gave his support for the reestablishment of animal sacrifices . But he was told that the Jews no longer practiced the ritual because they had no Temple .
 Julian appointed Alypius of Antioch to oversee the building, while the governors of Syria and Palestine were instructed to assist .
 When they tried to dig into the foundation, an earthquake occurred, which ignited pockets of natural gas underground, causing fires and explosions . All the stones, wood and metal which were being stored on the site were destroyed .
 Julian died in the battle against the Persians . This was taken as a divine sign that the Temple was not to be rebuilt at that time . Construction was halted after Julian died .
 After the return of power by the return by the Christian Roman Emperors, the idea was forgotten . The idea of the Roman Empire was forgotten.
 Across from the Temple Mount, it was actually intended to symbolically replace the Temple, which is why its layout is reminiscent of the Temple . The layout of the temple is similar to the Temple and the layout of it .
 As a way of offending Jews, the condition of the Temple area was allowed to deteriorate and was even used as a repository for human waste .
 In 614, the Persians broke through Byzantine defenses, and with the help of the Jews, defeated Heraclius . The Persians, with help from Jews, helped defeat the Byzantine ruler . In 615, Heraclian was defeated by the Persian forces .
 Although it is believed that the sacrifices were resumed, no construction was initiated . Chapter Eleven is believed to have been resumed, but no construction has been initiated .
 Heraclius returned to take over the city, building an octagonal church on the site . About fifteen years later he returned to build the church .
 After the death of Muhammed, his follower Omar became Caliph, taking over Jerusalem in 638 . Omar took over Jerusalem with the help of his Islamic army . Omar became the Caliph .
 In 687, Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, the 10th Caliph, began work on the Qubbat as-Sakhra or the Dome of the Rock, which was completed in 691 . In 691, the Dome was completed by the Caliph
 The Mosque was built to rival the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, showing its religious claim on the city by symbolizing the ideology of their new faith . It was built in order to protect the rock believed to be the threshing floor purchased by David by David .
 The Quran, the Islamic holy scripture, states that the Jews have a historic claim on the land . Even the Quran, which is based on the Bible, says Jews have an historic claim .
 The event known as the ""Night Journey of Muhammad"", when he fled from Mecca to Medina, was connected to Jerusalem, because it mentioned al-Aqsa, which is the name of the Mosque south of the Dome of the Rock . However, the event known . as the
 Linguistically, ""al-aqsa" means ""far corner" and could very well refer to Mecca . Linguisticistically, when it is translated, means ""Far corner"
 The Temple Mount is said to be the rock where Muhammed received his instructions from God, and ascended into Heaven . Therefore, it is believed to be where he received instructions and ascended .
 Some historians believe the story was concocted during the rule of Umayyad prince, al-Walid I to raise the funds necessary to build the al-Aqsa Mosque into an edifice comparable to the Dome of the Rock .
 From 1099-1187, the Crusaders occupied Jerusalem, and the Dome of the Rock became a Christian church . The al-Aqsa Mosque became the headquarters of the Knights Templar . The Dome of The Rock was the birthplace of the Crusades .
 When Jerusalem was overthrown by the Muslim leader Saladin, the Temple Mount complex became the third holiest site in the Islamic faith . The al-Aqsa Mosque is referred to as the Haram ash-Sharif .
 Today, the obstacle for rebuilding the Temple, is the Islamic holy site, the Dome of the Rock . The Dome is considered the most important part of the Temple's reconstruction .
 It is maintained that the Arabs have had a claim on it for 5,000 years, and that there was never a Jewish temple on that area . The Arabs have claimed the area has been claimed by the Jews for more than five centuries .
 The Israeli Antiquities Authority and most Israeli archaeologists agree that this traditional location was the site of the Temple . Most Israeli archaeologists believe it was the traditional location .
 In 1967, Israel returned control of the Temple Mount back to the Wakf as a gesture of peace and cooperation . Israel captured East Jerusalem during the Six-Day War, a month later .
 He feared the ground would be razed to make way for the rebuilding of the Temple . It was later reported that he had an underlying fear that the ground was razed .
 It is unclear whether the rock was the sacrificial altar, or the Holy of Holies where the Ark was placed . The presence of drain holes bored into the surface, which leads to a cave below the Mosque, may indicate it was the area of the Temple used for sacrifices .
 Chapter Eleven runoff into a canal which carried the fluids out of the complex . Chapter Eleven is the first time Chapter Eleven has been released from the site .
 This would place the Holy of Holies in an area which slopes downward, and creates a conflict with archaeological evidence and historical tradition . This would create a conflict of archaeological evidence .
 There is some support for the idea that the rock was the foundation stone for the Holy of Holies .
 Warren's Gate was beneath the Gate Babel-Mat'hara and up to 1967 was the location of an Arab latrine . The argument for this is based on the assumption that one of the Temple gates opened directly in front of the Holy of Holies . Warren's gate was beneath
 In 1867, Charles Warren found an ancient gate to the Temple Mount, and since then, the entire Western Wall has been excavated . The Rabbinic Tunnel was discovered and excavated by 1986, along with four other entrances to the Wall .
 The Western Wall of the Temple was left standing by Rome as a symbol of their authority . It was part of the retaining wall which was erected to support the immense platform which held the Temple .
 In March, 1979, a story was circulated, that a workman, digging with his fingers, 80 feet below the existing floor, discovered the Arch of King Solomon from the original Temple, which led to the Holy of Holies . In March 1979, where excavations were being done
 The archway of stone was constructed with a special mortar containing broken glass, as per God's instructions . The special mortar contains broken glass and was used in the archway .
 Tests taken of the glistening mortar indicated that it was produced during that period . The mortar is believed to have been produced during the same period .
 According to the Law, only a Jew from the tribe of Levi, and the family of Aaron, can enter the Holy of Holies . They would not break through the Wall, because according to the law, only Levi's family can enter .
 In 1981, Rabbi Meir Yehuda Getz, chief rabbi of the Western Wall, discovered a great hall behind a former cistern which contained an arch, believed to be one of the entrances to the Temple . Getz investigated water emanating from the Wall, and found a great
 It turned out to be the gate discovered by Warren, which led to the Temple court, and was the closest gate to the Holy of Holies . Warren discovered the gate in the temple court .
 A group of ten men, some from the Ateret Cohanim Yeshiva, began clearing the hall . The men cleared the hall, working their way toward the Holy of Holies .
 Tradition holds that beneath this stone there is a chamber created by Solomon which was later used to hide the Ark . If the Rock was the foundation stone of the Holy of Holies, then it is believed to have been used to create the chamber .
 Getz believes that this secret chamber contains the Ark, the table, and the menorah . Getz says he believes that the Ark is located in this chamber .
 After breaking down another wall, the Muslim authorities were made aware of what was going on, and the Arabs instigated a riot which led to the excavation site being shut down . The site was closed down after a riot broke out after the Arab authorities were informed .
 A wall was placed over the entrance to the tunnel, and was later reinforced with another wall of steel and plaster . In 1992, the wall was redone to give it an appearance of natural rock .
 It is believed that these articles were removed, and their whereabouts are unknown . The whereabouts of these articles are believed to be unknown .
 The Israelis have been kept from rebuilding or excavating the mosque because of their strained relationship with the Arabs . Moslems fear that such excavations would weaken the structure of the Mosque .
 Others argue that any significant archaeological discoveries on the site would prove Israel's ancient claim to the Mount . Others would argue that it's because any significant archaeology discoveries would prove that Israel has an ancient claim .
 Because of the lack of substantial information, there is even alot of doubt as to where on the Temple Mount the sanctuary was actually located .
 Father Bellarmino Begatti, A Franciscan researcher, published a report in 1979, that based on measurements and information in ancient documents, the Temple was located on the southern end of the Mount between the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa Mosque .
 Arab construction on the northern end exposed an ancient wall near the Dome of the Rock . It is believed to be the eastern wall of the Temple's Court of Women .
 It is believed that this was the location of the Holy of Holies in the original Temple, where the Ark of the Covenant was placed . It is also called the Qubbat el-Alouah, because it is believed to have been located in the location .
 The Mosque, which takes up an area of 34 acres, would actually be separated from most of the Temple foundation by many feet of rubble . If this is true, that means that the Temple can be rebuilt without disturbing the Arab site, because the Mosque takes up 34 acres .
 Proponents of this theory claim the area on the Mount of Olives was used for the sacrifice of the Red Heifer . This indicates that the Temple was not on the site of the Dome of the Rock . Proponents say the area was not used for sacrifice was used in the sacrifice
 Some Orthodox Jews believe that before the Temple can be rebuilt, both the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa Mosque would have to be removed . Some Orthodox Jewish believe that their presence defiles the sacred ground in the area .
 Before the Six-Day War, a quarter-page ad appeared in the Washington Post seeking aid for the rebuilding of the Temple . The ad was published before the war .
 Document known as the ""Temple Scroll" was part of the Dead Sea Scrolls found at Qumran . Document gives instructions concerning the construction of the Temple .
 Harvey A Smith, a Jewish Assemblies of God minister, wrote in his book, that they have the biggest and heaviest stones cut and secretly placed under the Temple Mount behind Warren Gate .
 From that time until the construction of the Temple by Solomon, only one generation passed . Only one generation had passed .
 In December 1970, 1970, a special school called ""Yeshiva Avodas Hakodesh" was established to train students from the tribe of Levi in the ancient ritual of animal sacrifice .
 Only students who can trace their lineage back to Aaron can be admitted to the university . Aaron is the son of Aaron, who was born into a family of four .
 Motti Dan is said to be a descendent of the priestly line . He studied all the rules in regard to the Temple service, and established the ""Ateret Cohanim Yeshiva"" in the 1970's as a religious school .
 The first class graduated on June 1,1980, and among their graduation exercises, was to perform the ancient rite of animal sacrifice . The first of the first class of the 1980s performed the ritual .
 An episode of ""60 Minutes"" in March, 1985, in a segment called ""One Step in Heaven"", indicated that rabbinical students in Jerusalem were studying the rites of animal sacrifice under Rabbi Shlomo Goren .
 The Institute for Talmudic Commentaries is run by Rabbi Nahman Kahane, a descendent of the priestly line . The Institute is involved in research to catalog all known cohanim in Israel .
 The Atara L'yoshna the crown to its original ""), a branch of Kahane's group, has established a Study and Tourist Center near the Western Wall . They have models of the Tabernacle, the two original Temples, the new Temple, the Ark
 It was a reactionary movement to protest the move by Moshe Dayan, the Israeli Defense Minister, who allowed the Muslims to maintain control of the Temple Mount area in 1967 . The movement was a reaction to Dayan's decision to let Muslims maintain control .
 Asher Kaufman, and archaeologist Dan Bahat, say Arabs were destroying valuable archaeological evidence from the first and second Temples . Kaufman and Bahat say Arabs are destroying valuable evidence . Kaufman, Bahat and Kaufman say Arabs destroyed valuable evidence of the first, second and third Temples
 The group has also made attempts to lay a special 4-ton cornerstone on the Mount .
 The Temple Institute was founded in 1988 by Rabbi Israel Ariel . Ariel was the first paratrooper to reach the Western Wall in 1967 . In 1967, Rabbi Ariel was first to reach Western Wall . The Institute is based in Israel .
 Time magazine printed a two-page article on the group in October, 1989, and ABC-TV's news show ""20/20"" televised a segment on them .
 On October 18,1989, the first bi-annual Conference on Temple Research was held . The conference was held at Temple University in New York .
 Temple Institute and the Ministry of Religious Affairs collaborated to coordinate efforts in making the Temple a reality . The Temple Institute hopes to bring together rabbis, scientists, archaeologists and archaeologists in an attempt to better coordinate efforts .
 The Temple Institute has produced the actual items which will be used in the Temple when it is rebuilt . Based on years of research, historical tradition and the Scriptures, the Temple Institute is producing the items for the Temple .
 In the planning stages, is the breastplate of the high priest, which will contain twelve gemstones . The gold electroplated menorah will contain 94 pounds of gold, giving it an estimated value of $10 million .
 The priest would sacrifice an unblemished, unbroken Red Heifer, after which the remaining ashes were collected and added to the ashes of the next sacrifice . The remaining ashes would be collected and collected to add to the final sacrifice .
 It took place on the western slope of the Mount of Olives, within sight of the Holy of Holies . The incident took place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The ashes were then sprinkled upon the waters of a large cistern under the Temple to prepare them to be used as the water of purification to cleanse sin and defilement .
 The last sacrifice occurred in 70 AD, prior to the destruction of the Temple, after which the ashes were secretly buried . The ashes of the last sacrifice were then buried in secret .
 This ritual cleansing would have to be performed on the Temple Mount in order to reinstate Temple worship as commanded by the Laws of God .
 Scroll"" found at Qumran, were buried in a container made of clay, and dung from the Red Heifer . The Scroll was found in the container made from clay and made of dung .
 The Temple Institute believes that the tradition of the ""ashes of continuity"" is a mistranslation . If they can not be located, the Temple Institute maintains that the original ashes are not necessary .
 Chief Rabbi of Israel dispatched a team of scientists to Sweden to purchase frozen embryos of a particular breed of red heifers in order to impregnate a heifer in Israel and breed an animal that would fulfill the scriptural requirements .
 A herd of red Angus cattle have been discovered in Mississippi . A group of these have been sent to Israel for later use . Red Angus cattle will be sent to the Middle East for use .
 Vendyl Jones, a former Baptist minister turned archaeologist, found a clay jar containing a unique incense oil which dated back to the time of the second Jewish Temple . Jones is said to be the inspiration for the creation of the fictional character Indiana Jones .
 One of the ingredients was an oil called afars'mon, which was taken from the sap of the rare balsam tree that grew near Jericho at a wadi known as Ein Gedi, near the area of Qumran .
 Rome burned the only known grove of these balsam trees, now considered extinct . The oil was very rare, and when Rome invaded Qumran community before 70 AD, the Essenes burned the grove .
 In 1988, a worker, Benny Ayers, who was with a group of Christian archaeologists and volunteers, used the clues given there, using the clues . The special anointing oil is listed in the Copper Scroll .
 Carbon-14 dating shows that the oil was put in the container during the first century . It is believed to be the anointing oil used in the Temple .
 The oil's chemical composition was such, that one drop placed in water, turned it milky white, as ancient documents indicated . One drop of the oil was placed in a drop of water, which turned it white, according to documents .
 The substance was given to the Chief Rabbi of Israel, and it will be used to anoint the Messiah when he returns . The substance will also be used in the Messiah's return .
 Chief Rabbi Isaac Herzog believes that the dye used to achieve the blue-colored thread on the Temple garments, comes from the Segulit snail, which because of its scarcity, is very expensive .
 According to the Talmud, Israel is inundated every 70 years with snails . Israel is expected to receive snails in 70 years, according to Talmud . The Talmud says snails are believed to be the largest in the world .
 In October, 1990, they were found in large numbers on the Mediterranean beaches of Israel . They were found on the beaches of the Mediterranean .
 Chapter Eleven tested by the Weizmann Institute of Science, and found to be remnants of a special mixture of incense believed to be used in the Temple service .
 The Temple Institute believes the incense was improperly prepared and disposed of, and thus is not acceptable for use . However, the temple Institute believes that since incense had not been found in a container, it had been improperly prepared .
 Little by little, all the elements seem to be coming together in preparation for the day when the Temple will be rebuilt . The Temple is expected to be rebuilt in the next few years .
 The closer we come to that reality, the opposition to it increases within certain religious circles, says the author of the book . "The truth is that the world is changing, and that it's changing, is changing."
 The destruction of the second Temple in 70 AD, according to some Christian leaders, indicated that the Jews were being punished for rejecting Jesus as the Messiah, and that Christianity had become the new temple of God .
 Building of the Temple would be a denial of Jesus' atonement for our sins on the cross, which eliminated the necessity of Temple sacrifice . They feel that because he spiritually dwells within all who believe and follow his teachings .
 The Bible eludes to the existence of the Temple in the last days, regardless of how right or wrong it is . This sort of theological debate is pointless, because the Bible plainly eludes . The Bible does not mention the Temple .
 The Temple doesn't have to be rebuilt, says Milt Maiman . Maiman says to fulfill the prophecy, the Temple won't need to be reconstructed .
 Just as the Tent of the Tabernacle was originally used to house the Ark, it could again be erected on the Temple grounds, and used for Temple observances .
 Israel has put up the Tent, or that construction on the Temple has begun, know that this is one of the major events in the prophetic timetable, and that the end is near . So, when you turn on the 6 o'clock news, and you see that .
 The purpose of building the Temple, was to house the Ark of the Covenant, so the discovery of the most sacred item in Jewish history may be all that is needed to initiate the rebuilding of the Temple .
 Jeremiah 27:22 seems to indicate a connection between the Temple treasures, and the existence of the Temple . However, Jeremiah appears to indicate that the Temple was not a temple .
 After the first Temple was destroyed, the vessels had to be returned or refabricated before the Temple could be rebuilt . According to Ezra, the Temple vessels must have been returned before they could be used to rebuild the Temple .
 Only the existence of the Temple vessels may be all that is needed to rebuild the Temple, since it is believed that the Ark was not in the second Temple . The Ark was believed to have been found in the first Temple .
 Chapter Eleven two cherubs looking down and facing each other on its lid with outstretched wings, which was known as the mercy seat . Chapter Eleven: The cherubs were looking at each other and faced each other . Chapter 11: Two cherubs face each other looking down, facing each
 It was constructed at Mount Sinai by Bezalel, according to the instructions Moses received from God . Moses received Moses instructions to build it on Mount Sinai .
 Inside was placed the rod of Aaron, a pot of manna, and the two tablets of the Law given to Moses .
 It represented the divine presence of God, and was the point where the literal manifestation of God on this Earth took place . It represents the point of God's presence on the Earth, the author says .
 It caused the Jordan River to part, aided in the destruction of Jericho, and brought about numerous military victories when it was present . The Jordan River was the source of many military victories .
 Inside the Temple, the Ark was placed in a dark, windowless room known as the Holy of Holies . The Ark is placed in the windowless, dark room inside the Temple .
 Only once a year, on the Day of Atonement, the high priest was allowed to enter the Ark . A vale was placed around the Ark, and only once in a year was allowed into it . The Ark was placed in a vale and the Ark was made to
 Even then, he was to carry a container of burning incense, which filled the room with smoke, thus obscuring his view of the Ark . The Ark was to be filled with smoke .
 He would sprinkle the blood of a bullock on the ground in front of the Ark, and on the mercy seat, as atonement for the sins of the priests . The blood of an animal would also be sprinkled on the floor in the Ark as a symbolic atonement .
 A rope would be tied around his waist, so if for some reason he accidently touched the Ark and was killed, he could be pulled out without risk by the other priests . The other priests would be able to pull him from the Ark without risk .
 The common belief is that the Temple will not be rebuilt unless the Ark is found . The Ark is believed to be the key to rebuilding the Temple in Egypt .
 It is unlikely that Hezekiah would have allowed the Ark to be taken away from the Ark .
 Amon discovered that Manasseh had been involved in a form of Baal worship, and had erected an image of Astarte in the Temple . It is believed that he would have ordered the Levites to remove the Ark .
 Solomon's son, Rehoboam, caused the kingdom to be divided, with Judah in the south, and Israel to the north . However, idolatry took root again, and the kingdom was divided again .
 During the second invasion, 2 Kings 24:13 says that ""all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasure of the king's house"" were taken . 2 Kings says that all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple had been cut
 Lists of Temple items (2 Kings 25:13-17-17, Jeremiah 52:17-23) do not refer to any Temple treasures from the Holy of Holies . This silence could indicate that it wasn't captured, since there is a Biblical record of the time .
 Ezra 1:7-11 states that all the captured items were later returned by the Persians, but the Ark was not discussed . In addition, Ezra states that the Ark wasn't discussed with Persians .
 The Ark was destroyed along with the Temple in 2 Chronicles 36:19 . The Ark may have been hidden before it could be found, or the Ark was hidden .
 When Rome invaded Judea in 63 BC, General Pompey swept through Jerusalem, entering the Temple, and the Holy of Holies, it was empty . The Roman general Pompey entered the Temple and Holy of Hios, but the Temple remained empty .
 Jewish history records the high priest making his offering upon the foundation stone of the Holy of Holies, not the Ark . The high priest made his offering on the foundation of the holy of holies .
 Arch of Triumph was built in 81 AD at the entrance to the Forum, in the Palatine section of Rome, to commemorate his victory . Titus returned to Rome with some of the Temple treasure .
 It depicted the sevenbranched candelabra known as the menorah, with an octagonal base, rather than a threelegged stand, which it actually has; which could indicate that it was a duplicate kept in the Treasury . The seven trumpets of the Jubilee were
 The Ark is not pictured, thus adding to the evidence that the Ark was not in the second Temple, and has been hidden . The Ark was found in a second Temple in the Bible's second Temple .
 It is believed that King Solomon constructed a secret chamber in the recesses of the Temple Mount to hide the Ark . It is where it was placed during the reign of Manasseh, according to the Bible .
 Jewish tradition has held that the Ark, and the Altar of Incense were hidden in a secret location under a woodshed on the western side of the Temple, near the Holy of Holies .
 Under the city of Jerusalem there is an underground city consisting of tunnels, chambers, and cisterns . The city was created to establish a water storage system, as well as quarters for guards, chambers to hold sacrificial animals, rooms containing ritual bathing areas, prison cells, and storage
 Hezekiah's Tunnel was constructed to make sure Jerusalem would have fresh water in case of an attack . The tunnel was built to ensure the city had fresh water .
 It started at Gihon Spring, and ran for a third of a mile, through solid rock, spilling into the Pool of Siloam . It ran for three miles, and ended up spilling into a pool of siloam.
 An escape tunnel used by King Zedekiah ran from the Tower of Antonia, to a point near the Eastern Gate, emerging outside the walls of the city, covering a distance of over 8,000 feet .
 The nine original members of the Knights Templar were received by King Baldwin l in Jerusalem in 1119 . They established their headquarters in a wing of the al-Aqsa Mosque, which had been converted to a palace .
 They were given complete access to the palace and various outbuildings which were on the site where Solomon's Temple originally stood, which was adjacent to the Dome of the Rock . The palace was located in the site of the Temple, which is now known as Solomon's Palace .
 For nine years they rarely left the palace grounds . Although their goal was ""to keep the road from the coast to Jerusalem free from bandits"", for nine years the goal was to keep a road from Jerusalem from bandits .
 The Knights of Saint John were already performing that task before the Templars showed up . It was an unrealistic pledge, because it would have been difficult for the nine to patrol this fifty mile road .
 Evidence indicates that they were engaged in a massive excavation project . It is now known that they had some knowledge about the Temple treasures .
 Templars were aware of hidden areas underneath the Temple grounds . They believed that the Ark would be found there . The Ark was believed to be under the Temple .
 They mounted an operation to plunder whatever treasurers they could find . They mounted a mission to plunder the treasurers' treasurers and plunder their treasures .
 Although it is questionable that they found the Ark, it is believed that they discovered treasure, relies and ancient manuscripts dating back to the time of Moses .
 Archaeologists found the exit point of a tunnel dug by the Templars on the southern side of the Mount . The tunnel had been dug by Templars in the area .
 It lead inward about 30 yards, where it was blocked by stone and debris . It is blocked by stones and debris blocking the path .
 There has been many stories concerning the location of the Ark of the Covenant . It is believed that the Ark was located in the Ark's location .
 Some believe it is still buried in a secret chamber on the Temple Mount . Others believe it was buried in secret chamber .
 Jewish historian Eupolemus wrote that many of the Temple treasurers had been plundered by Babylon, ""except for the Ark and the tablets in it" Babylon .
 Many researchers believe that this could refer to either Mount Sinai or Mount Nebo, which is located in what is now the country of Jordan, and is the traditional burial place of Moses .
 The contention was made, that since these articles were made under the leadership of Moses, they may have been deposited at the site of his burial . It was made that since Moses' burial, they could have been placed at the burial site .
 Various archaeological expeditions have failed to turn up anything there . Various archaeological examines have failed to find anything there at all .
 Chapter Eleven locations in Jordan for the Ark were based on clues in 2 Maccabees, and believed the location to be on Mount Pisgah, the highest peak on the Mount Nebo range . Chapter Eleven is based on the clues in the clues . Chapter 11 was based on
 He thought it contained the carrying poles, the cherubim which had been mounted on the top, and the legs . Beside it was another bundle, which he thought contained the . carrying poles . He thought he thought he had found the carrying pole, the carrying . poles and the
 The cave is located near the Church of the Franciscan Fathers of Terra Santa . It is under a building which contains the remains of an old Byzantine church .
 Some people have claimed that David Rothschild is a direct descendant of Jesus, and has been chosen to build the third Temple . He reported it to the media, and claimed that God told him to send the photographs to London banker David Rothschild .
 Rothschild refused to accept the pictures, and they were returned to Crotser . Rothschild refused, and the pictures were returned .
 Noted archaeologist Siegfried Horn visited his home in Winfield, Kansas to see the pictures . Horn visited the home of the archaeologist at his home to see his work .
 Jeremiah's Grotto is located near an ancient stone quarry on the northern extension of Mt. Olympus . In January, 1979, archaeologist Ronald Wyatt, while sightseeing near the Damascus Gate, felt that the location of Jeremiah’s Grotto was near a stone quarry .
 He believed that during the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem from 587586 BC, when the city was surrounded, it would have been impossible to remove the Ark, so it had to be there .
 With the permission of the landowner, and a permit from Israeli officials, he excavated the area . He excavated it with permission from the land owner and Israeli officials .
 On January 6,1982, he entered a chamber that contained the Ark, and other artifacts from the first Temple, which had been hidden there by Jeremiah . The Ark was found in a chamber hidden by Jeremiah in the Temple's first Temple .
 The cave is located directly beneath the area where Christ was crucified . The 22-foot long cave is actually located beneath the site of Christ's crucified.
 According to Wyatt's research, when Jesus was crucified, his blood flowed down to the ground, through a split in the rock, and onto the Ark . Wyatt says his research shows that Jesus' blood flowed into the Ark when he died . Wyatt: "When Jesus died, his
 Calvary was used as burial grounds, so it is highly unlikely that the Ark would have been placed on defiled ground . The Ark was likely to be placed in defiled grounds, according to experts .
 Scholars have questioned Wyatt's lack of archaeological training, and his techniques . Yet Wyatt's work is gaining more acceptance because of other discoveries, such as the true Mt. Olympus .
 Sinai, the location on the Red Sea crossing, Noah's Ark, the 12 altars erected by Moses, Sodom and Gomorrah, and Abraham's family tomb in Hebron . Sinai is also the location of the site of Abraham's tomb . Sinai's location is the
 His work has produced the most information on the Ark, all of which seems to be compatible with Scripture . Plus, he has produced most information about the Ark that seems to match Scripture .
 Chapter Eleven layout of Cave IV is similar to the Temple, and that its lower level may have been the containment room used by Jeremiah to temporarily protect the Ark . Cave IV may have a lower level of storage room .
 Preliminary trenches dug in 1993 failed to turn up anything substantial . Preliminary trench dug in the area failed to find anything substantial in the early 1990s .
 The treasures plundered by the Roman legions fell into the possession of the Catholic Church . Once Christianity became the official religion of Rome, the treasures fell into its possession .
 Nelson Canode, of Amarillo, Texas, says he was taken to a cave, four levels below the monastery, where ancient artifacts were being shuttled from there to the underground vaults of the Vatican . The artifacts included the Ark and the disassembled Tabernacle, Can
 There are many who believe that once Jerusalem becomes an international city, the Vatican will return all Temple items in their possession .
 Some people think the Ark may be in Ethiopia . Graham Hancock's book The Sign and the Seal was published by Graham Hancock . The Ark may have been found in Ethiopia.
 Menelik I, the royal son of King Solomon, returned to Ethiopia after his mother, the Queen of Sheba, died . He was born in Ethiopia .
 Solomon treated him with so much favor, that the elders were jealous and wanted him to return home . When he was twenty years old, he returned to Israel, and Solomon was treated so much favour, that he was jealous .
 Solomon agreed to send him home, on the condition that the first born sons of all the elders would go with him . Solomon agreed, but the firstborn sons of the elders were not allowed to go . Solomon died in childbirth, but his son survived .
 Azarius, the son of Zadok, the High Priest, switched the Arks, and took the real one . Azarius worried about idol worship which was flourishing, worried about the idol worship . However, Azarius was able to take the real Arks .
 The Ark was taken to Egypt, on the island of Elephantine in the middle of the Nile, near Aswan, where a temple was built to protect it . The Ark is believed to have been buried in the Nile .
 The Ark was carried along the Nile, and the Takazze tributary into Ethiopia . It is believed that the Ark was taken to Ethiopia by the Ethiopian king .
 During the 1530's, when the Muslims attacked, it was moved to safety, but returned a hundred years later to a rebuilt St. Mary's Cathedral .
 Emperor Haile Selassie moved it to the Church of Zion near the center of Aksum, in northern Ethiopia, in 1965 . It remained there until 1965, when it was moved to a church of Zion in the Church's center .
 Though the communists overthrew the monarchy in 1974, killed Selassie, and imprisoned much of the Royal family, the Ark remained safe because of its reputation for possessing an awesome amount of power, which has generated enough superstition .
 Eleven descendents of those who accompanied him became known as ""Falasha"" Jews, or the ""Black Jews" This area became part of the independent nation of Eritrea in 1993 .
 When Israel became a nation, an appeal was made to Emperor Salassie to return the Ark, it is alleged .
 There are some who share the suspicion that Israel already knows where the Ark is, but also know that the political climate of their homeland is too volatile to take a chance on revealing it .
 As we have discovered, the Ark was not in the second Temple, so the existence of the Ark is not necessary for the Temple to be rebuilt . We have discovered that the Ark did not exist in the first Temple, but the second was not .
 Israel is announcing the discovery of the Ark of the Covenant, this certainly will have a bearing on the prophetic timetable . However, if you turn on the 6 o'clock news, and you see that Israel is . announcing the . discovery, this will have an impact on the timing of
 During the first half of the seven-year treaty with Israel, there will be quite a few changes in the world . The treaty is expected to last for more than a decade .
 The ability of the Western European leader to settle conflicts throughout the globe will give the U.N. the impetus to establish world government .
 This will probably bring with it complete disarmament in order to maintain such a peace . The peace is likely to be maintained by the end of the war .
 Most likely any country who does not willingly join the New World Order, will be forced to comply . Most likely, any . country who . does not . willingly join . The New World . Order will be imposed on the world .
 The countries of the world will make this leader from Western Europe, the head of their New World Order, the author says . The countries will make him head of the new world order .
 The individual who has emerged as the preeminent religious leader in the world will succeed in bringing together the major religions to form a new coalition of Christianity . Christianity will be bound together with New Age philosophy .
 After 42 months, or 31/2 years, the trap is finally going to be sprung . The trap has been in place for 42 months or 31 months .
 Chapter Eleven will announce that the head of the world government is the Messiah who they have been waiting for, and he should be worshipped . Chapter Eleven is titled 'The Messiah' and will be worshipped by followers of the government .
 By assuming the role as the Messiah, Jerusalem will become his city, he will erect an image of himself in the Jewish Temple, he says . Jerusalem will be his city .
 People will be made to worship the image of the man who is called the Beast, or die . This image will appear to speak supernaturally, and the people will have to worship this image .
 The Antichrist will use economic terrorism to force the people of the world to follow him, says the author . He says economic terrorism will be used to force people to follow his path .
 No man might buy and sell, save he that had the mark or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. And that no man might ... save he . had the . mark, or . the . name of a beast, he said .
 Six is the number of man, because he was created on the sixth day, and given six ""days"" to live . The number of days man has to live is six .
 The word means 'Latin kingdom', and it was later believed that this referred to the religion of the Vatican, because Latin is their official language . Latin is used in their canons, missals, prayers, and blessings, which are used in canons .
 Chapter Eleven numerical system was based on the number six, instead of ten, in Chapter Eleven . Chapter 11 numerical system based on number six instead of 10 . Chapter Eleven is based on six, rather than ten .
 Penney, and Montgomery Ward computers were prefixing their transactions with the number 666, as mandated by its computer programming . The number 666 was mandated by the company's programming .
 After alot of protest, it was omitted in 1978-79, but resumed in 1980-81 . It was omitted from 1978-81, and resumed in 1981-82 .
 McGregor Clothing Co. had introduced a ""666 Collection"" of menswear. Chapter 25) The McGregor Clothing . Co. introduced a .666 Collection of clothing .
 The mark may be some sort of identification number, such as your Social Security number, which will serve to identify everyone . The mark will be some of the identification number .
 U.S. law requires every citizen to have such a number by the time they enter the first grade . Social Security number could be used for such a system .
 The move is on for everyone in the U.S. to have an identification card . The move was announced in March .
 A Special Presidential Commission on Immigration and Refugees had recommended a national identification card in an attempt to keep illegal aliens in check . The commission was set up by President Barack Obama .
 The Federal Government is planning an identification card that would prevent anyone without one from working or transacting any sort of business .
 All American citizens and legal immigrants would be given a national identification card . This computerized system would keep track of every American citizen .
 In 1995, the European Economic Community was to begin issuing identification cards to all the citizens of western Europe . The cards were issued to all western Europe in 1995 .
 In California, drivers licenses will contain a microchip that will contain personal information, criminal records, a photograph, and fingerprints . Drivers licenses will be issued with microchips that contain information such as criminal records .
 The Pentagon is issuing M.A.R.C. cards to soldiers in a test program by the Department of Defense . The program is being tested by the Pentagon .
 It contains a bar code, a magnetic strip, a digitized photograph, and an integrated circuit computer chip . The device was released in September .
 Drexler Technology Corporation's Laser Card can store nearly 2,000 pages of information . It can be used for identification numbers, school records, photographs, photos, signature, voice print, fingerprints, medical and health care records, credit and banking information .
 This card is believed to be the prototype for the national identification card that will be issued to all U.S. citizens . It is believed the prototype of the national ID card .
 This system links member banks across the globe in a manner designed to accommodate any type of computer system . This system is designed to allow banks to use computers in any way .
 Burroughs Corp. developed the data processing and communications system equipment that will be used as a private communications system for the transmission of payment and other international banking transactions and communication .
 These data concentrators are linked to terminals in all the member banks of those countries . Data concentrators can be used to send data to all member banks across the world .
 Brussels is the location of the Main Switching Center, which occupies three floors of the European Communities thirteen-floor headquarters . Brussels is located in Brussels, Belgium .
 The Monet Building in Luxembourg is the largest computer in the world . This computer has since taken a back seat to the world's largest in the Monet building .
 The United States SWIFT Bank was built at a cost of $15 million . The bank is located near the Federal Reserve Office in Culpepper, Virginia .
 Social Security numbers, Driver License numbers, Birth Certificates, Passport numbers, and Credit Card numbers are tied into this system . Everyone living in the major industrial nations are tied to this system through Social Security .
 All financial transactions on record, including taxes paid, and property acquisitions, are on record . All transactions are recorded in the book .
 Also in its memory banks are changes of address, and employment record . Also in the memory banks is your employment record and change of address and employment .
 Social Security number is already used in bank dealings, Medicaid, Medicare, Blue Cross, and various other identification methods . All other numbers, such as driver license numbers and credit card numbers, would be phased out .
 This number, most likely, will be used for the issuing of an International Card so that financial transactions can be accomplished electronically . The number is most likely to be used to issue an international card issued by the government .
 Relfe believes that the Personal Identification Transaction Card may include a photograph, signature, and the identification number encoded on it with a magnetic strip and a bar code . Relfe says the card could include a photo, signature and the ID number encoded in it .
 The advent of debit cards may have heralded the coming of this type of card . It is the first time a debit card has been used in a major bank .
 You are not to write your number down, tell it to anyone, or record it anywhere . Do not record it down or write it down, or tell anyone about it .
 Giant Food, Inc. and the Safeway Stores were the first to install the Point-of-Sale computerized Electronic Fund Transfer checkout machines in their supermarkets to take bank debit cards . Giant Food and Safeway stores installed the computerized electronic fund transfer checkout machines .
 Mobil Oil installed the system in all of its gas stations throughout the country . They were later joined by Mobil Oil who installed it in their gas stations . The system was installed in the country by Mobil .
 Since then, debit cards have slowly become assimilated into all aspects of the retail industry . Deaf cards are slowly becoming more mainstream in the retail world .
 The move is to combine the credit card and the debit card into a single multi-use card .
 Money can be used to make deposits, pay bills, transfer money, make withdrawals, make purchases, and borrow money . It can also be used for deposits, payments, transfers, and purchases .
 The debit card will bear the familiar red and ochre logo, the same way that all Visa cards are blue, white and gold . It will be the same colour as the logo of all Visa debit cards .
 Even the magnetic stripe specification adopted for the new MasterCard now embraces an element introduced by Visa's three digit service code in the discretionary datafield of track two . Visa's service code is now in use by Visa .
 With this code, it will be possible to determine if a card from one country many be used...in another country . The code will be used to identify a card used in a foreign country .
 The cover of the January 18,1982 issue of Business Week depicted a single debit card for nationwide electronic banking . The card was designed for the first time .
 A cashless society would eliminate extortion and blackmail for money, such as drugs and untaxed alcohol . A cash-free society would also eliminate extortion, blackmail and the purchase of illegal contraband such as illegal drugs .
 The real reason for going cashless, is that the population can be controlled and manipulated . However, the real reason is that it can be used to control and manipulate the population, he says .
 The 3"" X 3"" magnetic stripe on the back of credit and debit cards has the potential to carry about 5,000,000 bits of information, or about 100,000 words . The 3" X 3" magnetic stripe could carry about five million words or more .
 It could conceivably record your credit history, work history, medical history, and medical history . It could also record the story of your life, including your credit, work and medical records .
 The 'Smart Card' has a 2 line display screen, yet is only slightly larger than a credit card . Magnetic strip has been rendered obsolete by the 'Smart card' Smart Card has a two-line display screen .
 Instead of a magnetic strip, it is imbedded with an integrated circuit chip for the storage of information . It can be updated each time the card is used, and the chip can be used to store information .
 With this card, a person could shop, bank, and receive social services; and it could be used to store their medical history, Social Security records and other personal information . The card could also be used for medical records and Social Security .
 In April 1980 edition of Business Week, National Cash Register featured a card called the ""Worldwide Money Card" which replaced all the world's currencies . The card was designed to replace the currencies of the world .
 People will lose their card, or have it stolen, or accidentally mutilate it . But people will lose it, or get it stolen .
 You have probably noticed that the magnetic strip on your credit cards does not hold up well . You have also noticed that your magnetic strip is not strong enough to hold up credit cards .
 The constant rubbing against each other, and against your wallet, causes scratches and drop outs on the strips which can not be read by scanners .
 An advertisement by the First Tennessee Bank, showed a man with his bank number tattooed on his arm, implying that this was the only way to remember your number . The bank said this was a way of remembering your bank number .
 Initially, a process had been developed to create a permanent non-toxic fluid that could be invisibly tattooed on human flesh, until a particular light, such as infrared or ultraviolet, shown on it .
 R Keith Farrell invented a laser gun, which he used to number fish, which accomplished the task in less than a second . The laser gun was invented by Farrell, who invented the laser gun .
 The laser beam can not be felt, the number can't be seen with the naked eye, and it is as permanent as your fingerprints . It can be felt with the laser beam, but the number cannot be seen in the eye .
 A full-page illustration appeared in a 1993 issue of the London Daily Mail . It showed housewives in Europe making purchases by putting their hands on a computer screen at the cash register .
 Revelation 13:16: Mark will be placed ""in"" the right hand or forehead, not ""on"" it . Note that in Revelation, it says that the ""mark"" will be put on the forehead or right hand, not on the hand .
 The wafer is printed with a serial number and injected into the animal . When an electronic wand is passed over the area, the serial number is displayed on a digital readout .
 It can also be placed on inanimate objects to electronically monitor the whereabouts of store merchandise and leased equipment .
 A Washington Times article contained a report by Martin Anderson, Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institute, concerning a solution for the problem of people losing their identification cards . Martin Anderson: A solution to the problem is to have people lose their ID cards .
 Syringe Implantable Transponder is a permanent method of identification using radio waves . It's a permanent way to identify a person by using a syringe implantable device .
 The UPC symbols are used to read the price of items you buy at the grocery store . The price of that item is automatically printed on the computer .
 No doubt these scanners already have the capability of scanning your forehead or your hand .
 With a flat scanner, the cashier only had to slide the item across the scanning plate; but with -the upright scanner -the cashier has to lift the item up in front of the scanner . The upright scanner has to be lifted up to the scanner, and the item is
 The first time I seen one, I knew that its purpose wasn't to make things easier for the cashier, It was to make it easier to scan your forehead and hand . I was amazed when I saw the first time, because right away I knew .
 I haven't seen alot of them, so it don't know if the retail industry as a whole is going to upgrade to this version of the scanner . I don't think it will be used in the future .
 We have been talking about future developments, so let's talk about the present . We have to talk to the present, and we will talk about that . We will be talking about the future, and then we'll talk about our present .
 In 1970, the National Association of Food Chains, and five other major trade associations met, and formed an ad hoc committee to set up guidelines for an encoding system that could be accepted by the entire industry . Do you realize that with the Universal Product Code, we are already buying and selling
 In 1972, the Uniform Grocery Product Code Council, Inc. and Distribution Codes, lnc. was established . Thousands of companies invited to become members of the council .
 A twelve-digit bar code could be printed by conventional methods, and scanned omnidirectionally by an automated system . On April 3,1973, the ad hoc committee announced that they had selected a twelve- digit bar code .
 By the end of 1974, the Uniform Grocery Product Code Council, Inc. had 21 representatives from manufacturers, distributors, and trade associations on their Board . The Council had changed their name to the Uniform Product Code .
 Around 2,600 companies, representing a total of $70 billion in annual sales, have become members of the Code Council . The Code Council is based on bar coding on products that are bar coding .
 Left Hand Guide Bar tells the computer that information is coming . Chapter Eleven 6 6 6 7797 5 02265 .
 The regular size of the bar code is 1.469"" X 1.020"", but it can be printed from 80% of that size, to twice that size . The bar code can also be printed at 80% the size .
 It must appear in a rectangular block on the bottom, side or back panel of a product, or anywhere it can be scanned . The rectangular block must appear on the top, side, or back of any product .
 The bar code is a series of black and white parallel bars, 30 black and 31 white , with white margins on each side . It is 30 black, 31 white and 30 black .
 Modules are all the same width, being that they are the foundation of the system, and create the bars which are visible to the naked eye . Modules create the width of the bars, which are the height of the structure .
 The UPC symbol is split into two sides, a left-hand side, using an odd number of modules, and a right-handside using an even number, making them opposite of each other . If you look at the above diagram of the symbol, you will notice that the
 Sometimes the actual number may appear on the right-hand side of the symbol, just as the Number System Character appears on the left-hand .
 The purpose of the Check Character is to check for errors, such as the unauthorized addition of lines that could result in the computer reading the wrong number .
 You add the two lines together as indicated, which gives you a figure of 50 . Add the lines together to give you a total of 50. Add the two numbers together to make the difference .
 Subtract 50 from the next highest number which is a multiple of 10, which is 60 . Subtracted 50 from 50 to 50 is the number of the highest number .
 The Zero Suppression Method of the UPC Symbol permits zeros to be eliminated from the ten digit code number, narrowing it to six numbers . This reduces the width of the symbol so it can fit on a product with a smaller package .
 Known as truncation, this method reduces the height by shortening the length of the vertical lines . It also reduces the effectiveness of the computer's effectiveness in reading the symbol omnidirectionally .
 The intention of this alternate design was to insure that the general public would not crack the UPC code . The UPC was designed to ensure that the public wouldn't crack the code .
 The design incorporates bar codes from the first and second sets, and from a third set created from the second set . The design is based on the bar codes created from two sets .
 Bar codes from Set Two are used to represent the numbers 0, 4, 5 and 9 in Set Three . These bar codes are used for the first time in Set Two . Set Three is set to include 0, 3, 4 and 9 .
 Since the design is half of the regular design, it uses half of its center bar pattern to represent the number 6 in the third set of numbers . Half of the pattern is used as a symbol to represent 6 .
 While the main portion of the design will only use bar codes from the first and second sets, the extended area on the right side of the symbol will use all three sets . The extended area will use bar code from both sets .
 Using the UPC system of encoding products, we are actually buying and selling with the number 666 . Incredibly, as you have seen, through the use of the system, we have actually bought and sold 666 products . The number 666 is actually the number of products sold and sold in
 The only visible modules of the number 6, is the designation of 101, which is used in the left and right-hand guides, and the center bar pattern .
 Design #2 incorporates a third bar code for the number six, which is represented by half of the center bar pattern, or a module pattern of 010 . Design #1 is half the design pattern of Design #3, Design #4 is half design .
 In Design #1, there are six numbers on the left side, and six numbers in the right side . Design is based on the design of the original design of this year's design .
 Six is the perfect computer number, which led Apple Computer, Inc. to introduce their Apple I units at a price of $666.66.66 .
 We are buying and selling with the number 666. However, the evidence is overwhelming to the contrary, Bible prophecy has been fulfilled . We are not selling with 666. We are selling and selling products with 666 .
 As the items are carried down the conveyer belt, the cashier pulls the symbol downward, across the scanner, then bags the item . The symbol symbol is downward, then the item is pulled across a scanner .
 The white bars or spaces will reflect more light than the black bars, which is measured by a light detector . The white bar or space reflects more light, which can be measured by light detector light .
 A time measurement of how long the beam takes to move across the bar and space, also used for decoding . A time is also used to measure the length of the beam and space .
 The scanner reads the symbol, no matter what direction it is passed over the scanner, from several inches to a foot away, decoding the number and sending the number to a computer . The number is decoded by a computer and sent to the computer .
 The computer transmits to the electronic cash register, the price of the product, which is indicated on a display, and printed on the receipt tape . The system transmits the price to the computer, and the price is printed on a receipt .
 When the register totals the purchase, the printed receipt tape usually indicates the store name, number, and location, item name, item price, whether it is taxable, and the total . The receipt tape also indicates the item price and whether it's taxable .
 It allows for payment in cash, food stamps, check, debit card, or credit card . It deducts the coupons which are presented .
 Besides the quickness and efficiency, another feature of the system is the ability to automatically keep track of inventory . It tells how much change is received, the date, time and lane number .
 Stores are pulling funds directly from a customer's checking account, and transferring it to the store's account at the bank . Those stores who already have electronic fund transfer capabilities, and are accepting debit cards, are using debit cards .
 The system is also able to accept an international debit card .
 TeleResearch Item Movement, Inc. had a full page advertisement for their supermarket computer scanner . It featured a picture of a man with a UPC symbol printed on his forehead .
 Relfe believes that the UPC method of encoding will be used to invisibly place identification numbers on the forehead and hand with a laser . Relfe says that the method could be used in the future to place numbers in the forehead with the hand .
 Scanners now being used in stores will also be able to scan your forehead and hand . When the international debit card is phased out, the machines will also scan your hand .
 Frank Church said in August, 1975, that the government has the technological capacity to impose 'total tyranny' if ever a dictator came to power . Church said the government could impose "total tyranny" if a dictator was ever in power .
 The purpose of the Mark, is to serve as a surveillance tool, to make a person totally dependent on the government . The Mark is designed to make people 'totally dependent on government'
 Without the Mark, you won't be able to buy food for you and your family, receive medical treatment, buy clothing, or gas for your car . The Mark is a form of identification that allows you to purchase food and medicine .
 Those who do not take the Mark, will be constantly harassed by the government, especially true Christians, who will become fugitives when their freedom of religion is taken away . Those who don't take Mark will be harassed by government .
 And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven . And he blasphemed his name and the tabernacles of heaven .
 The dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuteth the woman which brought forth the man child . And when the dragon saw . that he . saw that . he was . cast upon the earth he persecuted the woman that brought forth . forth the child .
 When the Antichrist reveals himself by defiling the Jewish Temple with a statue of his image, and his demand that he be worshipped as the Messiah, the eyes of the Jewish people will be opened .
 Revelation 13:2 indicates that the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority . Once his Satanic agenda is realized, the Jews will flee Israel to escape his wrath . The Jews will be fleeing Israel .
 This area is believed to be the land of Edom, Moab, and Ammon, which were not overrun by Russian forces . This area was believed to have been Edom and Moab - but not Ammon .
 Located in a valley, the only entrance is a narrow path known as El Ciq, which is about 6,000 feet long . The only entrance to the narrow path is a path that varies in width from 12 to 30 feet wide . The path is surrounded by impassable sand
 Known as Mount Seir in the Bible, this was the home of Esau, the father of the Edomites . It was also known as Seir, home to Esau the son of the first Edomite king .
 Petra was inhabited by an Arabic tribe known as the Nabataeans during the 6th century BC, and became an important trade center . During the Babylonian captivity of the Jews, the Edomites moved into Israel, and Petra was a major trade center in the area .
 Marc Antony gave Petra to Cleopatra of Egypt as a gift in 32 BC . The Romans were defeated by the Romans around 55 BC, and in . 32 BC, Marc . Antony . gave Petra . Petra . The site was a Roman stronghold in Egypt .
 Because he was married to Octavia, the Senate stripped him of his rank and ordered him back to Rome . The Senate also ordered him to return to Rome because of his marriage to the sister of Roman Emperor .
 Rediscovered in 1812 by Swiss explorer John Burckhardt . The area became part of the province of Arabia after the Islamic invasion of the 7th century .
 The last segment of the 1989 Paramount movie ""Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade" was filmed at Petra . Petra is located in Petra, near the city of Petra in Petra .
 Rock City is believed to have originally been built inside an extinct volcano . Rock city contains many elaborate facades among its many structures, which includes tombs, monuments, and dwellings .
 Some date back to the Edomite era, most are Nabataean, and some are Roman and early Christian . Others date back from the Nabatean era, some from the Roman era .
 The Ain Musaf'Spring of Moses is one of the two sites where Moses produced water by striking a rock . Even though it is located in a desert area, there are water cisterns there, and dozens of springs and wells .
 Construction firm out of Minneapolis, Minnesota, has been hired to restore water system . Other international teams were schedules to carry out other restoration work .
 This event marks the beginning of the end, for when the Antichrist is able to do this, he will have been able to take control of Jerusalem . This event is a sign that the end of the world is about to come, says the author of this article .
 By this time, he will have absolute power over 25% of the world, with the main concentration being in the Middle East .
 "He will seek out and destroy the true Christians who will not worship him or take his Mark," he said . He said .
 Revelation 11:3. It is at this time when ""two witnesses"" will emerge to ""prophesy" According to Revelation, this is when two witnesses will emerge from Revelation 11.3.
 It says, ""I will give power unto my two witnesses,"" which could indicate that God intends to anoint a couple of ordinary men, who will become ""super evangelists"", possessing extraordinary powers like the prophets of old .
 The consensus seems to be that these two will be prophets sent by God . However, just as angels have been sent to Earth in various capacities, these two have been prophets . The consensus is that God will send them to Earth .
 There have been two possibilities mentioned as to the identities of the two men .
 Matthew 17:3 and Mark 9:4, refer to Jesus being transfigured with Elijah and Moses . Jesus was transfigured by Moses and Elijah and Elijah . Jesus is believed to have been transfigured .
 Moses, unlike Elijah, had died, so it was his spiritual body which had appeared . Moses' spiritual body had appeared in Moses' words . Moses was not Elijah, but Elijah's spiritual body .
 The identity of the second witness perhaps points to Enoch . Enoch was the only other person in the Bible who never died . He was the last person to die .
 Two witnesses will preach for 1,260 days, or 31/2 years . They will most likely have a ministry similar to John the Baptist . The two witnesses will be preaching for 1/260 days .
 They will be latter-day prophets, opposing the dictatorship and government of the Antichrist, and spreading the word that the Son of man, Jesus, the true Messiah, is returning the reclaiming the Earth .
 After their ministry is complete, the Antichrist will succeed in having them killed, and as a warning to others, he will demand that the bodies remain unburied, so that all can see the extent of his power . After their deaths, he'll demand that they remain un
 God will bring them back to life, and they will be taken back to Heaven . However, God will show his power, and bring them to life .
 At this point, the Antichrist will put his military might on full alert, because he knows that the Scriptures are about to be fulfilled . The Scriptures will soon be fulfilled, and he will be ready to fight back, he says .
 There is a risk in trying to interpret Bible prophecy, and piece together last day events . There is no easy way to interpret the Bible prophecy .
 In the quest for understanding, literal and rational explanations are attached to events which may seem beyond reason, such as the Holocaust .
 Biblical writers were describing events in terms familiar to them, it becomes necessary to adapt those descriptions into modernday correlations . Biblical writers had to adapt their descriptions to modern day readings .
 Revelation 9:16-19 describes the action of the 6th of 7 angels, whose trumpet-blast set in motion an invasion force of monstrous creatures . The 6th angel's trumpet blast sets in motion a force of monsters .
 Clearly the mention of angelic activities is describing things which are occurring in the spiritual realm . However the results of those actions are literal events .
 The Associated Press reported that one out of every five in China have had military training . One out of five in the country's military have military training, the AP reported .
 The population of the United States is close to 260,000,000 . To comprehend a number this large, bear in mind that the U.S. population is almost 260,00,000.
 With the destruction of the Russian military, China is the last bastion of Communist domination . China is now a bastion for the Communist Party, with the loss of Russian military .
 They will join the forces of the Antichrist as he mobilizes for his last stand . They will be joined by the 'Antichrist' in his final stand, he says .
 Starting in Tibet, it weaves its way through the mountains peaks of Manchuria, Mongolia, Nepal, the Himalayas, West Pakistan, and into Afghanistan . The Euphrates River rises in Turkey, and runs across Syria, where it rises in Syria .
 It follows the ancient trans-Asian invasion route used by Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan, and the Mogul invaders . The route was used by the ancient Alexander the . Great and the . Mogul . invaders .
 It is written that the Euphrates River will be dried up at the time of this troop movement . It is said to be possible that the river will dry up .
 It could be done through supernatural means, as has happened with the Red Sea and the Jordan River . Or it could be the result of manipulation, as it has happened in past .
 There are two dams in the Turkish section of the Euphrates, Ataturk and Karakaya . The two dams are located in the region of Turkey . The Euphrates is the largest river in the world .
 In 1974, Soviet engineers built the Keban dam, and in 1975, built another at Tabka, in Syria . In 1975, engineers built another dam in Syria, built in 1974, in 1974 .
 In January, 1990, Turkey began operation of a dam that caused the river to fall 75% in one day . Turkey began the operation of the dam that made the river fall 75 per cent in a day .
 It is quite possible that the river could be made to dry up at just the right time . So, it is quite likely that it will dry up .
 Revelation 16:13-16 identifies the unholy trinity of Satan, the Antichrist, and the False Prophet . Satan is working to bring together armies of the world in preparation for the coming battle .
 Chapter Eleven was the capital of the area of Canaan when it was attacked by Joshua . Chapter Eleven is the first chapter of the Bible's Bible .
 The port city of Haifa is located at the Valley's western entrance . It will be used as a drop-off point for troops who are transported by naval vessels .
 Joel 3:2,12,14, pinpoints the battle area as the valley of Jehoshaphat, which was known as the ""valley of decision" According to tradition is believed to be located near Jerusalem, in the Kidron valley .
 The rider is none other than Jesus, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords . Jesus is the rider of the rider, Jesus, Jesus .
 It seems obvious that the military might of the Antichrist will use any means at their disposal to do battle against an invincible adversary . It seems to be obvious that they will use whatever means they have .
 The extent of our present weapons technology is our nuclear capability . The Bible gives an excellent description of just that kind of warfare in Revelation 9:18 .
 The sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, And the stars of heaven shall fall, . And the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken. Chapter Eleven . Chapter Eleven: "But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened
 Four other sites have been identified on the east side of the Dead Sea as part of the ruins of the five plain cities involved in the turn of events . Numeira(discovered in 1973), Safi, Feifa, and Hanazir have also been identified .
 Evidence which proves that the area was fertile and densely populated, all of these sites, along with Sodom and Gomorrah, are believed to be the five cities of the plain . Because of evidence which proves . that . proves that . the area . was fertile, densely populated
 Excavations made since 1974 at the Tell Mardikh, site of the ancient Ebla, in northern Syria, have turned up tablets which refer to all five cities of the plain . On one, even names them in the same sequence as in Genesis 14:2 .
 Nelson Glueck made a survey of the southern Transjordan area, east and south of the Dead Sea . The area had been settled before 2000 BC, but suddenly had been abandoned .
 These cities were located at the Vale of Siddim, at the southern end of the Dead Sea in the Great Rift Valley . These cities are located in the region known as the Jordan Valley, the Jordan and the Sea of Galilee region .
 The Dead Sea, between Israel and Jordan, is the lowest spot on the Earth's surface . It is fed by the Jordan River, and is the world's lowest point .
 Without an outlet, the water has evaporated for hundreds of years, leaving behind a variety of minerals, including sodium chloride, potassium chloride, magnesium bromine and magnesium chloride .
 Along the southern end of the Dead Sea is a ten mile mass of salt called Jebel Usdim . Jebel usdim is the largest salt mass in the world and is located in the southern part of the peninsula .
 The ""slimepits" mentioned in Genesis 14:10, refer to the bitumen, asphalt or pitcha lustrous black petroleum product which melts and burns .
 There are vast beds of it on both sides of the Sea, with heavier concentrations at the southern end . There is also a vast bed of it around the world .
 The Nabataeans collected the bitumen which floated to the surface for trade . The bitumen was collected for trade and used to be used to transport it to the world's largest cities .
 The southern half of the Dead Sea seems relatively new, and much shallower than the northern half . The northern half is 1,296 feet deep, but the southern half is more shallower .
 It had been written that the ruins were still visible until the first century . When the sun was shining in the right direction, the outline of trees were visible under the surface of the water .
 These stories were not confirmed by divers, who found no sign of human settlements . Divers found no signs of settlements in the area .
 Enough circumstantial evidence exists which indicated that the southern end of the Dead Sea was the location of the destruction . However, regardless of any hard evidence, there is no hard evidence that the destruction occurred .
 It has been theorized that an earthquake ignited the natural gas deposits, which created a violent explosion, and propelled a mixture of salt, sulphur and bitumen into the air, literally raining fire and brimstone, as the oil basin beneath cities burned .
 Some have even gone as far as saying that God leveled the area with an atomic blast . Some believe that the area was leveled with a bomb .
 Revelation 11:13: Within an hour after the two witnesses leave the earth, a massive earthquake will occur . According to Revelation, within the hour after they leave, the earth will be hit by an earthquake .
 This same earthquake is referred to in Zechariah 14:4, as Jesus returns to this world at the same point he left it, on the Mount of Olives, a small range of four summits which overlook Jerusalem from east .
 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself . He had no name, but himself, and his eyes shone as a light of fire .
 The armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean . And the armies which followed him were on white horses .
 The use of nuclear weapons in an all-out assault will begin a chain reaction in the Earth, that will affect one-third of the world, or areas surrounding ground zero .
 On August 6, 1945, the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, Japan . Hiroshima was the site of the first World War II atomic bomb .
 The heat from this blast was 127,200,000 degrees Fahrenheit, or three times hotter than the center of the sun . The blast was three times more powerful than the sun's center .
 The 20 kiloton explosion affected only a four square mile area, but its intensity killed 50,000 people, and wounded another 55,000 . On August 9, 1945, the second bomb, was dropped on Nagasaki, and people ten miles away were paralyzed .
 In 1953, a movie was produced which recorded the results of a military test of a hydrogen bomb detonation in the Pacific which took place in November, 1952 .
 The blast caused an entire island to disappear, turning it into deadly vapor and radioactive ash . The blast was caused by a blast that turned the island into a wasteland .
 The concentration of nuclear weapons in such a small area could succeed in throwing the Earth off of its axis, producing disastrous results . A small area of such a concentration of weapons could throw Earth off axis .
 These theories seem to be corroborated by events described in the book of Genesis . Theories seem to corroborate by events in Genesis .
 Noah warned of an impending flood, because they didn't know what rain was . The vegetation was watered by the morning dew, which was why the people scoffed at the warnings . Noah's warning was based on the dew .
 The Earth has been moved away from the sun by a million miles, resulting in 2% less heat . The tilt of the axis is now 231/2 degrees, which accounts for the harshness of the seasons . Scientists say the Earth has also been moved from the solar system by a
 The upset of these delicate balances of nature have been blamed for the reduction of the human life span . The upset has been blamed on the human death span .
 The movement of the Earth off of its axis, would certainly instigate earthquakes, and initiate volcanic activity; which would explain changes in the topography of the earth, and the poisoning of the waters .
 Volcanic activity will screen out the light of the sun, as well as the moon and stars . Volcano ash, smoke, smoke and dust tend to stay in the air for long periods of time .
 Radioactive particles, and the igniting of sulfur deposits, will poison the air . Radioactive particle particles and sulfur deposits will poison air .
 Analysis of the U.S. hydrogen bomb tests on the Marshall Islands indicated that hailstones were also there .
 The blast caused a tremendous air turbulence to develop, which in turn caused the formation of hailstones large enough to dent the armor plating on surface ships . The blast was caused by the blast, which caused a huge amount of air turbulence .
 Revelation 8:8:8 talks about a ""great mountain burning with fire"" which falls into the sea . In 8:10:10, a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, falls into rivers . Revelation: A great mountain from heaven from heaven falls into
 A meteor that fell in Winslow, Arizona, left a crater a mile in diameter . The meteor left a mile-wide crater in the Arizona desert .
 Indentations on the ocean floor off the coats of South Carolina and Georgia indicate a meteor shower . Meteor shower accompanied an asteroid that hit the western area of the Atlantic Ocean .
 In 1908, in Siberia, what is believed to have been a meteor fell with such an impact, that trees for 25 miles around were knocked over, and the resulting smoke was visible for hundreds of miles .
 In 1937, an asteroid, called Hermes, which was over a mile in diameter, approached the Earth . Hermes, a mile-in-center, approached Earth in 1937 .
 Scientists plotting its course thought it might hit the planet, but it only came within a million miles, then veered away . Scientists plotting it thought it would hit the Earth, but the planet was never hit .
 If it hit an ocean, at its speed of 1,800 mph, it would have generated a tidal wave big enough to destroy all nearby coastal cities . lcarus, the closest asteroid to the sun, comes dangerously close to Earth .
 Another asteroid, Toro, over three miles in diameter, also comes close to this planet during its orbit between Venus and the Earth . Toro is three miles wide and three miles deep in its orbit . Toro, a three-mile-diameter asteroid, is also known as Toro .
 The futile attempt of the armies of Armageddon will be in vain, and the combatants will be destroyed within a day, says the author of the book . "The futile attempt to defeat Armageddon will not be successful," he says .
 Jesus will then establish his kingdom on this Earth, and restoration of this area will begin . Chapter Eleven: "Restoration of this part of the world"
 The earthquake which caused the Mount of Olives to split, will produce a waterway to issue forth from under the Temple, which will split into two separate rivers . One going to the Mediterranean, and the other to the Dead Sea .
 This will cleanse the waters of the Dead Sea, and enable it to support life; and will change the desert on the eastern slope of Israel's mountains into fertile land; .
 Israel will then take possession of the land promised to them in Genesis 15:18 . Israel's land promised by the Bible will be taken over by the Israelites . Israel will take over the land they were promised to take over .
 The country of Israel will extend from the Nile to the Euphrates River, and include parts of Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, and Jordan . Israel will also extend to almost the Black Sea, and from the Red Sea to almost Black Sea .
 Since this book has been published, and scrutinized; I have been questioned in regard to my views . Afterword FINAL WARNING: A HISTORY of the New World Afterword .
 Christians are heavily involved in the political process . There's alot of talk about 'taking America back', and Christians have been involved .
 They are supporting conservative, pro-life and pro-gun candidates in order to facilitate change . Most Republican candidates in the country are Republicans .
 We should continue to fight for traditional family values, Christian principles, and the achievement of a higher moral standard .
 "Nothing you or I can do will change that. However, what is happening out there in the world, is going to continue,’s not going to change that . Nothing you or anyone can do can change that, but what's going to happen will continue .
 Anyone who thinks that political action and a Republican majority is going to do anything, better think again, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Newt Gingrich and Bob Dole supported NAFTA and the World Trade Organization . Gingrich and Dole were both House Speaker and Senate Majority Leader Dole .
 Richard Leach voted for HR666, which would allow for our homes to be entered and searched without a warrant . Leach is the only person who voted against HR666 . HR666 would allow us to enter and search our homes without warrants .
 One of the principle tenets of the Bible, is that we are to put our faith in Godnot man. One of our principle tenets is that God not man .
 There is a segment of Christians who believe that with enough political action, they can bring this nation back to God, so it will be ready when Jesus returns . The nation is ready to be ready for Jesus when he returns, they say .
 To believe that you can ""take America back"" is like saying that you don't believe what the Bible says, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 How about prayer, you may ask? Can't we put it off, can't we delay it. Well, how about prayer? Well, it's prayer, I say .
 When the Illuminati made their first attempt toward world domination at the Congress of Vienna, Russia, then a Christian nation, prevented it . The Illuminati attempted to take control of the world at the first attempt to do so in Vienna, then Russia .
 When the Illuminati made their second attempt with the League of Nations, the people of the United States, then a Christian nation, wouldn't accept it . The Illuminati tried to join the U.S. in the first place, but it was rejected by the Christian nation .
 When Israel became a nation, it was the beginning of the end, Israel's prime minister says . Israel's first nation was Israel, he says, was Israel's "beginning the end" Israel's president says, "I believe, that when Israel becomes a nation"
 Since then, since then, there has been an accelerated effort towards one-world government . And indeed, since that, there have been an acceleration towards one world government .
 When Jesus prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane, he said, ""...if it is possible, let this cup pass from me,"" but in the end, he knew what God's plan was, and that it would be carried out .
 Afterword from them, by doing everything they can to turn this nation back to God, they will do so . Afterword, they should be doing everything possible to turn the nation back .
 "That's how I got involved in all of this, because I wasn't going to accept what someone else said," she says . "I was going to get involved in this, and it's not what I thought," she adds .
 This book contains an extraordinary amount of information, in order to bolster my contentions, and if you don't agree with it, or have some doubts, then you need to get on your knees, and get into the word of God, and seek answers and confirmation that will satisfy you
 "We can continue doing what we were ordained to do with the Great Commission," says Pope Francis . We can continue to do what we've been ordained to be part of the 'Great Commission', he says .
 "We must not lose sight of this mission, because it is a key that will unlock the kingdom," says President Obama . "It is the key to unlocking the kingdom."
 With the advent of modern technology, the Bible has been printed in every major language . His Word is beamed via satellite to the four corners of the Earth .
 Where this technology is not available, missionaries have carried the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to remote areas . Missionaries have carried out the gospel in these remote areas.
 "By his very word, the end will not come until this Great Commission has been fulfilled," says the president .
 Instead of winning votes for some politician, you should be winning souls for Jesus . Instead of voting for politicians, Jesus should win souls for him, he says .
 Bible prophecy is being fulfilled everyday, and there is no doubt that we are living in the last days . Bible prophecy has been fulfilled every day, according to the Bible .
 As is usually the case, people don't think about God until there is some sort of crisis . People don't usually think about religion until there's a crisis, he says .
 When the time of the Tribulation comes closer, things become more apparent, he says . "I think that revival is going to sweep this land," he adds .
 It may be the last chance that people will have to come to the Lord, Christian leader says . As Christians, Christians, that is where our duty lies, he says .
 You may not be a Christian, and have a personal relationship with Jesus Christ . But you may not have a relationship with Christ . You may also be a believer .
 The same can be said about salvation, but the difference here, is that Jesus is everything . "Jesus is everything. The difference is that he is everything."
 "Now, I am not a preacher, and I don't make any claims regarding the authority of my words," he says .
 I believe that the Bible is the Word of God, and my theology is based on the truth contained therein . I believe in the Bible, and I have a theology based on that .
 The Bible is a very unique book, because it is the complete story of mankind, from the beginning, till the end . You see, the Bible is very unique, because of its complete story, from beginning to end .
 If you don't heed the warning, you will be sentenced to eternal damnation in the fiery pit of Hell . There are no ifs, ands, or buts; there are no two ways about it .
 Jesus is coming back to rule and reign forever, and unless you are a Christian, unless your faith is in him, he will have no part of you . Unless you love the Lord, he won't have any part of your life, he says .
 If you are not born again, if you don't know Jesus as your personal saviour, you can not afford to turn your back . Jesus is the saviour of your life .
 "What an incredible amount of love for mankind, and all he asks from you in return, is for you to follow him, and to serve him," he writes .
 You may be having problems in your personal life, God hears and answers prayers . You may have had problems with your life, but God hears your prayers .
 Just get down on your knees, and even if you think you don't know how to pray, the Lord knows your heart . The Lord will know your heart, and you can't hide it from him .
 You can talk to him, just like you would talk to your friend, because he is your friend . He is a friend that will never leave you, nor forsake you . He will never be gone, nor will not leave you .
 I believe that Jesus Christ, your Son, died on the cross for my sins, then rose from the dead so that I may have everlasting life . I believe in Jesus Christ's death for me, and I believe he died for me .
 "I pray for your guidance on my life, and for you to reveal yourself to me through the Bible, your living Word," she writes .
 If you prayed this prayer with all your heart and soul, you have just been taken out of the grasp of Satan and this world, because you are now a child of God .
 As a new Christian, you need to cultivate your relationship with Jesus, and to further develop your walk with the Lord . Nobody expects you to do it on your own, says Christian minister .
 You need to get a Bible and start reading it, and you need the spiritual guidance that can only be achieved through the regular attendance of a Spirit-filled, Bible-believing Church .
 Ankerbergberg, John & Weldon, John; The Facts on Rock Music , Harvest House Publishers: Eugene, OR, 1972 .
 Blair, Mike; ""Armed Patriots Confront UN Unit"", The Spotlight , September 12, 1994, pg. 3 . Blair, Michael Blair: "Armed Patriotism Confronts UN"
 Blair, Mike; ""FEMA Connection Exposed"", The Spotlight , September 26, 1994, pg.12, 13. Blair, Michael Blair, wrote: "FEMA connection Exposed".
 Blair, Mike; ""Feds Training to SWAT Enemies Secret Federal Training Facility"", The Spotlight , November 21, 1994, pg. 5, 6. Blair,Mike; "Feds training to SWAT enemies Secret Federal training Facility"
 Blair, Mike; ""Foreign Tanks, Missiles"", The Spotlight , August 15, 1994, pg.14. Blair, Michael Blair, "Foreign Tanks and Missiles", was published in The Spotlight . The Spotlight published a book about the U.S. anti-missile
 Blair, Mike; ""Hidden Aircraft I.D.'s seen as Bow to the UN"", The Spotlight , August 15, 1994, pg.6. Blair, . Mike; "Hidden Aircraft . I.E.D."’s . seen as a "Bow to
 Blair, Mike; ""Marines Quizzed on Loyalty"", The Spotlight , August 22, 1994, pg. 3. Blair,Mike; "" Marines Quized On Loyalty", August 22 , 1994, The Spotlight .
 Blair, Mike; ""Russian Choppers Confirmed"", The Spotlight , September 5,1994, pg. 3. Blair,Mike; "" Russian Choppers confirmed"
 Blair, Mike; ""Russian Special Forces Unit Coming"", The Spotlight , October 10, 1994, pg. Blair . Blair: "The Spotlight" was published in October 1994 .
 Blair, Mike; ""'Shoot Americans' Survey Results"", The Spotlight , April 24, 1995, pg. 3. Blair,Mike; """Shooting Americans" Survey Results," The Spotlight, The Spotlight .
 Blair, Mike; ""Urban Warfare Training Center Now Taking Shape in Louisiana"", The Spotlight , August 29, 1994, pg., 5. Blair,Mike; "Urban Warfare training Center now taking shape"
 Brownstein, Ronald; ""Will It Slow Your Mail"" Parade , July 19, 1981, pg.-18. Parade .
 Cook, Terry; ""The Mark of the New World Order"", Today's Front Page , October, 1994, pg. 2 . Cook: "Mark of the new world Order""
 A History of the War Between English and French Freemasonry , Jon Kregal, Inc.: Tyler, TX, 1994. Vol. Vol., A History Of The War Between French and English Freemasonry . Vol. V. A. History of Freemasonry in France .
 English Freemasonry, Mother of Modern Cults, Vis-A-Vis Mystery Babylon and Mother of Harlots . Mother of Hilarots: Mother of Cults . Vis A-Vis Babylon: Vis A. Vis a. Vis A . Vis a-Vis, Vis A
 Davis Jr., Nord; ""Dallas Conspiracy"", PARDON ME, but... , #2 , Northpoint Teams(Topton, NC), April, 1992, pg. 32 . Davis Jr. Davis Jr.'s Jr. was a member of the Dallas Conspiracy .
 Davis Jr. Davis Jr., Nord; ""Sui Juris"", PARDON ME, but... but... , Pardon Me, but ... , #5, Northpoint Teams, August 1994 .
 Evans, Mike; ""Countdown to Armageddon"" Christ for the Nations , August, 1982, pg.-5, 13. Evans, Evans, . Mike; "Countdown" to Armageddon .
 A Second Look at the United Nations , Western Islands: Belmont, MA, 1964, pg., 70, 73, 87,110, 113,176-177. A Second look at the UN .
 Hough, Warren; ""Key United States Units Internationalized"", The Spotlight , December 5, 1994, pg. 5,1994, "The Spotlight" was published by Warren Hough .
 Hough, Warren; ""UN Gets United States Troops; Moves Into 'Phase 2'"", The Spotlight , August 22, 1994, pg.6. Hough: "UN Gets U.S. Troops ... Moves into "Phase 2"
 Hudson, David; "" United States Currency Change Aimed at 'Cash Only' Group"" The Spotlight , May 21,1984, pg.-21. Hudson: Change aimed at "Cash Only" group .
 In History and Prophecy , Hearthstone Publishing: Oklahoma City, OK, 1991, 1991. 1991.
 Katson, Trisha; ""Defeat of Balanced Budget Amendment Hikes COS Threat"" The Spotlight , March 27,1995, pg.-13. Katson was Trisha Katson's editor-in-chief .
 Katson, Trisha; ""Global Connection Exposed"" The Spotlight , April 3,1995. The Spotlight . The Spotlight was published in 1995 .
 Katson, Trisha Katson; ""Last Minute Hold On GATT Vote"", The Spotlight , October 17, 1994, pg. Katson . Katson: "GATT Vote was a last minute hold on GATT vote"
 Trisha Katson: "Opposition in Grassroots to Constitution Changes Grow" The Spotlight , April 3, 1995, p.m. Katson, Trisha; ""Opposition to constitutional changes grow"
 Trisha Katson, Trisha; ""Powers of COS in the Process"" The Spotlight , April 3,1995, pg. 3, 1995, . Trisha. Katson .
 Katson, Trisha; ""Supreme Court Would Ignore Con-Con Political Questions"" The Spotlight, April 3, 1995, published in The Spotlight . Trisha Katson: The Supreme Court would ignore Con-con political questions .
 Intelligence Examiner Special Edition, 1994, 60 min. cassette tape. Is There An Illuminati Plot to Pollute the Word of God? Is there an Illuminati plot to pollute the word of the word God?
 Marrs, Texe; ""Foreign Occupation Troops in America?"", Flashpoint , December, 1994, . Flashpoint, Flashpoint.com, December 1994 .
 Marrs, Texe; ""Priest Richard Neuhaus ExposedHe's a Marxist Heretic!"", Flashpoint , November, 1994, pg. 3. Marrs: "Priest Neuha Exposed"
 Maxwell, Joe; ""Evangelicals Clarify Accord with Catholics"", Christianity Today , March 6, 1995, pg.-53, . Maxwell: Evangelical Christians "clarify Accord" with Catholics .
 McCarty, Burke; The Suppressed Truth About the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln , Taiwan, pg.-16. McCarty says Lincoln was assassinated in 1865 .
 The Soviets Bold Mideast Strategy" Saturday Review , April 12,1980, pg.-22. The Soviets bold Mideasts Strategy"
 Peltz, James; ""'Smart Card' Has Its Own Information Storehouse"" Sunday Patriot News , October 9, 1983, pg. 9,1983, .
 Pilote, Alain; ""Country With Honest Money Would Defeat Bankers"", Spotlight , December 12, 1994, pg.18. Pilote: "Country with Honest Money would Defeat Banker"
 Rockefeller, David; ""The Trilateral Commission"" Saturday Evening Post , October, 1980, pg.-38, 84 . Rockefeller, Rockefeller, John, Rockefeller; . David Rockefeller: "Trilateral Commission" Rockefeller: ""The Rockefeller Commission"
 Smythe, Horace; ""New Money Plans Remain Unclear"" The Spotlight , August 6,1984, pg. 6, was published by Horace Smythe in 1984 . Smythe: "New money plans remain Unclear"
 Alan Stang, Alan; ""Crimes of the World Council of Churches"" American Opinion , January, 1982 . Stang: "Crimes are crimes of the world council of Churches"
 The Ancient Plan of Secret Societies , Huntington House Publishers: Lafayette, LA, 1990, 1990 .
 Ward, Wes; ""Jekyll Island"" Saturday Evening Post , January/February, 1981, pg.8-111, 128. Ward, . Wes; "Jekyl Island" is a series of books by Wes Ward . The book was published in 1981 .
 The Plot Against Civilization is published by Small, Maynard and Co.: Boston, MA, 1921 . The plot against civilization was the work of Maynard Maynard, who died in 1921 .
 Welch, Robert; The John Birch Society Bulletin , Belmont, MA, February, 1975, published by Welch, Welch, in 1975 . Welch was a member of the John Birch society .
 Welch, Robert; The John Birch Society Bulletin , Belmont, MA, July, 1976, published by Welch in 1976 . Welch was a member of the John Birch society . Welch wrote that he was disappointed by the results of the society .
 While most movies are made to entertain, they are fairly straight forward in their approach, ""The Matrix"" challenged its viewers . The Matrix was made to challenge its viewers and entertain .
 Different people who saw it, had different interpretations of its meaning . Incredibly unique was the fact that different people . saw it differently . Different interpretations of the meaning .
 For people to devote their time into discussing the ""meaning"" of a Hollywood movie illustrates the shear impact it has had . For more people to discuss the meaning of Hollywood movies, consider the impact of the film industry .
 This new on-line book considers the interpretations, observations, the symbolism, and the spiritual significance of ""The Matrix,"" and puts it into perspective . This new book considers interpretations, the observations and the symbolism of the Matrix .
 There is nothing that can happen to me today, that my God can not handle. My God can't handle it, she said .
 "Because I walk by faith, and not by sight, I know, that with God, all things are possible," she says .
 "I go where others fear, fight where others fall, and triumph where others fail," says the author . "I'm not afraid. I go where I go when others fear," she says .
 No weapon that is formed against me shall prosper, and when the enemy comes in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord will lift up a standard against him . The Bible says, "No weapon that will prosper, will prosper"
 "I have no fear in what man can do to me, because through Christ, I am more than a conqueror," she says . She says she has 'no fear' in what men can do .
 I am an overcomer, and I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. I am a Christian, I say . I am not afraid of anything, but I am overcommitted to Christ .
 "I am a winner and I will walk in victory, because I have put my trust in God. I am a a winner," she says .
 Bible search function is great for quick and easy searches of the entire Bible . It also gives you the ability to annotate verses with notes, along with an essay editor to extract text from the Bible .
 If your looking for the ultimate personal Study Bible, you need the Dake's Annotated Reference Bible . If you want to know more about the Bible, check out the Bible's Dake Book of Revelations .
 With 35,000 commentary notes, 500,000 cross/chain references and 9,000 outline headings, the Dake Bible gives you more resources for personal study than you'll find in any other Bible .
 Tired of going to the movies or renting a video only to be disgusted because of the inappropriate content . Tired to go to a movie or a movie where inappropriate content is unacceptable .
 We-WebCorp is offering a FREE internet blocking system that allows parents to set-up a password protected personalized account for each member of the family, with each given a certain set of restrictions .