 We measure how users navigate our site and measure which pages are the most and least popular . They enable us to understand how users interact with our site . We are happy to reveal the most popular and most popular pages on the site .
 They are capable of tracking your browser across other sites and building a profile of your interests . They can also be used to build a profile based on your browsing history .
 It is used to make the site work as expected, support your experience, and enable us to analyze performance and improve our services .
 The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience . The information is used to help us identify people and places we need to do so .
 This month marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis . The 13 days in October 1962 were probably the closest the world has come to a major nuclear war .
 The lessons of that brief but perilous episode remain valid today, as the world confronts anew the threat of nuclear proliferation, the author says . "The lessons are valid today," he says .
 This month marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis . The 13 days in October 1962 were probably the closest the world has come to a major nuclear war .
 Nikita Khrushchev decided to cross Kennedy’s red line surreptitiously and confront the Americans with a fait accompli . Kennedy crossed the red line, but it was not clear what happened . The U.S. and the Soviet Union crossed the line,
 When an American surveillance plane discovered the missiles, the crisis erupted . The crisis erupted when the missiles were discovered by a surveillance plane .
 M. Manivannan argues that the escalating economic crisis demands radical action to restore financial credibility .
 Kennedy mobilized troops, but also bought time by announcing a naval blockade of Cuba . Kennedy also announced a naval blockage of Cuba, which he said bought time .
 The crisis subsided when Soviet ships carrying additional missiles turned back . Khrushchev agreed to remove the existing missiles from the island .
 The U.S. did not attack Soviet missile sites, which were relatively vulnerable . The risk that even one or two of the Soviet missiles would be fired at an American city was enough to deter a first strike . The Soviets were simply outgunned.
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev feared that rational strategies and careful calculation might spin out of control . Kennedy feared that if he was successful, he would be more likely to lose control of his government .
 Robert McNamara, Kennedy’s secretary of defense, says he became more cautious as the crisis unfolded . McNamara: "I'm not going to go crazy. I'm going crazy, but I'm not sure what I think I would do if I did"
 Douglas Dillon, Kennedy’s treasury secretary, said he thought that the risk of nuclear war had been about zero . Douglas Dillon: "I thought that he thought he thought it was about zero"
 He did not see how the situation could possibly have escalated to nuclear war . McNamara was willing to push the Soviets harder and to take more risks than McNamara .
 General Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also believed that the risk of nuclear war was low . Taylor complained that the U.S. let the Soviet Union off too easily .
 There are exciting changes coming to PS, and we want to make sure they reflect your needs and preferences . PS 2022 Reader Survey: What do you think? Share your thoughts with us at the end of the year .
 Share your feedback today to help us to deliver the best possible experience to readers like you .
 The risks of losing control of the situation weighed heavily on Kennedy, too, too . Kennedy took a more prudent position than some of his advisers would have liked .
 There are still ambiguities about the missile crisis that make it difficult to attribute the outcome entirely to the nuclear component . The moral of the story is that a little nuclear deterrence goes a long way, writes Andrew Hammond .
 How much the United States won, and why it won, is hard to determine . Two possible explanations of the outcome, in addition to Soviet acquiescence .
 The naval blockade and possibility of a U.S. invasion strengthened the credibility of American deterrence, placing the psychological burden on the Soviets . The other explanation questions the premise that the Cuban missile crisis was an outright victory .
 For a long time, the participants said little about the buyout aspects of the solution . For a time, there were little talks about the deal .
 On October 27, 1962, a similar plane taking routine air samples near Alaska inadvertently violated Soviet air space in Siberia . The plane was flying over Siberia after Soviet forces shot down a U.S. surveillance plane .
 Soviet forces in Cuba had been instructed to repel a U.S. invasion, and had been authorized to use their tactical nuclear weapons to do so . It is hard to imagine that such a nuclear attack would have remained tactical .
 In a rational, predictable world, such an outcome might produce stability . But in a rational world, that outcome might not produce stability, he says . He says it's not always a good thing, but it's a sign of stability .
 In the real world, the Cuban missile crisis suggests that it might not have happened . In the world, it may not have occurred .
 Exciting changes are coming to PS, and we want to make sure they reflect your needs and preferences . Read more from ""The JFK Legacy"" PS 2022 Reader Survey .
 Share your feedback today to help us deliver the best possible experience to you and your fellow PS readers .
 The Fed Does Not Deserve All the Inflation Blame The Fed does not deserve all the inflation Blame . Albert Park Soft Power After Ukraine Soft Power after Ukraine soft Power After .
 What the War in Ukraine Means for Europe means for Europe what the war in Ukraine means for the region . Joschka Fischer: The End of Nordic Neutrality is the end of Nordic neutrality . Joseph S Nye, Jr. is the author of the book, "The End of
 Previous Cancel Next Close new comment has been posted. Previous comment was posted.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day to visit CNN iReport.com .
 After posting your comment, you’ll have a ten-minute window to make any edits . Pin comment to this paragraph . After posting a comment, comment will be published in the next 24 hours .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your photos and videos of your favorite travel destinations to CNN iReport . Please share your photos with us on Facebook and Twitter .
 We appreciate well-informed comments and welcome the criticism and insight of our readers .
 Evan Lieberman says governance failures and scandals need to be seen in their proper context . Lieberman: The Promise of South African Democracy needs to be viewed in context .
 Pascal Boniface thinks French president's second term will offer fewer opportunities to chalk up foreign policy successes . The French president will be re-elected to a second term in 2015 .
 Through renewable energy, taxes, carbon credits or new protocols, they could become greener than the greenback . The U.S. presents the options for decarbonizing a notoriously energy-intensive technology and global industry .
 Please enter your email address and click the reset-password button . Use this email address to help us post updates and photos .
 If your email exists in our system, we'll send you a link to reset your password . Use this email to help us identify your email address and post your photo .
 The link will expire twenty-four hours after the email is sent . Use this link to help people around the world share a photo of themselves . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport.com .
 To receive email updates regarding this {entity_type}, please enter the email below . Sign up for the weekly Newsquiz .
 This will be the first time we have played together in a game of our own . We will use the weekly Newsquiz to test our knowledge of events in the news . Please email us your photos and videos from our gallery .