 A thesis presented to the Faculty of the United States Army Command and General Staff College in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree MASTER OF MILITARY ART AND SCIENCE by Manuel E FALCON, LCDR, USN. USN B.S., United
 4 June 1993 Master'i Thesis, 3 Aug 92-4 Jun 93 4. 4. Aug 93 4 4. Jun 93 . 4. June 1993 4. 1994 4. 1995 4. 1996 4. 1997 4. 1999 4. 2001 4. 2004 4. 2000 4
 Presidential Dec is ion-Making q4J ltý5.64ý ii.,Idd tfn~Ar''-d ihc. kenteA4efti 6.64 ý ii.64 .
 Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited . DISTRIBUTION: This is the first time the film has been shown to be released .
 Study investigates the methods by which President John F Kennedy arrived at decisions to deploy the military in the conduct of foreign policy . The results of the study will be published in the US National Security Council .
 This study examines how effectively Kennedy employed the military once he arrived at the decision to deploy them in pursuit of his policies . Further, this study examines the effectiveness of the military in deploying them .
 His preferred instrument of choice in foreign policy matters was the military . His preferred weapon of choice for foreign policy is the military, he said .
 This study explores the maturation of Kennedy's decision-making process and how its evolution most affected the military . The study also explores the evolution of the military's decision making process .
 The study focuses on Kennedy's personality and the Cold War political realities to arrive at an understanding of the decisionmaking mindset of the era . The study is based on the personality of Kennedy and political realities of the time .
 From this point of reference, the measure of effectiveness of Kennedy's ""flexible response"" strategy is validated and his employment of the military can be judged a qualified success .
 The opinions of the student author do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College or any other governmental agency . The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not .
 Kennedy arrived at decisions to deploy the military in the conduct of foreign policy . Kennedy's decision to use the military to conduct foreign policy was made by President Kennedy .
 The study focuses on Kennedy's personality and Cold War political realities to arrive at an understanding of the decision-making mindset of the era .
 Kennedy's ascendancy to the White House was due in large part to his ardent belief in the containment of Communism and anti-Soviet rhetoric . Kennedy's rise to the presidency was due to his belief in containment of communism .
 A constant throughout Kennedy's years in the White House was his use of the military as America's principal instrument in the conduct of foreign policy . Kennedy's use of military was a constant throughout his presidency .
 Decisions to deploy the military were based on a myriad of complex issues which generally resulted in poorly articulated military objectives and an increasingly strained relationship between Kennedy and the military .
 The military was able to effectively define its role and execute 1 the President's foreign policy initiatives . Nevertheless, the military remained Kennedy's instrument of choice .
 This study explores the origins of Kennedy's decisions and the resultant military employment in support of his policies . It also explores the reasons for the use of military personnel to support Kennedy's policies .
 President Kennedy's 1960 campaign for the Oval Office was highlighted by an aggressive assault on the incumbent Republican administration's policy toward the Soviet Union .
 During the campaign, Senator Kennedy made repeated claims that under the stewardship of President Dwight D Eisenhower, the United States had fallen behind the Soviet Union in technology . The Soviets had launched the spacecraft Sputnik in October 1957 .
 Kennedy's campaign promise of a more active role in Cuba foreshadowed the major crises of his administration . Kennedy's promises of an active role and not so subtle hints at the elimination of the Cuban leader Fidel Castro .
 The origin of the Kennedy doctrine can be traced as far back as March 12, 1947, when Representative Kennedy was in attendance as President Harry S Truman addressed a joint session of Congress .
 As the acknowledged leader of the free world, the President argued, the U.S. had the inherent responsibility to contain the expansionist Soviet Union . The President argued that the United States had the . inherent responsibility .
 The U.S. devised the Marshall Plan in the Fall of 1947, and responded to the Soviet blockade of Berlin with the Berlin Airlift . The Marshall Plan was put into practice in the fall of 1948 .
 Eisenhower doctrine, authored principally by his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, was one of massive retaliation . The Eisenhower doctrine was a doctrine of retaliation against the U.S. government .
 Given that the U.S. possessed a nuclear monopoly, this theory was justified in economic terms . Given the United States possessed a . nuclear monopoly .
 It was more cost effective to place a greater reliance on deterrent nuclear power than maintaining a large conventional force, it said .
 Ei.enhower viewed maintenance of a nuclear arsenal as cheaper than becoming involved in a protracted conflict as his predecessor had done in North Korea .
 The obvious implication was that the U.S. had to stop Communist expansion into Vietnam . "The obvious implication is that the United States had to protect itself from the Communist expansion," says historian John Sutter .
 The means by which this strategy was carried out was in the form of government aid and military advisors, some covert . Some of the country's military advisors were covert, some of which were government aid .
 Eisenhower's fondness for covert operations grew the hugely successful Guatemala plan . The Central Intelligence Agency conceived operation which resulted in a bloodless coup .
 The CIA set about crafting plans for the overthrow of the Cuban government . Suitably emboldened, the CIA planned to overthrow the government of Cuba .
 President Kennedy would very closely adopt both Eisenhower's concept of the domino theory to justify his own aggressive campaign against communist expansion . Eisenhower's propensity for covert operations also influenced Kennedy's foreign policy .
 President Kennedy introduced a strategic policy that was markedly different than President Eisenhower's . Maintaining the momentum that carried him into office, President Kennedy immediately introduced a new policy . President Kennedy took office in 1963 .
 Kennedy's strategy became one of ""flexible response"" rather than massive retaliation . Kennedy's own belief that the military, much like diplomacy, was a critical instrument of foreign policy .
 President Kennedy wanted alternatives to assured destruction, and the forces 4 were available to present a credible deterrence across the entire spectrum of conflict .
 The result was the United States' largest ever peazime military buildup to date . The U.S. increased the pace of an already prodigious arms race with the Soviet Union . The result of the buildup was the largest military buildup ever .
 The centerpiece of Kennedy's new strategy was the buildup of conventional forces . There was an emphasis on guerrilla warfare and pro-insurgency operations .
 His plans to do so included buying additional sealift and airlift assets, developing a ship modernization program, and significantly increasing conventional war materiel stocks such as ammunition, electronic equipment and helicopters .
 The modernization of U.S. nuclear forces was no less a priority for President Kennedy . In keeping with his ""flexible response"" strategy, the modernization of United States nuclear forces also a priority .
 Kennedy's emphasis was on the maintenance of a force capable of delivering a decisive retaliatory strike in response to a Soviet first strike . Kennedy said the U.S. would be prepared to respond to a first strike by striking back at Moscow .
 He reasoned that a strong conventional force was not in itself the ultimate deterrent . The U.S. President George H.W. Bush argued that conventional forces were not in themselves to be a deterrent . He said the U.K. would not be deterred by conventional forces .
 It could, however, be used in crisis escalation to make the nuclear deterrent a more viable one . It could also be used to make it more viable .
 The nuclear option would not represent the first, and sometimes only, option as had been the case in the previous administration . Obama administration has been criticized for not using the nuclear option in the past .
 Kennedy inherited considerable foreign policy baggage from the outgoing administration . In adopting the ""domino theory,"" and Eisenhower's penchant for covert operations, Kennedy inherited some of the baggage from his predecessor .
 Eisenhower intimated that it was the President's responsibility to overthrow Fidel Castro by whatever means necessary . Eisenhower said it was his duty to overthrow the Cuban regime .
 The foundation was being laid for critical decisions which would be made a few short months into Kennedy's presidency . Kennedy's administration was being made a critical decision just a few months into his presidency .
 McNamara admitted in a Pentagon press conference that no ""missile gap"" existed with the Soviet Union . McNamara said in a press conference in 1964 that no gap existed with Soviet Union in nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy's credibility was immediately brought into question . Contradicticting one of Kennedy's principal campaign themes, the new President's credibility is immediately brought in question .
 Cuba was publicly flaunting its developing relationship with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro was practically daring anyone to invade . The Cuban government was openly flaunting their relationship with Russia .
 Kennedy was facing constituents to whom he had pledged during his campaign to be tough on Castro . Kennedy's credibility already shaken, Kennedy was now facing constituents .
 He felt he had to act to regain the credibility of his fledgling presidency and make good on campaign promises, he said . He said he felt he needed to act .
 The Kennedy doctrine is a doctrine that by its nature demanded a proactive course of action . Thus the seeds were sown for the first test of the Kennedy doctrine, a test of its effectiveness .
 President Kennedy's relationship with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was becoming increasingly antagonistic . The United States was developing a clear nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy's strategic doctrine was inconspicuously evolving into one in which a 7 nuclear first strike was not categorically rejected . Kennedy's policy was evolving into a policy of a 7 first strike .
 President Kennedy's pragmatic view of the interdependence between the military and diplomacy in foreign affairs served as the driving force behind the use of arms as the genesis for his ""flexible response" strategy .
 Despite an increased role for the military, Kennedy tempered what might have appeared to be a step toward a foreign policy dominated by options conceived by the military . Kennedy tempered the move by ensuring a clearer civilian control of the military and military policy formulation .
 Defense Secretary McNamara was left to formulate the strategic doctrine from which the military's role in foreign policy would be more precise>y defined 13 years later .
 Evidence suggests Kennedy was not always willing to allow diplomacy to run its course before committing the military . Despite attempts to make it appear otherwise, evidence suggests that he was willing to let diplomacy and diplomacy run their course .
 During the Kennedy Presidency, defense expenditures increased by 13 percent over the Eisenhower Administration . Defense spending increased 13 percent between Eisenhower and Kennedy .
 The net result of Kennedy's ""flexible response"" strategy was to make the military an attractive option in most situations . Kennedy's strategy made the military a more attractive option for most situations in the world .
 Kennedy's perception of the military as an organization when he entered the White House was one of contempt . In contrast to his belief in the use of military power, Kennedy's view of military was contemptuous .
 The ""New Frontier" was a phrase coined by Kennedy during his nomination acceptance speech . It came to define the legion of advisors he brought with him to Washington . The phrase was coined during Kennedy's acceptance speech to define his advisors .
 They were young by Washington standards, most had military experience in World War II . Most had an almost universal contempt for the military they perceived to be an entrenched bureaucratic institution .
 They looked upon the military as an inflexible bureaucracy where one had to endure great pains to get anything accomplished . The military was seen as a bureaucracy that had to be endured great pains .
 Using World War II as the source of their experience, the authors professed to have a complete understanding of national goals 9 and the military's role in the attainment of those goals .
 In their minds, they thus had only marginal use for the advice of senior military officers . "In their minds," they said, "they were only marginal"
 Kennedy's own World War II experience was short, but nevertheless, eventful . Kennedy served in the Army during the Battle of the Atlantic War .
 The experience revealed his early, less than favorable impression of the military hierarchy . The experience was revealed in a CNN interview .
 Kennedy wrote of his disgust for military inefficiency and mistrust of senior officers . In letters home while assigned to a Motor Torpedo Boat squadron, and later while hospitalized by the Navy, he wrote .
 This perception, fueled by his contemporaries, made him skeptical of the value of advice he would receive from his Joint Chiefs of Staff . This perception was fueled by a perception that he would not be able to rely on the advice he received .
 His early dealings with the military did little to engender the trust or mutual respect that would have given Kennedy reason to include senior military officers in his inner circle of advisors . Kennedy's dealings with military did not engender a trust or respect .
 Foreign policy and military strategy formulation was done almost exclusively with civilian advisors . Foreign policy was created by President Obama's administration .
 Kennedy ordered the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, to end the anti-Soviet rhetoric he was well known for on the lecture circuit . The false missile gap was revealed by his Defense Secretary .
 There is sufficient blame to share with any organization remotely associated with its implementation . Yet, as with most major disasters, there is plenty of blame for the disaster .
 Some blame, whether justified or not, was directed at the military . Some of the blame was directed towards the military, but some were justified .
 President Kennedy was seemingly convinced that the early misgivings he had concerning the military establishment, particularly the quality of advice he would receive from its senior leadership, were well founded . President Kennedy seemed to be convinced that he would be able to get the best advice from the military .
 President Obama would continue to use the military as his primary foreign policy tool . The principal deliberations which would ultimately lead to their deployment would be done with little input from the uniformed services .
 President Kennedy asked General Maxwell D Taylor, former Army Chief of Staff, to come out of retirement to chair the Cuba Study Group . General Taylor is a former Army chief of Staff and former Army Secretary of Staff .
 In a letter to Taylor which set forth the charter of the Study Group, Kennedy made only passing mention of the Bay of Pigs .
 His preoccupation was with improving the military's capability to conduct guerrilla, anti-guerrilla and paramilitary activities . He said he wanted to improve military's ability to conduct guerillas and anti-war activities .
 President Kennedy pursued one of General Taylor's recommendations by meeting with his Joint Chiefs to define their roles further . Kennedy was disappointed with the advice he received from the military during the Bay of Pigs .
 As his principal military advisors, they were responsible for providing the President with complete and unfiltered advice . The President's military advisors are responsible for his decision to take action .
 Their advice should not be purely military but also should consider political, economic and psychological factors, says CNN.com.com .
 In short, the military should be made to feel a certain sense of responsibility for the outcome of the Cold War . The military should also feel a greater responsibility for Cold War outcome, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Kennedy offered Taylor a position in his administration . Taylor had authored a book, The Uncertain Trumpet, which outlined what the General considered inadequacies with the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 He was assigned to the newly created position of Military Representative of the President .
 His role would be to serve as an advisor or military matters but with no command authority . He would serve as a military advisor but not a command officer .
 This position allowed a military man into Kennedy's inner circle of trusted advisors . But it did nothing to solidify the President's relationship with the remainder of the military hierarchy .
 In a fate that befell more than one administration, the role of the military in Vietnam was never clearly defined, and, therefore, there was nothing tangible to measure the successes or failures of American military employment in the region .
 President Kennedy never clearly articulated his administration's political objectives in South Vietnam . President Kennedy's administration never fully articulated its objectives in Vietnam .
 Kennedy was reluctant to pursue any course of action which would make him appear weak . The Bay of Pigs served as his introduction to foreign policy decisionmaking .
 Nothing came out of Kennedy's Vietnam experience which would appreciably change his perception of the military, says historian John Avlon .
 President Kennedy offered the job to General Taylor when the post of NATO's Supreme Allied Commander of NATO became vacant . General Taylor took the post in 1963 .
 He declined, stating that he had long neglected responsibilities at home due to his numerous overseas assignments . He said he wanted to remain stateside .
 The President nominated the current Chairman, General Lyman Lemnitzer, to the NATO post, opening the way for General Taylor's eventual nomination to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . General Taylor was nominated to the post by President Obama .
 The President was finally able to begin shaping the Joint Chiefs with men of his own choosing . The Joint Chiefs are the first to be formed under President Obama .
 During the Missile Crisis, General Taylor was typically the only military representative present . During Executive Committee meetings throughout the crisis, he was typically only the military representative at the time .
 The role of the military during the Missile Crisis, unlike the Bay of Pigs, would be clearly defined . The military would have a clear role in the crisis . The role would be clear-eyed and clear-cut .
 The basis for this study is a historical review of events which caused decisions to be made within the Kennedy White House which ultimately resulted in the deployment of the military in the conduct of foreign policy .
 The primary avenue of research will focus on how President Kennedy arrived at his decisions, and, once doing so, how effectively he employed the military in pursuit of his policies .
 The first chapter has provided a background study on what has been loosely defined by some historians as the Kennedy Doctrine . Some historians have called it the 'Kennedy Doctrine'
 Kennedy's reasoning for his pursuit of a ""flexible response"" strategy and the evolution of the military's role in the execution of his strategy are included in the chapter . Kennedy's evolution of his strategy is included in this chapter .
 Chapter Two examines the Bay of Pigs and the implications that the operation had on Kennedy's relationship with the military . Chapter Three examines the implications of the operation in which the operation occurred .
 Military successes and 14 failures, as the operation unfolded, will be examined . Military successes, as well as failures, will also be examined in detail .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion plan was conceived during the Eisenhower Administration . A detailed description of the plans' evolution prior to Kennedy's ascendancy to the Presidency .
 Political and diplomatic fallout from the Bay of Pigs is also included to illustrate the relationship between the two events . Political and political fallout is also shown to illustrate how the events unfolded .
 This analysis is done in the context of Kennedy's role in managing the crisis and military actions taken short of war . This analysis includes the role of Kennedy and the military actions he took short-of war .
 Soviet revelations of actual troop strengths on the island provide a good barometer for U.S. military preparations . Recent Soviet revelations show the strength of the Soviet Union's troops in the area .
 The Bay of Pigs was almost entirely disregarded by the US government in the 1960s . The book was published by the CIA in 1961 .
 Analysis in this study is weighted toward pragmatic, event oriented decision-making . Analysis focuses on personality traits of the decision-maker .
 The analysis is more in keeping with recently published accounts of President Kennedy which tend to portray a generally less favorable impression of his performance than was previously thought to be the case .
 This was particularly prevalent during the many crises of his Administration . This was especially prevalent during his administration .
 In researching Kennedy's relationship with the military, and the manner in which he conducted himself during military crises, numerous shortcomings in his performance become evident . This was not done with malice of forethought; however, in researching Kennedy, many of his shortcomings are evident .
 There is somewhat less on the Bay of Pigs; however, it is sufficient for the study of Kennedy decision-making as it relates to military employment .
 The primary source materials have largely been works by individuals who were in the Kennedy Administration . The primary sources of this article have been largely written by individuals involved in Kennedy administration .
 John F. &ennedy in the White House, Theodore C Sorensen's Kennedy, and General Maxwell D Taylor's Swords and Plowshares . General Taylor's swords and plowsharees .
 With the exception of Garthoff (whose book was revised in 1989 to include Soviet and Cuban sources), these books were written by Kennedy intimates . These books are almost exclusively laudatory in their examination of President Kennedy and his decisions .
 Recent authors have been much more critical of Kennedy . Recent authors provide a nice counter-balance to the writings listed above .
 Numerous additional books, government documents, transcripts of meetings, magazine and newspaper articles, previous research papers and television documentaries were used to round out the primary and secondary source material .
 The Soviet Union was making inroads in Africa, Communist insurgencies were poised to take over in Laos and establish a stronghold in Southeast Asia . In the Western Hemisphere, Fidel Castro's Cuban revolution was drifting undeniably to the left .
 Most Americans felt the formation of a Communist state in the Caribbean created an unacceptable security threat to the U.S. Most Americans believed the state of Cuba was a threat to America .
 U.S. options in Cuba were becoming increasingly limited as anti-Americanism was taking hold as the central theme of Castro's social revolution . The United States was losing its influence in Cuba .
 As early as March 1959, there were indications from within the Castro Government that the Cuban revolution was being driven toward Communism in both structure and foreign relations . In 1959, Castro's government was moving toward Communism .
 Cuba was purposely being portrayed as an enemy of the U.S. Additionally, it appeared that Cuba was intentionally being portrayed by the United States .
 Castro's anti-American rhetoric was based on a Latin, not Communist, view of the United States' perceived dominance in the region . Publicly, Castro's words were based on Latin views of the U.S.
 Castro was a charismatic and astute politician who was exceptionally popular among most working-class Latin Americans . Castro was known for his charisma and popularity in Latin America .
 He was able to convince large followings that any link between his revolution and Communism was more of the usual Washington propaganda of associating all Latin 3 reformers with Communists .
 Eisenhower administration chose to pursue a course of moderation in public . Despite what appeared to be open hostility toward the United States and an attempt at provocation by Cuba, the U.S. chose to take a cautious stance .
 In January 1960, the Eisenhower White House issued a statement detailing a policy it had no intention of following . The Eisenhower administration did not intend to follow the policy .
 The guise under which Eisenhower's public policy was being undertaken lasted only a few weeks . Eisenhower's presidency was overthrown by the White House in 1953 .
 Eisenhower wanted to finish his Presidency in a peaceful atmosphere . However, that desire was rapidly being overcome by events . Eisenhower wanted the President to end his presidency peacefully .
 The election year in the U.S. resulted in the electorate's increasing focus on Cuba and Communist expansion . The election in the United States resulted in an increased focus on the island nation .
 In February, Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan paid a state visit to Havana . The Soviet deputy premier visited Havana in February .
 Castro alleged Americans were responsible for an explosion on a French munitions ship anchored in Havana harbor which resulted in the loss of 6 life . Castro alleged that Americans were behind the explosion .
 Increased Soviet intervention in Cuba further inflamed the hostilities . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 In May 1960, Khrushchev insinuated that the ""Monroe Doctrine 'has died a natural death' and should be interred as a stinking corpse,"" while also announcing that any ""American aggression"" against Cuba would lead to a response from the Soviet Union .
 Any pretense of a peaceful coexistence between Castro and the U.S. was completely put to rest . Castro was assassinated in September 1961 in Cuba .
 The formulation of 21 and eventual implementation of the covert operation to overthrow Castro was given new life . The formulation 21 and subsequent implementation of a covert operation was given life .
 Dulles ordered a program to create, train, and equip a guerrilla force to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Dulles' plan was to create and train a force to topple Castro's government . The Cuban government was overthrown by Fidel Castro's regime .
 Richard M Bissell, Jr., Jr., the CIA's deputy director for plans, was placed in charge of the Cuba operation . Bissell was the principal author of the four point program .
 He had 22 been a key contributor to the CIA's successful 1954 coup in Guatemala, 11 . He had been in charge of the program that resulted in the production of the famous U-2 photographicreconnaissance spy plane .
 The Cuba ""program"" gained instant credibility among Eisenhower advisors . Armed with these credentials, the program's credibility was forged .
 The official estimate was that the entire operation would be functional in six to eight months . The entire operation was expected to be completed in just over a year .
 Richard M Nixon was particularly interested in the success of the plan . Nixon was the 1960 Republican Presidential candidate, and then-Vice President, Richard M. Nixon .
 CIA given a free reign and broad mandate, the planning and execution of what was to become the Bay of Pigs was in full swing . With the CIA given such a free rein, the CIA was given a broad mandate . The Bay of the Pigs War was planned and executed .
 Eisenhower's predisposition against the use of overt military force as an option in securing political objectives provided the impetus for the military plan . The plan ultimately had little Pentagon input, with little Pentagon involvement .
 The institutional momentum generated by an agency operating in a vacuum would require close scrutiny and an unambiguous desired end state articulated by the ultimate decision-maker . To ensure a suitable probability for the success of such a plan, the institutional momentum that was generated by the agency would need close scrutiny .
 In the waning days of his Presidency, Eisenhower sensed no urgency to provide either . Eisenhower sensed a lack of urgency to offer either .
 Eisenhower's decision was not a political one, but one balanced by his desire to provide his successor with a workable option for resolving the Cuba dilemma without committing American troops or adversely affecting world opinion .
 President-elect Kennedy's first exposure to the CIA's invasion plan was during Oval Office pre-inaugural talks with President Eisenhower in December 1960 .
 Vice President Nixon claimed Kennedy was aware of the plan as early as July of that year . His opponent in the election, Vice President Richard Nixon, claimed Kennedy knew about the plan .
 Some recent writings suggest that Kennedy may have known as early as Nixon indicated;' 5 however, there is no evidence to verify this .
 To Nixon, the facts regarding what Kennedy may have known about the plan, and at what point he became aware of its existence, were central to the campign . Nixon: The facts regarding Kennedy's knowledge of the plan were central .
 Kennedy, having already gone to bed for the evening, had not seen the statement before it was released . Kennedy had been in bed at the time of the statement .
 He did not retract it, however, because it was in keeping with the exchange he had with Nixon the previous day . He didn't retract it because of the exchange .
 When Nixon called for a ""quarantine"" of Cuba, Kennedy countered that Yixon's proposal was ""too little, too late,"" and called for direct intervention in Cuba .
 Fearing that any comments he might make could endanger the planned operation, Nixon could only retort that Kennedy was being overly reckless in his foreign policy views . Nixon retorted that Kennedy had been overly reckless on foreign policy .
 It is highly speculative to suggest that the revelation of the fact that Kennedy may have been aware of plans for an invasion of Cuba--and Nixon's subsequent campaign performance--were significant contributors to the outcome of the election .
 The event served to further politicize the deliberations which eventually resulted in the decision by Kennedy to undertake the Bay of Pigs operation .
 Eisenhower hoped Eisenhower would be in a caretaker role after Kennedy's election . Eisenhower had hoped the last ten weeks of his Administration would see him in a posthumous role . Eisenhower's Administration was dominated by the Kennedy administration .
 He proposed no new initiatives, but worked to maintain as many options open as possible so as not to tie the hands of the incoming president .
 Eisenhower severed diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1960s . Not consulted President-elect Kennedy, he severed diplomatic ties with Cuba . Cuba was the last nation to have diplomatic ties to Cuba .
 This well-publized event added to the already growing public demand for action which Kennedy helped create during his campaign for the presidency . The event was well-publicized .
 Eisenhower directed Bissell and the CIA to increase the size of the refugee force and step up preparations . In private, Eisenhower ordered the increase in the number of refugee forces .
 By the time Kennedy entered office, the tentative plans of ten months prior had developed into full-blown invasion preparations . However, the outgoing President was resigned to ""turn over our responsibility on the twentieth,"" while declaring, ""our successors should continue to improve and intensify the training and .
 Under the energetic CIA leadership 27 of Allen Dulies and Richard Bissell the plan had taken on ""impressive proportions,"" and seemed to have developed its ""own self-contained dynamics." Not only had Kennedy inherited the ""Cuba problem,"" he had a covert army at his
 With his anti-communist posturing, Kennedy seemed to reason that some course of action was required . With his actionoriented campaigning and anti-Communist postures, Kennedy decided to take action . Kennedy seems to have a sense of urgency to act .
 He made no effort to dissuade the continuing preparations of the CIA plan . He said he seemed intrigued by its continued progress .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles and his deputy, Richard Bissell gave President-elect Kennedy his first full intelligence briefing on November 18, 1960 . Kennedy's plan to use the CIA to help secure his presidency .
 Kennedy seemed surprised only by the size of the operation . He gave no indication that he did not fully endorse the plan . Kennedy seemed to be surprised only .
 President Eisenhower was briefed on the true size of the 28 expanding invasion force and the developing paramilitary concept of the operation . It was not until two days later that President Eisenhower learned of the extent of the force .
 Kennedy could hardly relegate the issue to the back burner . Kennedy was elected to the White House on the wave of the Cuba problem .
 In his first press conference following the inauguration, Kennedy responded to a question about Castro by indicating that at present, the U.S. had no plans to resume diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 His State of the Union Message, delivered four days later, made numerous references to the Cold War . He called for a strengthening of the military to support his flexible response strategy .
 To reestablish confidence in his administration after the false ""missile gap"" was revealed, the new 29 President felt the need for rapid action . Communist domination in this hemisphere can never be negotiated, writes David Cameron .
 To do nothing would be a sign of weakness, and could potentially harm his credibility abroad, says Obama . Obama's credibility abroad could be at risk, he says .
 Kennedy wanted to make certain that American power was not only sufficient, but was recognized as such around the world . By continuing the strong anti-Communist rhetoric that got him into office, he supported a stronger defense .
 A credible conventional military capability able to respond quickly to a limited war scenario, c_ was potentially developing in the Caribbean . Kennedy championed as a candidate and vigorously pursued as he entered the White House .
 Kennedy failed to address the question in his transition to power . To what degree he was willing to use force was a question he failed to answer in transition .
 The Bay of Pigs would be his first opportunity to test his evolving doctrine . He would be the first time he has a chance to test the idea .
 Allen Dulles briefed the leading members of the new administration on the Cuba project on January 22, 1961 . President Kennedy made the decision to go to Cuba in 1961 .
 Within a week, President Kennedy presided over his first meeting on the plan in the White House . The plan was approved within a week of Kennedy .
 This meeting was the first time all the members of the Joint Chiefs were officially introduced to the plan . This is the first meeting to officially introduce the plan to combat terrorism .
 Kennedy directed the Department of Defense to 30 report on the military concept of the plan . The State Department, working through the OAS, to prepare diplomatic 36 options for Cuba .
 General Lemnitzer's role in the early meetings may have lent a certain military credibility to the plan that was not justified . General Leminitzer was a key member of the U.S. National Security Council . He was not involved in the initial meetings, but his role may have
 Kennedy's direction to the military at this juncture was significant in that it got the Pentagon's senior leadership involved in the operation . Kennedy: "I'm sure it's a good sign that the U.S. is on the right path to victory in Iraq"
 The JCS rated the plan as having a ""fair" chance of military success . The overall success of the plan would depend on a considerable uprising from within the island or substantial support from additional forces .
 President Kennedy's penchant for extreme secrecy was a trait that would prove common in most foreign policy deliberations . Kennedy's decision to deploy the military was a major factor in his foreign policy decision .
 "To a large and unfortunate degree, it served to insulate him from information which would prove valuable in his decision-making. To a large . degree, he served to . insulate himself from information he would have useful in decision making .
 In the case of the ongoing Cuba invasion preparations, maintaining feasible deniability was the overriding factor . While national security considerations were the convenient explanation, it was not .
 The lack of access to key information served further to hamper military preparations for whatever role the military may be called upon to perform .
 Richard Bissell presented the JCS position to the President . After a limited military review of the plan, the President made the decision .
 Bissell's persuasive and energetic briefings had the desired effect . Bissell was clearly biased in favor of the plan in which he had vested so much effort, Bissell said .
 Allen Dulles would join in the effort to relieve the President's fears . Dulles joined in the efforts to relieve Kennedy's fears when dissent among advisors was voiced .
 Disbanding the CIA operation would reveal how the U.S. had planned to dispose of Castro, then lost its nerve . The operation would undoubtedly expose the CIA, revealing how the United States had planned for Castro to be disposed .
 Kennedy wanted to dispose of Castro without expending any political capital, particularly overseas . The effect would be to discredit the United States, dishearten Castro opponents, and eventually produce pro-Castro revolutions all around the Caribbean .
 "To be cast in the light of an imperialist Yankee would end any hopes for the ""Alliance for Progress"" he proposed in his inaugural address .
 Kennedy was concerned that if American military force was committed against Cuba, Khrushchev might retaliate with Soviet military force in Berlin . Kennedy was worried that if U.S. military force committed, it would be retaliatory .
 Kennedy feared the sight of U.S. military power on Cuban soil might result in another Hungary . Kennedy feared it might lead to a similar situation .
 The consensus among Kennedy advisors seemed to be that something had to be done, but it had to appear that the U.S. was not involved . The consensus was that something must be done .
 Plan called for combined amphibious/airborne assault at Trinidad supported by tactical airpower . The plan called for a combined amphibian/air assault at the base .
 He wanted a quiet landing, done preferably at night, with plans drawn up that required no intervention from the U.S. military . He wanted to land safely in the air, but wanted no military intervention .
 He recognized that the principal stumbling block with maintaining a plan that was deniable would be the tradeoffs between military and political risks . The U.S. military says it will have to make sure the plan is deniable .
 Of the three, the JCS also preferred the Zapata plan due to its available airstrips, and because restricted access to the 34 area provided a natural defense for the invaders . The JCS preferred Zapata to Zapata because of the available airstrip access .
 The JCS's first preference, however, remained the original Trinidad plan . JCS: "The first preference is to have the original plan"
 Kennedy agreed to the Bay of Pigs plan but ordered that the ""noise level"" be reduced by ensuring that all invasion ships be off-loaded at night . Kennedy agreed that the noise level should be reduced .
 The President withheld formal approval, but told the CIA to continue planning under the assumption that the invasion would be carried out . The President withholds formal approval of the invasion, but tells the CIA that it will take place .
 Contributing to the President's indecisiveness was the growing dissent among his advisors, others from whom he sought counsel . The President was indecisive and indecisive .
 The greatest dissenters were Arkansas Senator J William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and special assistant Schlesinger, Loth of whom provided the President with unsolicited written memoranda outlining their objections .
 With newspapers increasingly forecasting an invasion, the plan was anything but a secret . The plan was not a secret.
 He considered it inconceivable that the U.S. could convince the world of non-complicity in the operation .
 He held the same belief that the United States would be unable to dissociate itself from the Cuban invaders . The U.S. would not be able to separate itself from Cuba .
 He was concerned that little evidence existed to indicate that the invasion would ""touch off a mass insurrection"" against Castro rather than turn into a protracted civil war . Additionally, he was concerned .
 President Obama says it would be politically difficult not "to send in the Marines" if rebels call for U.S. armed assistance . He added that it would also be difficult not to send in Marines .
 CIA intelligence reports continue to sound positive for those in favor of the operation . On the point concerning insurrection, the reports continued to be positive . The operation is expected to be successful .
 The weekly intelligence summary of that day reported an increase in anti-Castro terrorist bombings and other accounts of attempted sabotage . That day was the day of the most significant increase in bombings in Cuba .
 The shortage of basic food and household items, felt by all levels of society, is causing increasing dissatisfaction . With D-Day of 5 April rapidly approaching, the CIA was anxious for a decision .
 Allen Dulles described how heavy rains would descend on the Caribbean islands by the end of April . Dulles: Heavy rains would delay the invasion for weeks .
 Dulles: By then, the Cubans would have even more Soviet weapons at their disposal . Dulles reasoned that by then, there would be even more Russian weapons at his disposal .
 When Kennedy returned to Washington on 4 April, his closest advisors expressed amazement at the President's change in attitude about the Cuba operation .
 President Kennedy was skeptical about the plan before he flew to Florida . McGeorge Bundy, the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, noted a great deal of skepticism in Kennedy . Bundy: "There's a lot of skepticism" in Kennedy about the proposal .
 President seemed dubious about the invasion of Cuba before the Easter weekend . Schlesinger expressed a similar view, indicating the President was dubious .
 Bundy recalled, that upon the President's return, he ""really wanted to do this...when he came to the moment of truth--the decision to go or not go-he made up his mind and told us," Bundy said . Bundy recalled that upon his return, the President "
 All indications were that Kennedy was prepared to make a formal decision . Kennedy was expected to make the decision on Friday .
 The article, with the accompanying headline, ""Invasion Reported Near,"" reported that invasion preparations were nearly complete .
 Kennedy told his press secretary, Pierre Salinger, "Castro doesn't need agents over 37 here, all he has to do is read our papers" Kennedy told Salinger that Castro doesn't have to need agents .
 A few months into his Presidency, Kennedy did not have the decision-making apparatus in place to balance the concern for his public image with the military significance of the decision he was about to make .
 On 12 April President Kennedy held a press conference to air these views . President Kennedy was assassinated on 12 April 1963 .
 There will not be, under any conditions, an intervention in Cuba by the U.S. Armed Forces, says President Obama . Obama: "Under any conditions"
 I intend to see that we adhere to that principle and as I understand it this administration's attitude is so understood and shared by the anti-Castro exiles from Cuba in this country . The Cuban government has been criticized by some of the country's most prominent dissidents .
 With this pronouncement, Kennedy may have inadvertently made the decision that eventually doomed the invasion of Iraq . The decision may have saved the invasion .
 Kennedy intended to honor the pledge, but it became clear that this was not what he intended to do . Kennedy has been charged with a crime of perjury .
 The invasion of 17 April would be proceeded by an air strike on the fifteenth . The invasion would be followed by the air strikes on the 15th and 17 April .
 CIA trained B-26 crews were to attack three Cuban airfields to neutralize the Cuban Air Force . Under the guise of defecting Cuban pilots, the crews would attack three airfields .
 Second strike was to be conducted at dawn on D-Day . After an interval of two days to assess the damage, a second strike was planned . After two days of assessing damage, the second strike would take place .
 On 14 April, the invasion fleet sailed from Puerto Cabezas in Nicaragua .
 That afternoon, Kennedy called Bissell with approval for the air strikes against the three airfields . The strikes were the first to be carried out by the U.S. government .
 In the end, the operation that concluded in such total failure was a military one that, from its inception, was run almost exclusively by a civilian agency . The operation was run from the inception of the operation .
 The only subject that everyone involved seemed to agree on was the elimination of Castro as the primary goal of the invasion . The only thing everyone agreed on was eliminating Castro .
 They argued that their role in the operation was a supporting one, charged solely with critiquing the CIA plan and providing limited assistance in training and logistic support .
 They claimed they were required to work under conditions in which even this modest support was difficult . They said they worked under conditions that were difficult to support .
 Secrecy kept them from properly staffing any plans, providing detailed options, officials say . Secrecy was kept from providing detailed details of the plans, they say .
 No records were taken at any meetings nor agendas circulated among the participants to assist in preparations . No agendas were circulated among participants to help with preparations .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff had not been forceful enough in expressing their reservations about the plan, the author says . Each of these arguments have merit; however, the charge the JCS did not answer is that the civilian leadership did not .
 There can be no escaping blame for the failure of the JCS to express concerns about the new President's plan . The JCS failed to rigorously express their concerns, he says .
 If the military is to be judged as a contributing partner to the failure of the Bay of Pigs, it was during the planning phase when seemingly glaring shortcomings in the plan were not detailed to the President . The military should be judged to be a contributing member of the failure to the failed Bay
 For their part, the JCS were made to feel they had a minor role; therefore, their critique of the plan and briefings to the President were narrowly focused to strictly military considerations .
 Kennedy failed to grasp that his decision amounted to the approval of a military operation and allowed political considerations to dominate his thinking . Conversely, Kennedy did not grasp that he had already approved of the operation .
 Despite limited participation and severe restrictions on planning, military hierarchy continued to plan and make preparations for involvement . Despite these institutional perceptions of what the JCS role should have been, the military continued to make preparations .
 With the existence of an American naval 41 base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and the proximity of the United States to a potential Soviet staging base, the strategic implications were obvious . The U.S. military base is located in Cuba .
 The Joint Chiefs had not been officially briefed on the invasion plans until January 1961 . Contingency planning had been ongoing for some time .
 Brigadier General David W Gray was appointed to run a committee to study the options available to overthrow Castro . The committee will study the various options available .
 President Eisenhower directed the CIA to undertake a similar study . This was done without the knowledge that President Eisenhower had already directed the study . The study was conducted without knowledge that Eisenhower had ordered a study .
 The study concluded that American involvement in any amount less than that recommended in step four would result in failure . The U.S. would not be able to participate in any of the four steps required .
 The committee recommended that an inter-agency staff group be formed to review all 42 alternatives so that the President would have an overall plan from which to make a decision .
 As early as October 1960, General Lemnitzer, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, had heard rumors concerning a ""most highly secret operation"" during informal discussions in the White House . The operation was described as a 'highly secret operation'
 He considered the discussions none of his business, and never pursued the issue . "He considered it none of the business," he said .
 The same month, Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, learned of CIA activities from Naval Intelligence sources in Guatemala and Nicaragua . Admiral Burke learned of the CIA activities in Guatemala, Nicaragua .
 General George Decker learned several weeks later when the operation had grown into plans for an invasion . General Decker, the Army Chief of Staff, learned of the plans .
 General David Shoup found out by accident when he discovered a large cache of rifles being prepared for shipment to a base in Texas . The Marine Corps Commandant found the rifles by accident .
 Bissell refused to call on the military for any assistance during the planning . Bissell refuses to call for military assistance .
 This became particularly disturbing to the Navy when the CIA decided to expand into the business of amphibious warfare . The CIA has been involved in the CIA's amphibious operations .
 Admiral Dennison was none too amused to report that one of his commanders had been approached by the CIA with an order to requisition his vessel . The CIA had ordered the vessel be requisitioned .
 Lemnitzer professed to know little of what was going on and called Allen Dulles to arrange a brief for the Admiral . The Admiral said he knew little about the situation and called Dulles .
 The CIA Director dispatched Bissell to the Admiral's headquarters in Norfolk, Virginia, to deliver a ""sketchy"" summary of the operation . Bissell delivered a summary of operation . The operation was described as a "skechy"
 Dennison's anger was not abated when Bissell could not provide answers to the Admiral's queries about the Navy's responsibilities .
 Dennison's suspicion that the CIA had not considered these details in their planning . The CIA had been planning for the attack, he said .
 Dennison knew more about the operation than did the 62 Chief of Naval Operations . At this point, however, he knew more than he did .
 Owing to the extreme secrecy surrounding the evolving plan, these concerns never surfaced in the White House . The White House has been tight-lipped about the plan .
 A recurring theme throughout the planning stages was that the CIA's tightly controlled access to the military had the net effect of diffusing criticism from the military . The CIA says it will be closely watched by the U.S. military .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff introduced to CIA operation in January 1961 . Joint Chiefs were officially introduced to the CIA operation . CIA operation began in 1961 .
 General Gray was directed to chair the committee that would report on the military's review of the CIA plan . He had earlier chaired a committee to study military options in Cuba .
 The CIA, with the President's concurrence, limited the circulation of the plan, making Gray's committee necessarily small . The plan was limited by the CIA, making it necessarily small.
 Members of Gray's group were not permitted to take notes during the CIA briefing . They were given no copies of the CIA plan itself .
 They were forced to reconstruct the briefing from memory to complete their report . As a result, the report was forced to rely on memory .
 The resultant ""fair chance"" of success report was never fully explained . The report was released in 2005 .
 The principal problem with the JCS repoLt was that it sent no clear signal to the President concerning the true level of support within the military for or against the plan . The president should have known the true support of the plan, the author says .
 Too much military intervention would reveal the true U.S. role in the operation, too little could doom the plan to failure . Too little military intervention could doom a failed mission, too much could doom it .
 The Navy stepped up its activity in the Caribbean to counter what it perceived to be a Soviet threat developing in Cuba . Unrelated to the development of the Bay of Pigs, the Navy had been stepping up its activities .
 A standing naval force, made up of a destroyer squadron and Mar4 .e Amphibious Ready Group, was established 45 years ago and based in Roosevelt Roads, Puerto Rico .
 Guantanamo Bay is being used with greater frequency to provide refresher training for Atlantic Fleet warships . Guantanamo Bay was being used to provide training in combat systems drills, engineering and damage control .
 When Admiral Dennison learned of the CIA's plan, he further increased activity in the region, and intensified staff's contingency planning .
 He had no idea what role he was playing but was certain he would be called upon . He said he would not be surprised if he was called upon to play a role .
 He directed surface ships undergoing training to conduct electronic surveillance, and used submarines, operating from their bases in Key West, to monitor shipping in and out of Cuba and conduct fact-finding missions .
 Dennison requested assistance from the Commander, Strategic Air Command, through the JCS, for the protection of Key West . Further, he requested assistance .
 This was a joint exercise which integrated forces under the Commander of the North American Air Defense and added them to the defense and surveillance of the south Florida coast . This was the first joint exercise in the history of the U.S. Air Force .
 None of these assets were specifically targeted for use in the Bay of Pigs operation . To avoid the perception of a military buildup, all this activity was conducted under the guise of training . None of the assets were targeted specifically for use .
 The anti-submarine warfare carrier USS Essex and her six ship ASW squadron were chosen to provide 46 support for the invasion . The squadron was chosen to support the invasion of the Soviet Union .
 The carrier was to embark a squadron of AD-4 Skyhawk jet aircraft and, along with five destroyers, were to escort the invasion fleet to a point outside Bay of Pigs .
 Two destroyers were to rendezvous with the Cuban ships and guard them against possible enemy interference . The carrier was to stand off while two destroyers rendezvous to guard them .
 The commander of the task force, Rear Admiral John A Clark, was under strict orders that he was not to fire a shot except in absolute self-defense . The commander was not allowed to fire at least one shot during the operation .
 The Bay of Pigs operation quickly turned into the fiasco for which it is renowned . The operation is known for its bungling, bungling and bungling .
 The limited air strike of 15 April did not destroy the Cuban air force, but only served to alert Castro of the impending invasion . The limited strike only served as a warning to Castro that the invasion was imminent .
 Kennedy canceled a second strike on the 15th and 17th . The resultant condemnation of U.S. actions in the U.N. caused Kennedy to cancel the second strike . Kennedy canceled the air strikes that were to accompany the invaders on the 17th.
 The result was that the invaders met a fully prepared Castro with his air force nearly intact . Castro's air force was nearly intact after the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Admiral Burke denied Admiral Burke's suggestion that offshore destroyers assist with naval gunfire . Admiral Burke also denied that offshore ships assist with gunfire .
 There is no quantifiable means by which to judge the success of American military actions at the Bay of Pigs . Without a clear U.S. military objective at the outset, or ultimately a definitive role for the military during the operation, there is no quantitative measure of success .
 By all accounts, President Kennedy's employment of them was an unqualified disaster . The president's job was a "unqualified disaster" for Kennedy .
 The principal reason is that Kennedy unwittingly sabotaged the military aspects of the plan in order to reduce any potential political damage which might result from its execution . Kennedy's decision to sabotage the plan was made to avoid political damage .
 He steadfastly refused to appreciate the military implications of what was to transpire . He naively maintained the belief that somehow the U.S. could credibly deny participation in the operation .
 Dennison did what he could to ensure assets were in place to support the invasion . Nevertheless, the military made all preparations to make the plan work .
 Joint Chiefs were unanimous in their assessment that the invasion would have succeeded had the planned air strikes been carried out . Air cover and shore bombardment provided provided .
 Militarily, Kennedy's greatest failure was in not unequivocally erasing all doubts in the minds of military planners and insurgents that American military power would not be brought to bear to assist in the invasion under any circumstance .
 By subordinating military decisions to political concerns, Kennedy subjected himself to useless JCS advice . Kennedy subverted military decisions by subordinating them to political considerations . Kennedy subjected to useless advice from the JCS .
 In the end, the ""Cuba problem"" was not a crisis that required immediate action . In the beginning of the Cuban crisis, the crisis was not an immediate crisis .
 By defining it as such, the Bay of Pigs exposed an Administration that was ill-prepared for crisis decision-making . It also sent a message to the world that the new President was too narrowly focused on a single objective and too weak .
 Dean Acheson, chairman of Kennedy's Advisory Committee on NATO, stated that the only explanation for the operation was that the "mere inertia of the Eisenhower plan carried it to execution" Aideson said that the 'mere inertia' of the plan carried the operation to execution .
 The existing study of the Bay of Pigs is replete with possible explanations for President Kennedy's decision . President Kennedy made a decision to kill the Pigs in 1961 .
 The most credible among them are Cold War posturing, domestic politics, and a desire to portray the image of a strong, decisive leader, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The most credible part of the story is that the U.S. wants to be a
 Kennedy made the easiest decision available to him that, if successful, would have generated the greatest political dividends . Taken cumulatively, and in the context of the Cold War mindset, he appears to have made the best decision available .
 To do nothing would have been counter to his campaign themes of providing youthful, vigorous leadership . The United States was the only counter to Soviet Communist expansion in the world, he says .
 To do more, and not succeed, could have drawn the U.S. into a protracted conflict which would result in political suicide, says President Obama .
 Kennedy's concern that he not appear weak in the world community was a recurring theme . Kennedy: "A recurring theme was . not appearing weak in world community"
 President Kennedy allowed his concern for politics, of which his image was a critical element, take precedence over military and diplomatic considerations . Kennedy made a clearly disastrous decision which would bias his foreign policy decision-making and use of the military for the remainder of his Presidency .
 President Kennedy privately expressed dissatisfaction with his advisors and grew increasingly determined to rid himself of Castro . After its failure, President Kennedy expressed dissatisfaction . President Kennedy was determined to remove Castro from office .
 Publicly accepted the blame and continued his commitment to American non-intervention in Cuba . Publicly, he readily accepted the . blame .
 President Kennedy addressed the American Society of Newspaper Editors the day after the Bay of Pigs . President Kennedy spoke to the editors the next day .
 The theme of his speech focused on his policy of non-intervention . The lessons to be drawn from the recent experience in Cuba, he said .
 I have emphasized before that this was a struggle of Cuban patriots against a Cuban dictator . "I have emphasized ... this was ... a struggle against a dictator," he said .
 "We made it repeatedly clear that the armed forces of this country would not intervene in any way. While we could not be expected to hide our sympathies, we made it . We made it clear that we would never intervene in this way," he said .
 I want it clearly understood that this government will not hesitate in meeting its primary obligations which are to the security of our nation . I want to make it clear that the government is not going to hesitate to meet the primary obligations .
 "We intend to reexamine and reorient our forces of all kinds, our tactics and other institutions here in this community," the mayor says .
 With the final phrases, Kennedy was sending a signal that his efforts against Cuba would not end . With the last words, Kennedy sent a signal he would not stop his efforts to Cuba .
 His reference to institutions was presumably directed at the roles the CIA and the military would assume in future operations .
 In White House meetings, and in statements, Kennedy was adamant about assuming the responsibility for the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, I'm going to blame for what happened"
 The staff reorganization that produced the decision-making apparatus that would serve him during the missile crisis was quietly being set in motion . The reorganization of his staff was being set up in place .
 President's view was that his senior military advisors could not be entrusted to make decisions which reflected considerations that included other than purely military objectives . The President said the decision was made on behalf of the United States .
 President believed they were incapable of making decisions which had his best interest in mind . More pragmatically, the President believed, they were unable to make decisions which he wanted .
 This perception was in keeping with his pre-election views of senior military officers . The perception was kept in line with his views on the Iraq War .
 President Kennedy was besieged by stinging critiques of his performance and a demand for action . Despite attempts at political damage control and an obvious desire to put the Bay of Pigs behind him, President Kennedy faced a stinging criticism .
 In a private meeting with Eisenhower, Kennedy was asked by the former President why he decided against the use of air power during the invasion . Kennedy was also asked why he chose not to use air power .
 Eisenhower critiqued, "I believe there is only one thing to do when you go into this kind of thing" 54 years later, Eisenhower said, "There is only the only thing that you can do is get a job"
 "When we show weakness, he'll create crisis [sic] to take advantage of us," he wrote . "He'll create crises [sic]," he said. "when we show weaknesses, he will create crisis"
 Former rivals advised Kennedy on a strategy of action against Cuba . Such frank advice from former rivals served to strengthen Kennedy's resolve for a strategy .
 General Maxwell Taylor's Cuba Study Group, although generally not critical of President Kennedy's role in the Bay of Pigs, nevertheless, also called for action . The group was generally critical of Kennedy's actions in Cuba .
 The report went on to describe the existence of a ""life-and-death struggle"" which the United States ""may be losing"" with the 5 Soviet Union . The report also described a life-threatening struggle between the U.S. and the Soviet Union.
 No evidence exists to suggest an invasion of Cuba was ever seriously contemplated by the administration . But the private discussions and public pressures demanded action .
 The Bay of Pigs served as a rude introduction to superpower politics . Kennedy was naive with regard to foreign policy when he came into office .
 His first attempt to exercise his ""flexible response"" strategy was a disaster . His first try was a disastrous failure .
 He was failing in the very arena he chose to use as the principal battleground for his campaign rhetoric . He was not succeeding in his bid to win the White House .
 His desire was to turn the country's attention to other areas in which his strategy could be successfully used . He said he wanted to focus on other areas of which he could use his strategy .
 The Bay of Pigs and Cuba occupied only a small portion of the Summit's agenda . The timidity with which President Kennedy addressed the issue convinced Khrushchev that Kennedy was weak and lacked the resolve to commit American troops in a crisis .
 In the short term, Khrushchev chose Berlin to exploit what he perceived to be the President's 56 lost confidence and diminished world stature . In the long term, he chose Berlin as a short-term exploit of the President .
 After the Summit, Kennedy clearly believed Khrushchev had gotten Lhe best of him . Kennedy was not pleased with the result .
 "I think he thought that anyone who was so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be taken," she says . "He thought anyone who is so inexperienced could get into it could," she adds .
 The Soviet Union deployed missiles to Cuba may have been Khrushchev's perception that Kennedy would respond militarily only to counter direct aggression against the U.S. Khrushchen's perception was that Kennedy--based on his performance at the Bay of Pigs--would respond only to direct aggression
 Kennedy was certain his performance at the Vienna Summit reinforced Khrushchev's beliefs . Kennedy was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The CIA's Deputy Director for plans, Richard Helms, described as ""white heat"" the pressure he had been feeling from the President about Cuba since the Bay of Pigs . Helms described the pressure as 'white heat'
 In an ensuing meeting, Helms was told ""that getting rid of Castro was the top priority in the U.S. government" Helms says he was told that "getting rid" Castro was "the top priority" in the US government .
 Major General Edward Lansdale, a counterinsurgency specialist, was placed in charge of the operation . Major General Lansdale was placed with the operation in charge .
 He formulated a six phase plan which was to ""culminate with an open revolt and overthrow of the Communist regime," he said .
 All of these activities were in keeping with Kennedy's ""flexible response"" strategy . Kennedy's fondness for covert operation .
 Increasingly, the President's seemingly genuine desire to eliminate any vestige of conrmunism from the western hemisphere, and his increasing personal animosity toward 58 Castro, demanded continued efforts to effect his overthrow .
 As in the Bay of Pigs, however, political expediency overruled sound judgment . As in in the case of Cuba, the Cuban government was under pressure to act .
 Cuba once again occupied the public debate in 1962 . Cuba was the focus of the November mid-term elections that year .
 In early September, a group of Republican Senators introduced a Joint Congressional Resolution which authorized the use of American troops in Cuba .
 On the eve of the missile crisis, doing nothing was an option that was quickly dissipating . "Doing nothing was not an option," says President Nixon .
 Domestic political considerations were not far from the surface during discussions on options to pursue . Domestic politics were also at the forefront of discussions on what to do .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara offered, ""A missile is a missile" Defense Secretary McNamara said, "A missile is a missile. a missile. A missile. Is a missile?"
 Though outwardly Kennedy remained calm and courageously accepted the blame for the Bay of Pigs debacle, privately he felt his ""experts"" had failed him . Kennedy's New Team: Kennedy's new Team .
 President Kennedy was determined to have a firmer grasp on his administration's foreign policy . Henceforth, President Kennedy would have a stronger grasp on foreign policy.
 He was inclined to make greater use of those advisors in whom he had developed personal confidence and whom he considered generalists . He said he would make more use of advisors in the future .
 The process whereby he would replace incumbent advisors with those of his own choosing was greatly accelerated . The process of replacing incumbent advisors has been greatly accelerated.
 Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen became the President's most trusted confidants and would be present for every crisis decision for the remainder of his Presidency . Robert Kennedy was not involved in the Bay of Pigs decisions .
 McGeorge Bundy would assume greater responsibilities in his role as National Security Advisor . Bundy would take on greater responsibilities as the National Security Adviser . Bundy has been in charge of the U.S. National Security Council since 2009 . Bundy is a former Air Force Vice President George W. Bush .
 Maxwell Taylor brought in as a source of alternate military advice . Maxwell Taylor was brought in to give advice to the U.S.
 All close advisors were encouraged to provide 19 ""unfettered and confidential" advice to the President .
 The most obvious organization which was left out of this new national security apparatus was the military and the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The new administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Robert Kennedy was perhaps the Administration's most ready critic of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Robert Kennedy has been critical of Joint Chiefs' decision to step down .
 He was moved from the Executive Office Building to the West Wing of the White House . He was given responsibility for coordinating access to the President on security matters .
 He started regularly scheduled morning meetings with his National Security Council staff . The meetings included representatives from the CIA, Defense and State Departments .
 This increased his value to the President and, in turn, strengthened his grasp of the relevant issues with the fewest number of advisors . This increased him value to President and strengthened the President's grasp of relevant issues .
 In late June 1961, Maxwell Taylor officially became a member of Kennedy's team . Maxwell Taylor became the president of the Kennedy administration .
 As Military Representative of the President, Taylor was to serve as a staff officer whose responsibility it was to advise and assist the President in matters concerning the military . Taylor was appointed as the President's Military Representative .
 He was assigned in an advisory capacity to Cold War planning and in the intelligence field, with particular emphasis in Berlin and Southeast Asia . He also served in the Cold War .
 Kennedy emphasized that Taylor would have no command authority and was not to intervene between the President and any of those 22 individuals or agencies . Kennedy emphasized there were no appearances of conflicts with those who had statutory responsibility to the President .
 Taylor suggested that the members of the JCS and he exchanged views on issues they were working concurrently before official papers were forwarded to the President . Taylor suggests that they exchange views before they are forwarded .
 Chairman said he would do all he could to prevent any wedges from being driven between them . Chairman agreed and said he will try to prevent wedges between them being driven .
 Sorensea wrote that Kennedy sought military advisors whose thinking was in line with his own . Kennedy sought advisors whose views were not his own, she said . Kennedy's thinking was the same as that of his own.
 General Maxwell Taylor is President Barack Obama's second most senior military adviser . General Taylor is a retired General of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 This trend would continue unabated until General Taylor assumed the position of Chairman a year later . General Taylor took over as Chairman of the Board of Governors .
 Even with his appointment as Chairman it is debatable whether the Pentagon advice that eventually reached the President was unbiased military counsel or simply General Taylor's politically sensitized viewpoint .
 U-2 photographs provided evidence of the existence of missile sites in Cuba . The Executive Committee was briefed by McGeorge Bundy on 16 October 1962 .
 Kennedy directed Bundy to commence low-level reconnaissance flights and to call a meeting of top officials and close advisors . Bundy was convinced of the evidence, Kennedy directed him to commence reconnaissance flights .
 At eleven forty-five that morning the first meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council 25 was convened . The first meeting was held at 11:45 a.m. ET on Monday morning .
 Kennedy expressed a desire to limit the participants in the deliberations to generally the small group assembled at the first meeting . Kennedy said he wants to keep the deliberations limited to the group assembled in the first session .
 "It was his intent to present the evidence to the Soviets, at a time of his choosing, and to do so with complete surprise to gain the initiative in whatever maneuvering might ensue," he said .
 To conduct a large National Security Council meeting, the President reasoned, would surely cause leaks . The President reasoned that such a large meeting would cause leaks, so would cause trouble .
 Large National Security Council meetings had been commonplace during Eisenhower Administration . Large meetings were commonplace during the Eisenhower Administration. Large NSC meetings were common during Eisenhower administration .
 Kennedy's first official act after his inauguration was to sign an executive order abolishing much of the statutory membership of the Council .
 The creation of the EXCOMM 64 effectively eliminated the formal apparatus of the NSC . The NSC was intended to provide advice to the President . It was created to provide the President with advice .
 Kennedy chose members of the EXCOMM not so much because of position but because of personal confidence and reliability . Kennedy chose them because of their personal confidence, reliability .
 Secretary of State George W. McCone, Secretary of Defense Roswell L Gilpatric, Ambassador-atlarge Llewellyn E Thompson, Special Counsel Sorensen, National Security Advisor Bundy and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Taylor .
 From the outset, two traditional Presidential decision-making bodies were excluded, as organizations, from the President's group of advisors . From the start of the process, President Obama's advisors were excluded from the group .
 The President's own Cabinet and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Taylor, with the noticeable exception of General Taylor . General Taylor is the most senior commander in the world .
 Kennedy believed the Cabinet was not suited for the crisis management role, and few of its members had ascended to a place of complete confidence in the President's inner circle .
 Kennedy never fully regained his confidence in the Joint Chiefs since the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy was perfectly satisfied to go to General Taylor for military advice .
 Kennedy once remarked, 65 ""They advise you the way a man advises another one about whether he should marry a girl" Kennedy once said that the JCS advice is the same as a man advising another one on whether to marry .
 Chiefs made only rare appearances at EXCOMM meetings and, when they did so, had little influence on the proceedings and ultimately, the President's decisions . Chiefs made rare appearances in rare appearances and had little impact on proceedings .
 President Kennedy was impressed by the military effort, particularly the deployment of Navy vessels, the continuous alert by Air Force crews, and the movement of Army and Marine troops to the southeastern part of the United States . He was considerably less impressed by military representatives with whom he met .
 President Kennedy was concerned by the Joint Chiefs' limited military focus . President Kennedy worried about the Joint chiefs' limited focus on the military .
 Robert Kennedy wrote that the Chiefs "seemed to give so little consideration to the implications of steps they suggested" Robert Kennedy said he believed the Chiefs gave "so little consideration" to the proposals .
 After each EXCOMM meeting throughout the crisis, General Taylor would promptly return to the Pentagon to brief the Joint Chiefs . Taylor would ensure military requirements that had come out of the meeting were set into motion .
 General Taylor was often subjected to pointed questioning by the Joint Chiefs to ensure their positions were being appropriately defended . General Taylor often faced questions from Joint Chiefs about their positions .
 General Taylor would offer to hold coats for Chiefs to meet with President . Taylor offered to arrange a meeting for Chiefs with the President at which he promised to hold their coats .
 At General Taylor's suggestion, the President invited the Joint Chiefs to a meeting to hear their views . The Joint Chiefs will meet on 19 October to discuss the issue .
 By this time, the President, with strong endorsements from Defense Secretary McNamara and Attorney General Kennedy, had virtually decided on the blockade as a course of action . The blockade was virtually decided by the President .
 The diversity of the membership of the EXCOMM and the free-wheeling nature of the discussions provided the President with a wide range of responses to the Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba .
 The options ranged from doing nothing to doing nothing, to a pre-emptive air strike followed by an invasion of Cuba . The options included pre-pre-empting air strikes and an invasion by military .
 Domestic political pressures and continuing Presidential rhetoric necessarily demanded action . Domestic political pressure and continuing political rhetoric demanded action. President Barack Obama's actions were necessary .
 The lessons of the Bay of Pigs and Kennedy's own beliefs about his dealings with Khrushchev further fueled his desire for positive action . Kennedy was inspired by lessons from the lessons he learned from his own beliefs .
 EXCOMM considered diplomatic options in response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Its principal preoccupation was in addressing military responses .
 President believed that the U.S. would demand a military response . President believed the American people would demand military response to the threat .
 A naval blockade, the course eventually selected, was suggested during an evening session on the first day of deliberations .
 It circumvented the role normally intended for the NSC and JCS . It provided President Kennedy the deliberate, all-inclusive decisionmaking lacking during the Bay of Pigs .
 For the President's purposes, and based on the outcome of the crisis, its creation has been regarded as a success . For the purposes of the President, the creation of the . President's .
 For its actual utility as a crisis management tool its value was dubious, it was dubious . For the actual utility of crisis management tools its value is dubious, he said .
 The genesis of the decision grew out of concern for the American deployment of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Khrushchev's concern for American deployment in Turkey led to the decision to withdraw the missiles .
 The secondary issue was to protect Cuba from what appeared to be an imminent invasion by the U.S. Khrushchev was concerned at the time, he says . "The secondary issue, as far as . far from . concerned, was protecting Cuba," he says.
 The first was getting Castro to agree and, the second was being able to deploy the missiles secretly . The missiles were deployed in secret .
 Khrushchev disregarded the concern of some that the deployment of the missiles would cause a ""political explosion" in the Kennedy Administration . The deployment of missiles was considered a political risk .
 Fidel Castro quickly agreed to the proposal and expressed confidence that the deployment could be done secretly . Fidel Castro said he was confident that the 36 deployment could go undetected .
 The first of these was the official Soviet rationale for their missile deployment after the crisis itself . This was the first of several reasons for their deployment of missiles .
 The Bay of Pigs provided a precedent for U.S. intervention in Cuba . Certainly the Bay of Pigeas provided a . precedent for United States intervention .
 Further provocation was provided throughout 1961 and 1962 through covert action and military exercises . Military exercises were conducted throughout the period .
 U.S. military conducted Operation Quick Kick off the southeastern coast of the United States. The operation lasted from 19 April to 11 May 1962 .
 The Soviets presumed the U.S. was exercising a war plan for the invasion or 39 Cuba . The Soviets believed the United States was exercising an invasion plan .
 Operation Mongoose was also intensifying in Cuba and becoming decidedly less covert . Covert activity under Operation Mongoose was becoming less covert in Cuba .
 The gap opened further in favor of the Western Alliances under Kennedy's defense buildup . The gap in the Western Alliance widened further in the 1980s .
 In early 1963 the Western Alliances had a 6 to 1 advantage in Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles . The Western Alliance had a 3 to 1 . advantage in Long-Range Bombers . In early . 1963, the Western . Alliances . had an advantage in missiles and missiles .
 In pragmatic terms, the quickest and most cost-effective means of countering that advantage was the emplacement of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles in Cuba . The quickest way to counter that advantage is to deploy missiles in Cuba, the Cuban government says .
 Defense Secretary McNamara directed the Joint Chiefs of Staff to intensify contingency planning for 72 Cuba . The IL-28 medium bombers were discovered in October .
 Admiral Dennison, Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic, was alerted to prepare blockade plans as part of contingency preparations . Admiral Dennison was told to prepare blockages as a contingency plan .
 Atlantic Fleet was placed in its highest state of readiness on 6 October . Atlantic Fleet placed in state of alert on October 6 .
 The U.S. remained in Cuba until 20 November, the day after Castro announced he would not object to the Soviet withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers .
 The term ""quarantine"" was chosen by the President because he feared ""blockade"" could have been interpreted as an act of war . The term "quarantine" was chosen because it was feared it could be interpreted as a war act .
 Kennedy's commitment to a capable conventional force averted a confrontation with the Soviets which possibly could have escalated into a nuclear war . Kennedy's decision to achieve maritime superiority averted nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 As Kennedy articulated while formulating his national security doctrine, capable conventional forces are not in themselves a deterrent, he said .
 Without a strong conventional force, the U.S. would have been unable to make credible demands short of nuclear war, says President Obama . "The United States would have had to rely on the strength of its conventional force," he says .
 While still in the deliberation process, Kennedy's attitude handicapped military efforts in two critical areas . The president's attitude has handicapped the military's ability to reach a decision .
 His combat experience had been as commanding general of the 101st Airborne Division during World War II . He also commanded the Eighth Army during the Korean War, and Eighth Army in Korea .
 Most recently, his assignments had been exclusively in the diplomatic arena . Most recently he had been assigned to work in the United States .
 He was not a champion of the greater level of military effort being advocated by the Joint Chiefs . The Joint Chiefs' decision not to engage in more military effort was a mistake .
 The Joint Chiefs had little influence in shaping President Kennedy's perspective of the military options being pursued . President Kennedy did not consult the Joint Chiefs with the president .
 The second disadvantage the military endured was a result of President Kennedy's seemingly excessive concern for secrecy . The military suffered from a lack of transparency .
 Only the 74 Joint Chiefs themselves were briefed on the EXCOMM deliberations .
 Kennedy directed that he alone would decide which ships would be boarded by the Navy's blockading force after the quarantine went into effect .
 The President would issue his order to Secretary McNamara or General Taylor who would then deliver it to the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral George W Anderson, in the Navy's Flag Plot in the Pentagon .
 The CNO would then transmit the orders to Admiral Dennison at his headquarters in Norfolk . Vice Admiral Alfred Ward, the Task Force Commander, on board the Newport News, would also transmit orders .
 Flag Plot Watch Watch Watch Officer Captain John H Carmichael commented later, ""I know of no incident 75 when civilian authorities gave orders directly to afloat forces." General Taylor staunchly supported Kennedy's actions .
 The JCS had begun developing contingency plans for Cuba as early as 1959 when Casto came to power . Casto's government had begun planning for Cuba in 1959 .
 Special Forces teams would also deploy to facilitate the expected uprising against Castro . Special forces would also be deployed to facilitate an uprising against the Castro regime .
 Preparations for the execution of these three plans went into full swing on 1 October . Admiral Dennison was directed by 50 Secretary McNamara to intensify his planning efforts .
 Commander Gerry McCabe, the President's assistant naval aide during the crisis, said Kennedy was made aware of the Soviet's intention to deploy missiles into Cuba as early as July .
 Unconfirmed sources in the Soviet government were reputed to have provided some intelligence to Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 Large logistics movements at the Soviet ports of Odessa and Leningrad were drawing the interest of naval intelligence and American satellites . Additionally, large logistics movements .
 On 23 July, the Oxford, a sophisticated signals intelligence vessel, assumed a patrol off Cuba, sometimes closing to within 12 miles of Havana . The Oxford was the first vessel to assume a patrol of the area .
 Kennedy ignored the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba for much of the summer of 1962 . Perhaps hoping the Cuba problem would go away, Kennedy continued to ignore it .
 During the summer, sixtyone Soviet and Soviet Bloc vessels delivered troops, supplies and arms to Cuba . During that summer, fifty-one vessels from the USSR delivered troops and supplies .
 The military equipment included MIG-19 jet aircraft, tanks, battlefield artillery, rockets, 53 trucks and small arms .
 On 14 October, two U-2s provided photographic evidence of the Soviet deployment of medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles to Cuba . The U.2s were sent to Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 The JCS met on 16 October to consider military options for the removal of the missiles . JCS is considering military options to remove missiles from the region .
 They indicated that the air strike could be launched within twenty-four hours of authorization . The Navy's Second Fleet was already moving into position from which to impose a blockade .
 The ""elimination of the Castro regime,"" would require an invasion by American forces, they said . They further stated that the 'eliminated' regime would require a U.S. invasion .
 During EXCOMM deliberations on 18 October, the principal advantage of a blockade surfaced . The principal advantage was that a blockade would be easier to enforce in Syria .
 The blockade could be announced as an initial response with the threat of further U.S. military action, as yet undefined, if the Soviets not withdraw the missiles . The blockade is possible as a response to the Soviet missile threat .
 EXCOMM voted 11 to 6 to recommend the blockade to the President . On 20 October, the excomm voted to approve the blockade . The blockade is expected to be imposed by President Vladimir Putin .
 Cuba's President announced his intentions to quarantine Cuba to interdict further Soviet arms shipments and force 55 the removal of offensive weapons already in Cuba . On the evening of 22 October, President, on national television, announced his intention to quarantine .
 This was only one of three cases ever in which global American military forces have been placed in DEFCO•1 3 or higher . This was one of only three cases where U.S. military forces were placed in higher DEFCOs .
 Kennedy's handling of the crisis was hugely successful . Politically and diplomatically, Kennedy was successful in dealing with the crisis .
 His flexible response strategy had been validated and the United States was viewed as the dominant world military power . The U.S. was viewed by the world as a dominant military power in the world, Obama said .
 A small minority of world leaders viewed Kennedy's actions as reckless, but he had clearly gained the worldwide prestige he coveted .
 The JCS, as a body, had favored an invasion of Cuba . Some believed an opportunity to finally rid the United States of Castro and the ""Cuba problem"" was missed .
 Admiral Anderson suggests Kennedy conceded too much to the Soviets when he agreed to the removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The CNO, Admiral Anderson, echoed what many senior officers believed . Admiral Anderson said Kennedy agreed to remove Jupiter missiles .
 Critiques of President Kennedy's decisions by members of the Joint Chiefs were unquestionably biased by 80 their resentment of the President for excluding the Chiefs during what they considered to be critical decision-making junctures .
 Many subtle comments by the Chiefs reveal a certain disdain for the manner in which General Taylor presented their views to the President . The Chiefs say they are unhappy with the manner of the President's views .
 They said they believed an inadequate flow of information was being provided to them from EXCOMM deliberations and presidential decisions . They also said they thought there was insufficient information being provided from the White House .
 They were universally contemptuous of what they rightfully perceived as political leaders making military decisions . To compound matters, they were also disdainful of the political leaders .
 On the point of military decision-making, evidence exists to show that many of President Kennedy's decisions were poorly informed ones . Kennedy's control of military actions far from complete, author says .
 The only plausible explanation was the United States' overwhelming conventional superiority--particularly at sea--and Kennedy's deft political jousting with Khrushchev . The only explanation is that the U.S. was dominant in the Cold War .
 Despite being hamstrung, the Navy did what it could to make the blockade work . The first clash with the President was over th-.e issue of the distance from Cuba .
 When the Navy discovered Soviet submarines operating near the blockade, the submarines were prosecuted by antisubmarine aircraft and surface ships . Once located, they were forced to the surface with low-power depth charges .
 Kennedy gave his blessing only to the tracking of the submarines . Kennedy did not recognize the military issues involved in the project .
 Navy planners considered 59 the aggressive action the militarily prudent thing to do . Considering the potential danger of an undetected submarine amongst the American blockade line, the move was considered the military prudent .
 Some writings have suggested that challenging the Soviet submarines lent credibility to an otherwise timid quarantine . Others have suggested the quarantine was due to a lack of confidence .
 General Thomas Power, Commander-in-Chief of SAC, directed his aircrews to report their increased readiness status on unclassified circuits . After being ordered to DEFCON 2, Air Force Air Force was ordered to increase readiness .
 Later accounts revealed this unauthorized display of American power was unknown to the President, the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Later accounts reveal this .
 President Kennedy subordinated military considerations for diplomatic and political ones . Kennedy routinely subordinated his military considerations to diplomatic ones . President Kennedy routinely subverted military considerations .
 Kennedy preferred to trust his own judgement and that of close advisors whose thinking was similar to his own . Perhaps still reticent about committing American troops and remaining extremely distrustful of the military hierarchy due to his .
 The critical military lesson was the value of maintaining a credible conventional force and using it from a position of strength to attain legitimate national policy objectives .
 American/Soviet standoff in Berlin in October 1961 is a good candidate for a defining moment . The two seem to coincide with the development of the American military's conventional force capability .
 President's increasing degree of commitment to his flexible response strategy can be measured by his maturation process while in office . Additionally, the President's . increasing . commitment to . his flexible . response strategy, as it was evolving, can . be measured . by President Obama .
 His determination to atone for the humiliation of the Bay of Pigs provided suitable motivation to accelerate the process . The former Cuban president is determined to 'atone himself'
 When President Kennedy entered the White House he clearly understood the interrelationship of the various tools available to him in the conduct of foreign policy . President Kennedy understood that the tools available in the U.S. are different from the tools he was able to use .
 On the Presidential coat of arms, the American eagle holds in his right talon the olive branch, while in his left he holds a bundle of arrows . In his left talon, the eagle holds an olive branch .
 Kennedy's clearly articulated vision of America's role in the world would clash with Cold War realities . Kennedy quickly learned that his vision would abruptly clash with the Cold War .
 Nuclear age terms such as crisis management did not fit neatly into Kennedy's untested doctrine and political rhetoric . Crisis management and the preferable alternatives of crisis prevention and crisis avoidance were not well understood by Kennedy .
 In some cases, what appeared to be a U.S. exercise in power and influence by the United States was, in actuality, an exercise in personal diplomacy by the President and his closest confidant, the Attorney General, Robert Kennedy .
 Studies conclude that it was the face-saving gestures provided by the Soviets rather than the overt threat of U.S. military action that ultimately led to the Soviet decision to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 The use of secret diplomacy as an integral part of his foreign policy strategy was not unprecedented for Kennedy . Kennedy's secret diplomacy is not unprecedented .
 President Kennedy directed Robert Kennedy to inform the Soviets that he wanted the tanks removed in twenty-four hours . When American and Soviet tanks faced off in Berlin in 1961, the President ordered the Soviets to remove the tanks .
 Later accounts revealed the Attorney General provided secret concessions with the demand . The Attorney General was forced to negotiate with the government .
 He could effectively use the diplomatic tool because he was doing so from a position of strength, say experts . They suggest that he could use it as a tool of strength .
 The means by which he chose to do so were in keeping with his personality and the Cold War, pre-Watergate obsession with secrecy that was a matter of course for politicians of the day . He chose to go public in order to keep his own secrecy .
 He was critical that he appear to be a more formidable foe at the bargaining table than perhaps he really was . Due to his concern that he portray an image of strength and resolve, it was critical .
 If it was, in fact, personal diplomacy that ultimately resolved crises, it was military strength that provided the private lever and public prestige Kennedy sought from his doctrine . Therefore, if it was personal diplomacy, it is military strength .
 Kennedy's inclination to pursue diplomatic solutions was likely a lesson borne out of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion and resultant worldwide condemnation . Kennedy's tendency to pursue diplomacy was very likely borne from the failed failed invasion .
 Kennedy's decision-making apparatus evolved while in the White House . The military--particularly the Joint Chiefs of Staff--were affected more than any organization .
 Kennedy was enamored with the military as his principal instrument of foreign policy . Kennedy maintained a generally mixed opinion of senior military officers and the advice they offered .
 Allison's models place a great deal of emphasis on organizational dynamics and expected payoffs . Perhaps this is due to the fact that Allison's model emphasizes organizational dynamics . Allison: "Ally's models are very complex, very complex and very complex"
 The consideration of either of these by Kennedy was not in evidence during the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy did not consider either of the two options .
 Appearance and Reality in Decision Making more closely provides practical reasoning for Kennedy's decisions during both events . Kennedy's decision was based on appearance and reality in reality .
 As illustrated earlier, the Bay of Pigs crisis was a crisis of Kennedy's own choosing in which several interrelated factors contributed to his decision . Kennedy's decision to invade the U.S. was one of several factors that contributed to the crisis .
 Key among his priorities was his perception of the strength of the domestic insurgency against Castro . Key among them was his belief that the Castro insurgency is strong in Cuba .
 A central point in most decision-making models (when deciding on the commitment of military forces) is an almost exclusive focus by the decision-maker on the reaction of the adversary . A central part of most models is the focus of the decision to commit forces to the fight against an adversary
 The decision-maker tends to the conservative, while exaggerating his opponents' capabilities . Absent concrete intelligence, the decision maker tends to be the conservative .
 Armed with faulty intelligence, potentially disastrous decisions are made which could lead to failure . Armed with a faulty intelligence it could be disastrous decisions could be made by the UK government .
 In both cases, the U.S. grossly underestimated the resolve of Castro and the Cuban population . The United States grossly underestimated Castro and Cuba's resolve, the author says .
 Even short of nuclear war, the U.S. was unprepared for the resistance it would have encountered had the situation escalated beyond the quarantine . The United States was unprepared to deal with the resistance .
 43,000 Soviet troops in Cuba augmenting a well-armed Cuban force of 270,000 . Addressing military concerns was the revelation of the presence of 43,00 Soviet troops . The presence of a well armed Cuban force was also revealed .
 By October 24, 1962, twenty nuclear warheads had been delivered to the island . Additionally, it was revealed that by that date, 20 nuclear warheads were delivered to island .
 CIA estimates reported 10,000 Soviet troops on Cuba and no nuclear warheads . CIA estimates said there were no nuclear weapons on Cuba . CIA estimated 10,500 Soviet troops in Cuba .
 Regardless of the level of military escalation, numerous casualties would have resulted that the U.S. had not calculated in its contingency war planning . The United States would have had to make contingency plans .
 President Kennedy sorely underestimated the military implications of the decisions he made and policies he pursued in Cuba . With the obvious benefit of hindsight, it becomes clear that President Kennedy underestimated the implications of his Cuba policy .
 After that it can be argued that he was overtaken by a series of significant events in which he can be scrutinized as closely for decisions he did not make as for those he did . After that, he was simply overtaken .
 President Kennedy served in the White House during a period of extraordinary turbulence, or so the American public was led to believe . President Kennedy was in the midst of a turbulent period of turbulence .
 He defined the period as such during his campaign for the Presidency . He lent it credibility with an ominous warning of impending peril during his first State of the Union Message .
 He further cemented the perception of crisis by his ill-fated decision to launch the Bay of Pigs invasion so early in his Administration .
 Whether Kennedy was a creator of crises, or simply the beneficiary of a great many of them is purely conjecture . But nevertheless, the military was his instrument of choice in dealing with them .
 "As a manager of crisis--from a purely military standpoint--his performance was suspect," says President Obama . Obama's performance as a commander of crisis was suspect, he says .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff are not happy with the decision to withdraw troops from the U.S. National Guard .
 This fact can be attributed to the decision-making apparatus Kennedy chose for himself while in the White House . Kennedy chose to make his own decisions for himself, including those of his predecessors .
 Kennedy's commitment to his ""flexible response"" strategy evolved as he matured in office . Kennedy's level of sophistication he displayed in the international arena also evolved .
 The mechanism by which he chose to avail himself of critical information (information that would assist him in crisis decision-making) evolved as a result of the trials he underwent while in office . Similarly, the mechanism by . using critical information to assist him with crisis decisions evolved as well as the
 The roles he chose for his closest advisors represented the most significant evolution of his presidency . He chose the roles of his closest advisers to represent his evolution .
 He disdained large, structured meetings and instead preferred ""informal meetings and direct contacts" He brought with him to Washington a host of advisors who could be characterized as Ivy League 91 elitists with no ties to military .
 Many of these were given the position of Special Assistant to the President . They were to provide Kennedy with advise in particular areas of expertise . Many of them were given a position of special assistant to President .
 Kennedy's Bay of Pigs decision proved for naught in Kennedy's decision as the new President was simply unprepared to use any conventional decision-making apparatus .
 As Kennedy admitted to Special Assistant Sorensen, "it is a tremendous change to go from being a Senator to being President. As Kennedy later admitted, "It is a ... tremendous change"
 Kennedy made the most significant changes to his decision-making team immediately after the Bay of Pigs, culminating with the c nvening of the EXCOMM some eighteen months later . Nevertheless, as detailed earlier, Kennedy made some of the biggest changes in his team .
 Some accounts dispute the actual value of the EXCOMM as a crisis decision-making body . ExCOMM is a crisis-decision body .
 Several members perceived that meetings were dominated by Robert Kennedy who had the most direct access to the President . Several members of the House of Representatives perceived that Robert Kennedy dominated the meetings .
 He added that acknowledging the outcome as successful was paying ""homage to plain dumb luck"
 President Kennedy helped by luck of Khrushchev's befuddlement and loss of nerve . Kennedy's laurels in handling the Cuban crisis do not detract from his laurels, says historian .
 Kennedy's decisions were clearly the correct ones. Judging by the final outcome, Kennedy's decision was clearly the right ones . Kennedy's final decision was the right decision .
 It appears the means by which he came upon his decisions were more of a product of his personality and Cold War politics than any decision-making apparatus that was available to him .
 "The threat of a nuclear exchange magnified the importance of his decisions," he says . The threat of an attack on North Korea has magnified his decision to act .
 The existence of a credible conventional military capability gave his decisions substance, he says . He says the existence of the credible conventional capability gave him substance .
 President Kennedy was undoubtedly one of the most charismatic Presidents of the twentieth century . Kennedy Personalitv will be available on Kennedy TV at 8.30pm ET on Monday, October 8th .
 His personality was infectious to those around him and seemed to have an enormous influence on foreign policy formulation . His personality seemed to be infectious to people around him, and his influence was infectious .
 Walt Rostow, who helped craft Kennedy's foreign policy, said of Kennedy's personality and style: "It is extraordinary how the character of the President's personality shapes everything around him... it is the damned liveliest thing I have ever seen" Rostow was the Assistant Secretary of State
 Four principal personality traits stand out in Kennedy's decision-making style . Kennedy's personality traits include a strong sense of humor, humor and empathy .
 Kennedy's tendency to develop intense personal rivalries with his key adversaries, particularly Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro . The first of these was his tendency to become involved in a personal feud with both his adversaries .
 The second was the deep trust he maintained in only his few closest advisors while generally distrusting advisors he did not know . The third was the trust he kept in only a few closest advisers .
 His sense of historical greatness and concern for his political image also influenced his decision-making . He said: 'He had a sense of his own historical greatness'
 Kennedy's rivalry with Khrushchev was primarily a product of East-West political realities . Kennedy's relationship with the Soviet Union was largely based on East-East politics . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Moscow .
 Kennedy tended to resort to a decidedly personal tone when discussing his interactions with Khrushchev . Although it does not appear that personal animosities between the two was reason for confrontation, Kennedy tendered to a personal tone .
 Decisions in American-Soviet relations would be made based on worldwide perceptions of the relative strengths of the two men . Decisions would be based on world perceptions of their strengths .
 Kennedy's determination to never again appear weak on the international stage caused decisions to be made which were a result of the personal rivalry between the two leaders . Kennedy was determined not to appear weak again .
 Kennedy-Castro rivalry had a more deep-seated personal character to it . While the Kennedy-Khrushchev rivalry was borne principally out of the Cold War, it was borne out of personal conflict .
 Some writings suggest that Kennedy's attitude toward Castro was shaped as early as his days in the Senate . Kennedy had a history of anti-Castro sentiment in his dealings with Castro .
 Kennedy's tendency to harbor intense rivalries with his major adversaries had a significant influence on his decision-making . Clearly, Kennedy's tendencies to harbor rivalries led to his decision to take action .
 The manner in which Kennedy restructured his White House staff after the Bay of Pigs is well documented and is included in Chapter Three . Kennedy's staff was restructured after the attack .
 As indicated previously, Joint Chiefs of Staff suffered as much, in terms of trust, as any organization from the new Kennedy arrangement . The Joint Chiefs' trust in the U.S. military has been diminished in the past .
 The incorrect lesson Kennedy took from the Bay of Pigs experience served mostly to insulate him from critical advice that would have assisted him in his decision-making . Kennedy's incorrect lesson was that he should have learned more from the experience .
 Kennedy asked Cuban military if its own aircraft were not similarly vulnerable . Cuban aircraft lined up wing tip to wing tip on an airfield in Cuba . Kennedy asked if Cuban planes were not similar to Soviet aircraft .
 Kennedy ordered General Taylor to fly a photographic mission over Florida airfields to see for himself . Despite being assured that everything possible was being done to protect American aircraft on the ground .
 Kennedy ordered the Air Force to 12 disperse the aircraft . Distressed at what he saw Kennedy ordered a dispersal of the planes . The Air Force was ordered to disperse aircraft .
 Tactical Air Command and Navy aircraft deployed to Florida in maximum readiness posture . All available aircraft deployed in Florida were deployed to a maximum readiness position .
 With combat air patrol airborne continuously and additional anti-aircraft batteries emplaced around the airfields, all necessary precautions were being taken . All necessary precautions are being taken.
 The personality trait of ignoring the advice of experts for that of trusted advisors was potentially the most significant had the crisis escalated . The personality traits of ignoring experts for advice was potentially significant .
 As it was, military leaders in the field felt it was necessary to skirt around decisions made by civilian leaders . Military leaders felt that civilian leaders were out of touch with the evolving tactical situation and improperly informed .
 A third Kennedy personality trait that emerges from the study of these events was his seeming indecisiveness at critical moments . Kennedy seemed indecisively at critical times, according to a recent study .
 Intelligence reports first indicated the movement of 97 offensive weapons to Cuba in July 1962 . The confrontation would not have had the implications of a nuclear exchange that it ultimately did .
 Had Kennedy not taken a full six days of deliberations to choose the quarantine as a course of action, an invasion (which was favored by the majority of the EXCOMM) would likely have resulted . By the same token, had Kennedy not chosen the quarantine, the invasion would have resulted
 Based on information now available concerning Cuban and Soviet strength on the island, thousands of American lives would certainly have been lost . Thousands of Americans would have been killed in the Cuban invasion .
 During the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy's indecisiveness resulted in a plan that was continuously changed, delayed three times, and finally approved with the provision that it could be cancelled up to twenty-four hours prior to its execution . During the 1960s, Kennedy was indecisive and indec
 What resulted was doomed to failure without a large commitment of U.S. military forces . What resulted instead was a plan that was doomed-to-fail without a big commitment .
 Lack of clear guidance from the President created enough ambiguity that those charged with executing the plan were led to expect a sufficient level of American commitment, the White House says . The White House has been criticized for not providing clear guidance .
 The fourth personality trait which appears to have had a significant impact on Kennedy's decision-making was a sense of his own historical greatness and from that, a concern for his political image . Kennedy's sense of historical greatness was a key factor in his decision to choose the president .
 Kennedy was exceptionally adept at using the nedia to cast him in the best possible light . Considered the first television-age President, it was widely acknowledged that Kennedy was .
 This is best illustrated in another military crisis of the President's own choosing . This was best illustrated by the President of the United States .
 Critics say Kennedy intentionally suppressed negative accounts of the growing American effort in Vietnam to avoid having to make difficult political decisions at home regarding increased U.S. involvement .
 The political capital to be derived from the image that was depicted was certainly a motivating factor in making those decisions . It is clear, however, that the political capital .
 His desire to appear resolute and confident, while out-maneuvering his opponents, was a common thread that was evident in each crisis . He was seen as a resolute, confident and confident figure figure in his career .
 Time and again decisions were made that would result in the deployment of military units which reflected mostly political image considerations .
 Some historians have speculated that the crisis did not occur earlier due to political considerations . Historians have also speculated that some historians believe the crisis occurred earlier . In another exchange with Robert Kennedy, the President agreed that had he not taken action, he would have been impeached .
 Kennedy was simply delaying a decision he did not want to make. With the mid-term elections approaching, Kennedy was just delaying the decision he wanted to make, he said .
 Arguably, the sum of the personality traits described above had the greatest impact on Kennedy's relationship with the military .
 Kennedy's personality and decision-making tendencies created conflicts with the Pentagon . Numerous examples have been provided which highlight the inevitable conflicts between the two sides .
 Kennedy's foreign policy and political objectives were never accompanied with a clear military objective . Kennedy's style took the military professionals out of the decision-making loop, says historian .
 As noted previously, they failed the President early in his Administration by not strenuously expressing their concerns about the Bay of Pigs invasion plan .
 The ensuing distrust between Kennedy and the JCS was not entirely misplaced . Kennedy and JCS were distrustful of each other for years .
 The military recognized the strategic implications of Cuba and had completed extensive planning for contingencies in the region . The military said it was prepared to deal with the situation .
 President Kennedy ensured the military had the necessary tools to perform its mission . Kennedy was acutely aware of the value of a strong military, and therefore, it was Kennedy .
 President Obama's decisions reflect the political realities of how those decisions would play at home . Obama's foreign policy focused on the ideals of America's ideals, but never strayed far from political realities .
 President Kennedy was first, and foremost, a politician . An individual does not rise to the highest office in the land without suprenconfidence in his own judgment . All accounts suggest that Kennedy sincerely believed in the vision he so clearly articulated .
 Among the many legacies that defined the Kennedy Presidency was the realization that conventional military capabilities had a significant role in the Cold War .
 President Kennedy recognized that demands could be made of the Soviet Empire, and Communism could be contained, without resorting to nuclear war . Unlike his immediate predecessors, Kennedy recognized demands could not be made, unlike other leaders .
 The unfortunate by-product of his strategy was the eventual introduction of U.S. combat forces into Southeast Asia . The unfortunate result was the introduction of American combat forces to the region .
 The definitive achievement of his doctrine was in keeping the U.S. out of a nuclear war . Experts of the day pointed to the inevitability of just such a confrontation, he says .
 In his speeches and press conferences, President Kennedy very closely articulated what is the modern day, textbook definition of the role the military performs as an element of national power . President Kennedy closely articulated the role of the military in the U.S.
 Kennedy's greatest contribution to the military establishment was in rebuilding its conventional capabilities after eight years of neglect by the Eisenhower Administration . In an effort to ensure the military was able to fulfill this role, Kennedy's efforts were to rebuild conventional capabilities .
 Kennedy had a vision of America's role in the world, and the military was key to his foreign policy strategy . Kennedy's vision of the U.S. role in foreign policy is critical to understanding the motivation for his strategy .
 It was shaped almost exclusively by the Cold War and his perception of democracy's predominance over communism . His views on democracy were almost exclusively driven by his view of democracy .
 This was not a novel concept for leaders of his era; however, it was central to his campaign for the Oval Office . It was arguably the theme with which he continued to campaign while in the White House for a second term .
 As noted earlier, the ultimate decision to employ the military was very nearly always made with domestic politics in the forefront .
 President Kennedy's personal ambitions and idealist perceptions of the world demanded a proactive strategy which had to be executed from a position of strength . President Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 A military capable of responding to any number of scenarios was the solution to the problem . The solution was to have a strong military presence in the U.S. It was also to be able to respond to a number of other scenarios .
 A convincing argument can be made that his strategy succeeded in spite of, rather than because of, the actions :7ennedy took during any number of crises during his Administration .
 The immediate result was his undertaking of the Bay of Pigs invasion, which, in essence, produced a double-edged sword . He said: "The immediate result of the invasion was ... the immediate result"
 Kennedy's decisions to use the military, and the military's performance, validated his doctrine . It was the combination of Kennedy's decision to use military and the performance of the military that validated his policy .
 Kennedy's personality, and the many opportune occurrences which he was a beneficiary of but had no control over, cannot be excluded as contributing to his successes . Kennedy was not directly in control of his success, but his personality and circumstances contributed to his success .
 The real John F Kennedy was purported to be a man who was extremely competitive . He thought nothing of using his brother, Robert, as his primary henchman in neutralizing his competitors .
 How much of this characterization is fact will never be known; however, it assists in explaining Kennedy's overwhelming desire to appear dominant on the world stage .
 Kennedy's distrust of the military hierarchy explains why he politicized military decision-making . It also provides insight into his distrust of military hierarchy and the reasons he so politicized .
 The error of this approach was eventually manifested in the Vietnam conflict . It led to the failure of the U.S. military in Vietnam .
 Evidence suggests this episode was an extraordinary exception rather than the rule . However, evidence suggests this is not the only case of an episode .
 Kennedy's bravado in deploying the military, or threatening its use, did not extend to the actual decisions he attempted to impose on military commanders once an operation was underway . Kennedy tried to impose military commanders' decisions on military operations .
 The lesson to be drawn from this was not heeded by his successor and has hampered many presidents in their relationship with the military . The lesson should be learned from this, it has not been heeded, he says .
 President Kennedy fully understood the role of the military in the conduct of foreign affairs . But he never fully grasped the purely military implications of the decisions he ultimately made .
 His management style and decision-making apparatus did not allow for critical input from his senior military advisors, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "The Decision to Land at the Bay of Pigs" is published in Political Science Quarterly 99 : 472. The decision to land at the bay of Pigs was made by the Cuban dictator .
 Appearance and Reality in Decision MakinQ (Columbus: Charles E Merrill Publishing Co., 1971), 27. The book was published by Charles Merrill in 1971 . It was first published in 1971 in New York .
 "Mutual Misjudgments Marked Cuban Crisis 30 Years ago,"" The San Diego Union-Tribune, 14 October 1992: 9.9: 9:9:9.9. 9:10:9 .
 Report of the Twentieth Century Fund Task Fo:ce on the Military and the Media . Report: Report of a Task Force Task Fo'ce on Military and The Media .
 U.S.-Soviet Military Balance Concept and Capabilities 1960-1980 . Collins, John M. Collins, wrote a book on the Cold War and Cold War era .
 A firsthand Account of the Mission by a United States Pilot in SuPoort of the Cuban Invasion Force in 1961 . A firsthand account of the mission by a U.S. pilot in the Cuban invasion force .
 United States Army Command and General Staff College Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-6900 . 2.2.3.4.5.5 million people attended the college .
 Defense Technical Information Center Cameron Station Alexandria, VA 22314 3.3.4.5.5 . Cameron Station is located in Alexandria, Virginia .
 Hewitt Hall United States Navy War College Newport, RI 02841-5010 5.5.00.00 . The Naval War College Library is located at Hewitt hall .