 In the days of tense political climate in Burma, he held moderate views positioning himself between nationalist nationalists and British loyalists .
 He was a close friend of Burma's first Prime Minister U Nu . He served in various positions in Nu's cabinet from 1948 to 1961 .
 Thant was appointed Secretary-General in 1961, six weeks after his predecessor Dag Hammarskjöld died in an air crash . Thant had a calm demeanor that won his colleagues' respect .
 Thant ordered Operation Grandslam, which ended a secessionist insurgency in Congo in December . Later, in December that year, he ordered Operation Genslam, ending an insurgency in the country .
 He was reappointed as Secretary-General on December 2, 1966 by a unanimous vote of the Security Council . He was re-appointed in December 1966 .
 During his second term Thant was well known for publicly criticizing U.S. conduct in the Vietnam War . Thant is known for criticizing the United States' conduct in Vietnam War in Vietnam . He was also known for his criticism of the war's conduct .
 A devout Buddhist, he was the foremost Burmese diplomat on the international stage . He was widely admired and held in great respect by the Burmaese populace .
 When the military government refused him any honours, riots erupted in Rangoon . These were violently crushed by the government, leaving scores of casualties . Scores of casualties were left in the chaos .
 The United Nations Secretary-General is a former civil servant . He was also a United Nations secretary of the United Nations . He has been married for more than 30 years .
 Retirement 4 Death and legacy 5 Personal life 6 Awards, honors, and memorials 7 See also 8 Notes 8 Notes 9 Citations 9.
 His father Po Hnit was educated in Calcutta and was the only person in the town who could communicate well in English . He was born in India and was educated at the age of 13 in the city .
 He was a founding member of the Burma Research Society . He helped establish The Sun newspaper in Rangoon .
 Po Hnit had collected a personal library of various American and British books . His other sons, Khant, Thaung, and Tin Maung went on to become politicians and scholars .
 Apart from reading, he enjoyed various sports including hiking, swimming and playing chinlone .
 He dreamed of becoming a journalist and surprised his family by writing for the Union of Burma Boy Scouts magazine . He surprised them by writing an article for the U.S. Boy Scouts .
 As the eldest son he had to fulfill his filial duties and responsibilities to the family . He had also fulfilled his duties as a father .
 Nu was told by a distant relative to take care of Thant by a mutual relative . Nu and Thant soon became close friends and soon became friends . Nu is now married to Thant's wife .
 Furnivall urged Thant to complete a four-year university course and join the Civil Service . But Thant refused to join the civil service despite being promised a good job .
 After earning the certificate, he returned to Pantanaw to teach at the National High School as a senior teacher in 1928 .
 Urged by Thant, his friend Nu took the local superintendent of schools position . Thant's friend Nu is now the mayor of the district .
 Thant regularly contributed to several newspapers and magazines under the pen name ""Thilawa" Thant translated a number of books, including one on the League of Nations .
 His major influences were Sir Stafford Cripps, Sun Yat-sen and Mahatma Gandhi . His major influence was Sir Stafford .
 In the days of tense political climate in Burma, Thant stood moderate grounds between fervent nationalists and British loyalists .
 During the World War II, the Japanese occupied Burma from 1942 to 1945 . Civil servant Thant with U Nu in 1955 on early morning walk .
 Thant was brought to Rangoon to lead the Educational Reorganization Committee . Thant is a member of the committee . He has been in charge of the Education Reorganizing Committee .
 When teaching the Japanese language was made compulsory in Pantanaw high schools, Thant defied the orders and cooperated with the growing anti-Japanese resistance .
 Nu became the prime minister of the newly independent Burma and appointed Thant as director of broadcasting in 1948 . Nu was prime minister and Thant was director of radio in Burma .
 Thant risked his life to go to Karen camps to negotiate for peace . The Karen insurgency began and Thant was killed by the Karen insurgency . Thant is now a leader in the region of Thailand .
 In 1949 the advancing insurgents burned his hometown, including his house . The negotiations broke down, and in 1949 he was forced to flee .
 Insurgents pushed the front to within four miles of the capital Rangoon . The insurgents were beaten back by the army after they were pushed back . They were able to reach the capital four miles from the capital .
 In the following year, Thant was appointed secretary to the government of Burma in the Ministry of Information . Thant has been in charge of the Information Ministry of Burma .
 From 1951 to 1957, Thant was secretary to the prime minister, writing speeches for U Nu, arranging his foreign travel, and meeting foreign visitors . Thant wrote speeches and arranged foreign travel .
 He was the secretary of the 1955 Bandung Conference in Indonesia, which gave birth to the Non-Aligned Movement . During this entire period, he was U Nu's closest confidant and advisor .
 Burma's permanent representative to the U.N. from 1957 to 1961 . He was involved in negotiations over Algerian independence . Burma's ambassador to the United Nations was also involved in Algerian negotiations .
 The Burmese government awarded him the title Maha Thray Sithu as a commander in the order of Pyidaungsu Sithu . He was also awarded a posthumous award from his country .
 The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to appoint Thant as the Acting Secretary-General for the remainder of Hammarskjöld's term . Within two weeks, the U.S. and Soviet Union had agreed that Thant would take over the post .
 The two superpowers spent another four weeks arguing over the details of his appointment .
 On November 3, 1961, the Security Council recommended Thant in Resolution 168 . The General Assembly voted unanimously to appoint Thant to a term of office ending in 1963 .
 This was the indispensable first step in the peaceful resolution of the Cuban crisis . Thant shakes hands with John F Kennedy during his visit to the UN Headquarters in 1963 .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy showed Thant U-2 aerial reconnaissance photographs of Soviet missile installations in Cuba . Two days before public announcements were made, President Kennedy showed the photographs .
 The president ordered a naval ""quarantine"" to remove all offensive weapons from Soviet ships bound for Cuba . The president then ordered the removal of weapons from the Soviet ships .
 To avoid a naval confrontation, Thant proposed that the U.S. should make non-invasion guarantees in exchange for missile withdrawal from the Soviet Union . Thant suggested that the United States should give the Soviets missile withdrawal guarantees . The Soviet Union would withdraw from the USSR in exchange
 Soviet Premier Khrushchev welcomed the proposal, which formed the basis of further negotiations . The proposal was the basis for further negotiations in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev agreed to suspend missile shipments while the negotiations were ongoing . The suspension of missile shipments was part of a deal to end missile negotiations .
 On October 27, 1962, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba, deepening the crisis . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to be shot down in Cuba in 1962 .
 The U.S. agreed to dismantle missiles in Turkey and guaranteed never to invade Cuba in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The deal was part of a deal to remove Soviet missiles from Turkey and remove Cuba .
 Thant flew to Cuba and discussed with Fidel Castro allowing UN missile inspectors and the return of the body of the downed U-2 pilot . Thant visited Cuba and met with Castro to discuss allowing UN inspectors and return of body of pilot .
 Castro was furious that the Soviets had agreed to remove missiles without his knowledge . He categorically rejected any UN inspectors, although he did return the pilot's body . Castro was angry that he did not return the body of the pilot .
 The inspection was done at sea by U.S. reconnaissance aircraft and warships .
 Thant's reappointment was assured when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev made several favorable references to Thant in letters to U.S. President John F. Kennedy .
 In November 1962, the General Assembly voted unanimously to promote Thant to Secretary-General for a term ending on November 3, 1966 . Thant was promoted from acting secretary-General to secretary-general in 1966 .
 For personal reasons, Thant wanted his term to end five years from his initial appointment, and he would henceforth consider his first five years in office to be a single term . Thant did not hesitate to use force when required .
 The operation proved to be decisive and ended the secessionist insurgency once and for all . The operation was decisive . It was a decisive victory for the country .
 By January 1963, the secessionist capital Elizabethville was under full UN control . The UN was in full control of Elizabethville .
 For his role in defusing the Cuban crisis and other peacekeeping efforts, Thant was awarded the 1965 Nobel Peace Prize . Thant received the award for his role as a peacekeeper in the United Nations .
 In 1966 and 1967 no prize was given, with Gunnar Jahn effectively vetoing an award to Thant . The disagreement lasted three years, and no prize given in 1966 or 1967 .
 In April 1964, Thant accepted the Holy See's designation as a permanent observer of the UN . The Holy See became an observer in April 1964 .
 There appeared to be no involvement of the General Assembly or the UN Security Council in the decision .
 On December 2, 1966, the General Assembly re-appointed Thant to a term ending on December 31, 1971, on the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council . Thant was re-appointed to the post in December 1966, 1966 .
 During his second term, he oversaw the entry into the UN of dozens of new Asian and African states . He was a firm opponent of apartheid in South Africa, and was also an opponent of the apartheid regime .
 The Six-Day War between Arab countries and Israel, the Prague Spring and subsequent Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia all took place during his tenure as secretary-general . The Indo–Pakistani War of 1971 led to the birth of Bangladesh .
 Thant meets with U.S. President Lyndon B Johnson in the Cabinet Room of the White House on February 21, 1968 . Thant met with President Johnson at the Oval Office .
 He was criticized in the U.S. and Israel for agreeing to pull UNEF troops out of the Sinai in 1967 . The move was in response to a request from Egyptian president Nasser .
 The Permanent Representative of Egypt had informed Thant that the Egyptian government had decided to terminate UNEF's presence in the Sinai and the Gaza Strip, and requested steps that would withdraw the force as soon as possible .
 Israel refused to accept UNEF on its territory, the Force had to be deployed only on the Egyptian side of the border . The UN afterwards stated that the UNEF had been deployed on its own territory, and thus its functioning was entirely contingent upon the consent of Egypt as the host country
 Thant's once good relationship with the U.S. government deteriorated rapidly when he publicly criticized American conduct of the Vietnam War . Thant: "I'm not a Vietnam War veteran. I'm a Vietnam veteran. It's a Vietnam war veteran."
 In 1971, the participation of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations, which was a long-standing problem, was realized . His secret attempts at direct peace talks between Washington and Hanoi were eventually rejected .
 Thant sent a message to the Chinese government asking China to send a delegation . Thant has sent a video to China asking for a delegation from the country .
 On January 23, 1971, Thant categorically announced that he would ""under no circumstances"" be available for a third term as secretary-general . Thant: "Under no circumstances" was available for third term .
 The 1971 United Nations Secretary-General selection was delayed by the anticipated arrival of the People's Republic of China . The Security Council did not begin voting until two weeks before the end of Thant's term .
 Kurt Waldheim accidentally won in the third round when the US, UK, and China failed to coordinate their vetoes and all abstained . Waldheim retired after ten years on speaking terms with all the big powers .
 In 1961, the Soviet Union tried to insist on a troika formula of three secretaries-general, one representing each Cold War bloc, to maintain equality in the U.N. between superpowers .
 Thant was appointed a senior fellow of the Adlai Stevenson Institute of International Affairs . After his retirement, Thant became a senior Fellow of the institute . Thant retired from the institute in 2007 .
 He spent the last years of his life writing and advocating the development of a true global community and other themes he had tried to promote while secretary-general .
 Thant lived in Riverdale, Bronx, on a 4.75-acre estate near 232nd Street, between Palisade and Douglas Avenues .
 By that time, Burma was ruled by a military junta which refused him any honours . He was awarded a knighthood by the Burma government .
 The then-Burmese president Ne Win was envious of Thant's international stature and the respect that was accorded him by the Burmese populace . Ne Win had been envious that Thant was given international respect .
 Ne Win resented Thant's close links with the democratic government of U Nu which Ne Win had overthrown in a coup d'état on March 2, 1962 . Ne Win's government was overthrown by U Nu in March 1962, and Thant was Thant . Ne
 Histories of Burma that intense animosity between Thant and Ne Win went back only to 1969 . Ne Win believed Thant was conniving with Nu after Nu denounced Ne Win at a press corps meeting at the UN headquarters .
 Ne Win told his men to consider Thant as an enemy of the state, despite Thant denouncing Nu's action as inappropriate . Ne Win ordered that Thant be buried without official involvement or ceremony .
 On the day of Thant's funeral on December 5, 1974, tens of thousands of people lined the streets of Rangoon .
 Thant's coffin was displayed at Rangoon's Kyaikasan race course for a few hours before the scheduled burial . Thant was the first person to be buried in the country's capital, Myanmar .
 The coffin of Thant was snatched by a group of students just before it was scheduled to leave for burial in an ordinary Rangoon cemetery . The coffin was then snatched by students .
 Demonstrators also built a temporary mausoleum for Thant on the grounds of the RUSU and gave anti-government speeches . During the period of December 5–11, the student demonstrators also built an anti-glorification site .
 Government troops killed some of the students guarding the makeshift mausoleum . They removed Thant's coffin and reburied it in Kandawmin Garden Mausolea near the Shwedagon Pagoda .
 Martial law was declared in Rangoon and surrounding metropolitan areas . Martial law has been declared in the surrounding areas . The country's capital city is located in central Myanmar .
 Thant's memoirs, View from the UN, were published posthumously published by Doubleday in 1978 . The student-led protests over the shabby treatment of Thant by the Ne Win government were crushed by the Burmese government .
 U Thant is held in esteem in Malaysia as he helped to endorse the formation of the country in 1963 . UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited his mausoleum in April 2012 to pay respects to him .
 A road in Kuala Lumpur and a residential estate of Taman U-Thant are named after him . Among others, a road in Malaysia and an estate in Malaysia are also named .
 Tin Maung Thant fell from a bus during a visit to Yangon, Myanmar . They had two sons, but lost both of them . Both died in infancy, and Tin Thant died in a bus crash .
 Tin Maung Thant's funeral procession was grander than that of Commodore Than Pe, a member of the Revolutionary Council .
 His only grandson, Thant Myint-U, is a historian and a former UN official . He is the author of The River of Lost Footsteps, a biography of Thant .
 Thant was generally reluctant to receive prizes and honors due to his own humility as well as publicity associated with them . Thant generally refused to receive awards and honors for his humility .
 He declined Burma's second highest honor awarded to him by U Nu's government in 1961 . He declined the honor awarded by the government of Burma .
 He did accept the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding in 1965 and the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights in 1973 . However, he did accept a Jawaharar Nehru award for international understanding in 1965 .
 The meditation team also named a tiny island in the East River opposite the U.N. headquarters of the United Nations U Thant Island .
 In December 2013, Thant's house in Yangon was being converted into a museum which would feature his photos, works and personal belongings . The road Jalan U-Thant in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia are also named in his honor .
 In October 2013, the building of an U Thant library near his Pantanaw house was underway .
 In Burmese, he was known as Pantanaw U Thant, in reference to his hometown, Pantaw . He was also known in Burma, where he was born . He died in 2011 .
 Chairman Jahn more or less vetoed the idea of giving the prize to the third Secretary General, U Thant, and even to the first, Norway's Trygve Lie, in 1965 and 1966 .
 In March 1964 pope Paul VI wrote to UN secretary general U Thant saying he was minded to appoint a permanent observer . Pope Paul VI sent a letter to secretary general of the UN in March 1964 .
 In April, U Thant wrote back saying, in effect, fair enough, come ahead . "Come ahead," he wrote back .
 Withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency Force leading to the Six-Day War of June 1967 . U.N. Emergency Force led to the withdrawal of U.S. troops .