 This is a temporary hack fix for one specific page, until that bug fix can be deployed . Also related to blowout error, this temporarily fixes sidebar scrunched on wide desktop displays .
 Horse carts carry passengers and fresh-cut green bananas through narrow streets lined with pastel-colored homes .
 He was 19 when he was killed by a car bomb in 1996 . He says he was 19 .
 Alzugaray insists it was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by U.S.-backed Cuban exiles in April 1961 that led directly to the missile crisis . He says the United States was pursuing relentlessly a policy of regime change in Cuba . Alzugarays says the failed invasion led to
 Fidel Castro hosted a gathering that brought together aging Soviet commanders with former Kennedy advisers like Robert McNamara and Arthur Schlesinger Jr. His brother Raul now runs Cuba but doesn&#8217;t have the same affection for re-hashing glory days with old foes .
 Morales: "I think we lost a great opportunity in the crisis" Morales says. It was Khrushchev, they say, who blinked .
 The chaos and fear of those days are still alive in the memories of those who lived through it . But the chaos and fears of that day are still living in the memory of those living through it.
 Cold War was heating up to a near-boiling point . President Kennedy consulted with his closest advisers about what to do . He was told it was Soviet missile construction .
 Bredhoff is curator at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston . Others say he just wanted a very accurate record for history .
 Bredhoff: "Time ticks away on us" The stakes kept mounting .
 President Kennedy heard a range of opinions about how to respond . George Ball, undersecretary of state, urged restraint . Kennedy: "A course of action where we strike without warning is like Pearl Harbor"
 Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay says a blockade and political talk would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this . Bredhoff says others, including LeMay, almost bait the president, for not taking direct military action .
 That same day, Kennedy came clean to the nation about what was happening . This so-called quarantine would keep the Soviets from bringing in more military supplies .
 Oct. 1962, marked the first time the president spoke publicly about the missile crisis .
 Kennedy: "No one can see precisely what course it will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred" "There was a single combat casualty," Kennedy says .
 Rudolf Anderson Jr. was shot down during a reconnaissance mission over Cuba . But overall, Kennedy&#8217;s strategy was a resounding success .
 In secret, the U.S. agreed to remove all of its missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union . Bredhoff: "It&#8220;s almost impossible to imagine the weight of the responsibility of the decisions"
 Polmar says sailors didn't fear radioactive leaks or explosions . Polmar: "No problems at all with the nuclear plant, absolutely none, with absolutely none"
 Enterprise was the eighth carrier to bear the name Enterprise . The first was a British vessel, captured during the American Revolution and renamed by the man who led that raid .
 During the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962, President John Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba . President Kennedy, a former sailor himself, ordered the naval blockade .
 The Enterprise and its sailors were sent to take part in the Cuban Revolution . Kennedy said ships bound for Cuba would be turned back when found to carry weapons .
 The standoff lasted 13 days, before Soviet ships turned around . They were scared that this was the end .
 The Enterprise went on to set a world record by making a round-the-world cruise in two months in 1964 . It was the first ship to do so without refueling . The Enterprise set a record for the first time in 1964, when it set the world record .
 Nuclear power meant the ship could cruise almost indefinitely . A World War II carrier could go about three days before it needed to refuel .
 Tissot commanded the Enterprise during the closing days of the Vietnam War . Some of the first bombing runs into North Vietnam flew from its deck in 1965 . The last sortie of the war we flew off Enterprise, he says .
 One of our F-4 pilots was shot down and killed, he recalls . The Enterprise was the last major combat the Enterprise saw for some time .
 The ship was the setting for one of the top films of the 1980s, as Cruise, aka Maverick, trained to become a fighter pilot in Top Gun . Hollywood also called on the Enterprise to chase the only known Soviet sub captain .
 John Morgan was on the flag bridge of the Enterprise when he got a phone call from an aide who told him the World Trade Center had been attacked . Morgan was aboard the Enterprise at the time of 9/11 .
 Morgan had been in command of the Enterprise battle group only three days before . Morgan: "I reflexively picked up the phone and called the captain of the aircraft carrrier"
 Morgan's gut told him the attack was the work of Osama bin Laden, and the Enterprise would be going to war . But Morgan&#8217;s gut felt the attack would be the result of bin Laden .
 Its warplanes flew some of the first attacks against the Taliban in Afghanistan . Two years later, in 2003, its pilots and crew would take part in another fight, this time against Saddam Hussein .
 The ship will be scrapped, but the most famous name in the Navy will live on . The most famous ship in the U.S. Navy will still be called the USS Liberty .
 It&#8217;s played a featured role in world conflicts and Hollywood movies for more than a half-century . The U.S. military has been involved in more than 50 wars since the fall of the Cold War .
 Nuclear weapons are the most powerful devices ever developed by human beings . Nuclear weapons have never been created by humans in the world's history .
 Above-ground nuclear tests just aren&#8217;t done anymore . For one thing, above-ground nukes just aren't done anymore. For one reason, they're not .
 North Korean test would also release fallout into the environment . The last atmospheric test anywhere in the world was conducted by China in 1980 .
 To reach a remote part of the Pacific, a nuclear-tipped North Korean missile would have to fly over Japan . That radioactive material could travel in unexpected directions, including toward U.S.
 Hear conversations with the people at the center of the stories of the day . Share your thoughts with CNN iReport.com .
 As It Happens brings you the voices you want to hear . From the complex to the weird and wacky, <em>As It . Happens is from CBC Radio .
 Host Ophira Eisenberg challenges listeners and contestants alike with puzzles, word games, and trivia . "Ask Me Another" is hosted by a rotating cast of funny people and puzzle makers .
 The program originates from London, providing definitive, on-the-ground reporting and analysis of the biggest international stories of the day . It provides explanation, debate and background on why events are happening and explores their impact on our lives .
 Show tackles the subject of race with empathy and humor . Hosted by journalists of color, the show tackles the topic with empathy .
 Race affects every part of society from politics and pop culture to history . We offer tips and guidance on a wide range of topics .
 Code Switch & Life Kit delivers stories about race and identity to expand your mind . From workplace microaggressions to saving money and more, Life Kit talks with the experts to get the best advice out there and help you get it together .
 The first podcast to offer a mix of community and national news based on where our audience is . It\u2019s the first podcast ever to offer the first of its kind . It’s first podcast offering a mixture of community, national news .
 Jonathan Wilson and Rachel Kurzius join forces with the hosts of NPR's All Things Considered . The show tackles a few timely topics with careful attention to their complexity .
 In fact, the divorce rate among older Americans has exploded since the 1990s . The divorce rate has also exploded since then .
 Laura Stassi is a writer who was married for almost 30 years before her divorce . She says it's happening all over the world, including in South Africa, Japan, Australia and England .
 Newly single, she turned to friends and relationship experts for advice on navigating the dating scene .
 On <em>Dating While Gray, Laura shares the lessons she\u2019s learned and introduces you to other gray daters as they weather the wild world of love after 50 . Laura shares some of the lessons learned on dating while gray .
 The Diane Rehm Show is a continuation of the depth, quality, and civility listeners came to expect from Diane after nearly four decades at the helm of one of NPR's most successful talk shows .
 The Diane Rehm Show has been on the Diane Reham Show for 37 years . Diane continues to seek out insightful, well-informed guests who can help her, and her listeners, sift through the noise of the news media .
 Each week, 2 million listeners across the country tuned in to the program . The show grew from a small local morning call-in show on Washington\u2019s WAMU 88.5 to one of public broadcasting's most-listened to programs .
 In Fall 2015 and Spring 2016, the show placed among the top ten most powerful public radio programs, based on its ability to draw listeners to public radio stations . The show is on PBS, PBS PBS PBS .
 As the pandemic spread across the U.S., local restaurants closed or adapted, with many relying heavily on takeout and delivery in unprecedented ways . Local restaurants were forced to close or adapt to takeout or rely heavily on delivery .
 Host Stephen Dubner talks with academics and experts, including his Freakonomics co-author Steve Levitt . From cheating and crime to parenting and sports, there isn't a topic left untouched on the radio show .
 Fresh Air is one of radio's most listened-to shows . Host Terry Gross is known for her ability to engage guests of all dispositions . Fresh Air has nearly 5 million listeners each week .
 Gross has been noted as one of the best interviewers of our time . Gross has a remarkable blend of empathy and warmth, genuine curiosity and sharp intelligence, says the San Francisco Chronicle .
 Fresh Air opens the window on contemporary arts and issues . The program has received many accolades, including the 1994 Peabody Award .
 Host Shankar Vedantam explores the unconscious patterns that drive human behavior, biases that shape our choices, and triggers that direct the course of our relationships .
 The program was selected for preservation by the Library of Congress in its collection of significant locally-produced radio programming . Listen to audio from recent shows below .
 Great thinkers and great ideas designed to make your life better . The program was hosted by Kara Miller and was a co-production of PRX and GBH Boston .
 "It's Been a Minute" features people in the culture who deserve your attention . Join us to make sense of the world through conversation .
 This variety show features a unique blend of musical performances, comedy and audience interaction . The show is set to be held in New York City .
 Live from Here with Chris Thile is a Saturday-night destination for audiences everywhere . The show ended production in 2020 .
 Live Wire is a weekly one-hour variety show taped in front of a live audience in Portland, Oregon . It captures the intimacy and energy of live theater for radio listeners by turning people on to an eclectic cadre of artists .
 It captures the intimacy and energy of live theater for radio listeners by turning people on to an eclectic cadre of artists, musicians, writers and cultural observers .
 The 30-minute program airs weekday evenings on public radio stations nationwide . It boasts the largest audience for any business program in the United States on radio, cable or network television .
 "Metropocalypse" was a weekly podcast from WAMU 88.5FM . It explored the latest developments from Metro and answered riders' questions about their commutes .
 From Guns &amp; America, from the most uncompromising corner of the gun debate are turning hot-button issues into donations and controversy . "Discover a social media empire, with an unapologetic vision of gun rights, generating millions of likes, follows and loose dollars"
 In 2013, host Krista Tippett received a National Humanities Medal from President Obama . Guests include Maya Angelou and the 14th Dalai Lama .
 <em>On Point digs past the surface and into the core of a subject, exposing each of its real world implications . Leaving no perspective unchallenged, <em >On Point explores the world's issues with CNN iReport .
 "On The Media" is notable for its wry tone, lively pace, and singular insights about the stories we tell ourselves." Hosted by veteran reporter Brooke Gladstone .
 Every week, it uses the media as a magnifying glass to reveal the deeper truths behind the daily onslaught of information . This week, CNN takes a look at the world's most compelling stories .
 Planet Money explains the economy with playful storytelling and Peabody award-winning deep dive, roll up your sleeves journalism . Planet Money is a weekly, irreverent look at the world's economy .
 The program blurs the lines between ideas and the human experience . Hosts Jad Abumrad, Lulu Miller, and Latif Nasser weave stories and stories together .
 The program where ideas are illuminated, blurring the lines between science, philosophy and the human experience . The program is a program that explores ideas from science to philosophy .
 Host Glynn Washington leads the show's raw, musical brand of storytelling that dares listeners to see the world through the eyes of another . Hosts include musicians, musicians, comedians and comedians .
 "The Arts Hour" is a weekly showcase of rich arts, culture and entertainment stories from across the BBC and broadcasters around the world . This program reaches the world's culture centers and taps into stories, personalities and big global debates .
 The show features a collection of radio shows from the golden age, the 30s, 40s, and 50s . The show is hosted by Tony-Award winning playwright, lyricist and director Murray Horwitz .
 Hosts Michael Barbaro and Sabrina Tavernise provide an irresistible layman\u2019s approach to some of the most compelling and complicated stories of our time . Hosts Barbaro, Tavernise and Barbaro offer an irresistible approach to the world's most compelling stories .
 The Daily delivers a deep dive into one or two of the day's buzziest news stories . Hosts Michael Barbaro and Sabrina Tavernise provide an irresistible layman\u2019s approach to some of the most compelling and complicated stories of our time .
 Each week, 2. million listeners across the country tuned in to the show . In Fall 2015 and Spring 2016, the show placed among the top ten most powerful public radio programs, based on its ability to draw listeners to public radio .
 Tom Sherwood is a resident analyst for CNN iReport on Washington, D.C. Follow Tom's Opinion Opinion on Facebook and Twitter . Watch CNN Politics at 9 p.m. ET on CNN.com/Heroes .
 True stories are told live on stage without scripts, notes, props, or accompaniment . The program is a celebration of both the raconteur, who breathes fire into true tales of ordinary life .
 The Moth Radio Hour features tales from storytellers from all walks of life . At the center of each performance is the story .
 Ira Glass has been named the best radio host in the country by Time magazine . Glass received the Edward R Murrow Award for the highest individual honor in public broadcasting . Glass has won the award for the best public radio host .
 Relisha was missing for 18 days before authorities formally declared her missing . Relisha had not been seen at school or shelter where her family lived . Authorities say Relisha is believed to be in the care of authorities .
 Seven years later, Relisha has never been found . Host Jonquilyn Hill asks if Relisha's disappearance was, as the city later claimed, unpreventable .
 Each week, hosts Rund Abdelfatah and Ramtin Arablouei explore the historical under-inninnings of our tumultuous current events landscape .
 They are war protesters and Ku Klux Klan members, internet trolls and religious zealots . They're war protesters, Ku Klux Klansmen and internet trolls . They are also internet trolls, religious zealotryers and war protesters .
 Hosted by award-winning radio producers Michael Vuolo and Matthew Schwartz with special appearances by NPR\u2019s Nina Totenberg .
 "Put your thinking cap on and tune in to test your knowledge against some of the brightest names in news and entertainment. Don't Tell Me!"",""Post_excerpt" is a two-page excerpt from the show .
 The show covers a wide range of topics such as politics, sports, and entertainment, presented alongside anecdotes and expert perspectives . Host Scott Simon has reported in all 50 states and 7 continents .
 "He is as comfortable talking with a world leader as he is with a leading actor," says Simon . "All of the week's news, wrapped up and delivered by NPR's Peabody Award-winning host Scott Simon"
 Host Ayesha Rascoe presents interviews with politicians, artists and everyone in between . Hosts include politicians and artists .
 A very funky Mother\u2019s Day""This weekend has . a <em>lot<\/em> going on going on," says author . "This . weekend has ... a lot of things going on"
 There are two major music festivals in D.C. and an Embassy world tour . Mother's Day is all bookended by Mother&#8217;s Day on Sunday .
 This year's event will have live music at three different spots along U Street . Live music will be held at three spots along the street .
 She says working in the activist space, along with her identity as a Palestinian-American, help her to find inspiration for her work . She says she is inspired by her identity and her activism .
 Key differences emerged on whether the city should hire more police officers and if the system of mayoral control of schools should remain intact . Mayor Muriel Bowser will be asking voters for a third term in office .
 She pushed back on arguments made by progressive activists that police don't prevent crime . She said she has never been to a community where they say they don't want police .
 She says residents want to make sure police are engaged and they have a trusting relationship . Never, she said, detailing her years in public office, she says .
 Councilmember Robert White said he is skeptical of efforts to hire more police . Bowser's push for 4,000 officers isn't based on any specific data on how many officers MPD should ideally have, White said .
 He said he supports calls for an audit of the department's staffing to determine what the appropriate number of officers should be . He said it will take years to reach 4,000 officers .
 White said police need to focus on closing more cases, and that he would work more closely with federal prosecutors to determine why some cases are being dropped .
 Police staffing was high during the city's most violent years in the early and mid-1990s . Police staffing levels made little difference in crime rates, police chief says .
 The three candidates broke different on the issue of whether police should remain in D.C. schools . While 59% agreed that more police on patrol could help, 82% said additional economic opportunities in low-income neighborhoods could make a dent .
 Robert White agreed with the council’s move, while Trayon White says he opposes it . Robert White: "This generation has become more violent"
 Robert White and Trayon White advocated for more independence for the Office of the State Superintendent for Education and a stronger state board . The candidates disagreed over whether that should remain the case .
 Bowser: Lawmakers had provided shifting answers on the question of who should control the schools . Bowser: Two lawmakers' statements left an opening for Bowser . Bowser said the two lawmakers had given shifting answers over the months .
 If your answer shifts depending on which way the wind blows, they can't trust you with their kids . And if that's true, they won't be able to trust you anymore .
 Mayor: "Most important thing you have to do as mayor is provide mayoral leadership of the schools. And the most important thing is to be mayor is providing mayoral leadership"
 Council members "are equivocating and waffling," says councilwoman . Councilwoman says council members "equivalent" and "waffling" on the issue . Councilman: Councilmembers "equivocate and waffle"
 Robert White says Bowser is making mayoral control seem like a simple yes-no proposition . Bowser: "We need a mayor who\u2019s not just going to go to the easy talking points"
 She doesn't have a clear understanding of why so many students are leaving schools, she says . And that’s why she doesn’t know why, she said. She says. And that\u2019s why .
 Robert White said he would increase trade and vocational offerings to boost enrollment in schools east of the Anacostia River . White would also reduce teacher turnover .
 Trayon White said he supports a moratorium on new charters . White said the significant increase in charter schools has impacted enrollment and investment at traditional public schools . White supports the moratorium .
 Bowser also pledged to reduce testing of students and assessments of teachers . Bowser said the new high school should not be built in Ward 3, arguing resources should be elsewhere .
 Bowser responded she had done just that, pointing to the modernizations of Roosevelt and Coolidge high schools in Ward 4 . Trayon White supports a more rapid rollout of traffic-calming measures on city streets .
 The average person in Washington, D.C. doesn't have disposable income from $300 to $600 a month to address tickets, Bowser says . He says he believes the cameras cause more stress and anxiety than they succeed in creating safer streets .
 She also said she had requested more cameras as part of a broader $200 million plan to re-engineer streets and roads to make them safer for cyclists and pedestrians .
 Bowser said that Trayon White was already empowered to make the changes he is proposing . Bowser: "The councilmember is a budget-maker and he\u2019s a policymaker"
 Bowser and Trayon White are supportive of getting the team back . Robert White said he wants to see if the RFK stadium campus be used for housing and recreation .
 Strictly Necessary Cookies should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings . Strictley Necessaries are required to make use of cookies .
 If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences . Enable or disable the cookie-enabled system .