 It has been accepted for inclusion in Political Science Faculty Works by an authorized administrator of Works . The article has been published on the University of Cambridge .
 The use of this moral analogy in the Cuban missile crisis is important in at least respects . It's important to use of the moral analogy to deal with the crisis in Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy introduced the analogy into the discussion as part of an ethical argument against air strikes . Robert Kennedy was the one who introduced the idea to the debate .
 The “Pearl Harbor in reverse” argument generated little traction in 2003 . However, in comparison to the missile crisis, the argument generated less traction . In comparison, the ‘Pearl Pearl in reverse' argument generated few traction in the same time .
 Morality in international relations is evident, with widespread prohibitions on torture, colonialism, and unjust aggression . Morality is evident in the prohibition on torture and colonial aggression, as well as unjust aggression, the author says .
 The norm against surprise attacks featured to a remarkable extent in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . Given the norm’s inherent ambiguity, the norm for surprise attacks was often ambiguous .
 Moral analogies provide the perception of ethical certainty in an uncertain moral world . In other words, moral analogies . provide the . perception of moral . certainty in a moral . world, it says .
 Third, references to Pearl Harbor served as a rhetorical tool to explain the administration's policy to Congress and the American public .
 He raised the possibility of creating a pretext for an invasion by “getting involved in this through Guantánamo Bay or something.” He said the U.S. could get involved in the situation through Guantànamo .
 The moral analogy came up again later that day when former Secretary of State Dean Acheson was arguing for a military attack on Cuba without delay, Theodore Sorensen says .
 For many Americans, the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon seemed to parallel Pearl Harbor, notably the element of surprise and the intelligence failure . The attacks on 9/11 and Pentagon seem to have parallels with Pearl Harbor .
 The Kennedy tapes reveal that the Pearl Harbor moral analogy had a major causal impact during the first week of the crisis . Kennedy tapes show that the moral analogy was a major factor .
 The president acknowledged the military disadvantages of a warning, but by this point he was convinced that it was the best policy . "He never again seriously entertained a surprise attack," he said .
 If the analogy had not been invoked, the participants would probably not have drawn such a stark moral-political line between an air strike with a warning and one without . On the other hand, if the analogy were not invoked, it wouldn't have been drawn such an analogy .