 He also wrote about the Cuban missile crisis and lessons for today's leaders in the Post Outlook Section .
 Dobbs awards Pinocchios to exaggerating and prevaricating politicians and pundits in his Washington Post column, The Fact Checker . Dobbs' column is known for its humor .
 The Nazi Raid on America and Down with Big Brother: The Fall of the Soviet Empire are available on Amazon.com.com .
 Thanks for joining me on-line discussion, and your interest in my book, or the Fact Checker column .
 The long-range ones capable of hitting the U.S. were removed within one week . Long-range missiles were removed from the United States within a week . They were removed as soon as possible .
 The tactical missiles would have been used to attack a U.S. invading force . They would have stayed in place for a few more weeks . The missiles were deployed in support of U.N. forces .
 Khrushchev decided he had to remove nuclear weapons from the island . He did not want to leave nuclear weapons on the island, under Castro's potential control .
 I'm curious to know whether history illuminates any misconceptions, mis-steps, or, perhaps, irony in Mr Kennedy's memoir . I'm also interested in knowing whether Mr Kennedy has any misconceptions .
 RFK book was published posthumously, after his assassination in 1968, edited by Ted Sorensen . RFK was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Of course, it tells the story from the Kennedy point of view, and there is a fair amount of political spin in it . The film is based on Kennedy's life story .
 It leaves out the secret war against Castro, which Bobby was responsible for directing, which was one of the factors that led to Khrushchev putting missiles in Cuba in the first place . Bobby was behind the decision to put missiles on Cuba .
 I mentioned the eyeball to eyeball naval confrontation on October 24, which did not happen as advertised . The confrontation was supposed to be an eyeball-to-eye confrontation .
 "I believe the strength of a great leader is measured in how they safeguard our country without going to war," says President Obama . "A great leader should be measured by how they protect our country," says Obama .
 Backdoor negotiations have a place with getting things done without having to fire a weapon . Back-door negotiations are a good way to get things done with a gun .
 President Kennedy had Bobby Kennedy work with the Russian leader with secret talks . President Kennedy worked with Bobby Kennedy to secure secret talks with Russia's leader .
 The cowboy that we have in the White House today showed that you go to war first and work out the details later is truly the weak leader . "The cowboy" is the leader who goes to war before details are worked out later .
 This question goes to the heart of an issue that has come up in the present election campaign: should you talk to America's enemies, or freeze them out? This question is a key issue in the election campaign .
 Barack Obama is correct in saying that Kennedy felt that it was necessary to negotiate, have contacts . Barack Obama says Kennedy felt necessary to have contacts. Barack Obama corrects that .
 He kept talking to Khrushchev through the most dangerous episode of the Cold War . "It was important that he did. It was important he did," he said .
 McCain people have a point when they cite the failed Vienna summit of 1961, 1961 . On the other hand, the McCain people say the Vienna summit was a failed summit .
 JFK went into the summit unprepared, and was pushed around by Khrushchev . JFK had been unprepared for the summit, and he had been pushed around .
 Afterwards, he came to see the summit as a mistake, and felt that it would take a great deal of effort to restore his credibility with Khrushchev .
 Both campaigns can use the Kennedy experience to justify their positions, some extent, to some extent . Both campaigns are using the experience to defend their positions .
 Kennedy himself calculated the chances of nuclear war as between one in three and even . At one point, Kennedy calculated the chance of a nuclear war was between 1 in 3 and even even .
 My book shows that the risk was not necessarily greater, but it was different from the way we have traditionally looked at it . My book was published in May 2013 and is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Cambridge .
 The risk came not so much from the direct confrontation between K and K, but from the chance, unpredictable events that happen once you put the machinery of war into motion . In my view, the risk came from the risk of a direct confrontation, rather than the chance of war .
 By Black Saturday, both leaders were losing control over events, which is why they moved to find a solution . Both leaders were looking for a solution to the situation .
 Pressure was building on JFK to bomb the missile sites, and invade Cuba, which we now know could have pushed the Soviets into using their tactical nukes, against a U.S. invading force .
 Kennedy believed the principal Soviet motivation was a desire to achieve strategic parity . Kennedy and his aides believed that the principal motivation was to gain strategic parity.
 By stationing intermediate range weapons in Cuba, Khrushchev suddenly had more nukes that could hit the United States . That was no doubt one of his motivations, but he also wanted to defend Castro, and defend the Socialist revolution in Cuba .
 It was a matter of prestige for him, but also an emotional connection with Castro . It was also a matter for him to have a relationship with Castro, he says .
 He feared that the Kennedys were out to get Castro after the failure of the Bay of Pigs, and sending nukes was a way to protect him, he said . He said he feared the Kennedy-led invasion of Cuba was an attempt to protect Castro .
 Bobby was a complicated person, with two sides to him, much more emotional than his brother . Bobby's brother says he was a "complicated person" who had two sides of him .
 He was effectively in charge of Operation Mongoose, the secret war against Castro . He led the CIA's secret operation against the Castro regime .
 When he first heard that the Soviets had deployed missiles to Cuba, he reacted emotionally, cursing Khrushchev . When he heard that he reacted very emotionally, he said, 'I'm not surprised'
 He talked about arranging some kind of ""Sink the Maine"" incident as a pretext for an invasion of Cuba, as if he needed one . The incident was described as an attempt to sink the Maine, Maine .
 Later he said that a Pearl Harbor type attack was against the American tradition . Later he adopted a rather moralistic position, saying that such an attack would be against the tradition .
 The Soviets were responding to the U.S. putting missiles into Turkey, immediately adjoining the Soviet Union . In fact, the Soviets responded to the United States putting missiles in Turkey, which borders Turkey .
 The crisis was resolved when we agreed to move our missiles from Turkey in exchange for them removing their missiles from Cuba . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles in Cuba in return for removing them from Turkey .
 There is a lot of pre-history to the Soviet decision to send missiles to Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I agree with you that there is a very long history to go to Cuba"
 Khrushchev was also indignant about the U.S. missiles in Turkey, across the Black Sea from his summer residence in Turkey .
 He would look out in the direction of Turkey from his dacha, seethe with resentment, and think about ways of ""putting a hedgehog down Uncle Sam's pants,"" as he put it .
 Khrushchev told his government it was time to end the confrontatation - before Bobby Kennedy's secret offer . Naftali's book was published in October 2012 .
 I have looked at the same sources that he and Fursenko have, and think they have misread the admittedly somewhat ambiguous Presidium record . I'm not sure if they are correct, but I think they are wrong .
 Khrushchev had probably taken a decision in principle to withdraw the missiles, but the message with the RFK offer arrived during the course of the meeting, prior to the final decision .
 Khrushchev loved Fidel ""like a son,"" but he also had doubts about his emotional stability, and was not going to entrust nuke weapons to him . He also doubts about the emotional stability of Fidel .
 Castro's strategy has always been based on total defiance and showing no weakness to his enemies . Castro has always shown no weakness in his fight against his enemies, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "He was ready to die for the cause, and take a large number of fellow countrymen with him," he said . He said: 'He was prepared to die ... for the sake of the cause'
 I believe he was willing to authorize a nuclear war on Cuban soil to defeat the yanqui invader . The Cuban invasion of Cuba was authorized by the U.S. government .
 It recreates the atmosphere well, but includes a number of inaccuracies, including the famous Eyeball naval confrontation . The film includes the famous naval confrontation, which did not happen this way .
 While the low-level reconnaissance planes were fired on, they were never hit . The planes were never shot at .
 JFK was willing to go a long way to avoid a preemptive strike against Cuba . JFK had a few other tricks up his sleeve, he says . JFK's decision to avoid preemptive strikes against Cuba was a mistake .
 The Jupiters were removed from Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles on Cuba . The deal was part of a more public deal on the removal of the missiles from Turkey .
 The military were urging him to attack, and the shootdown of another U-2 spy plane, or some unforeseeable incident, could have forced his hand . However, the military urged him to act after the shoot-down .
 The deployment of nukes to within 15 miles of Guantanamo was closely coordinated with the Cubans, particularly with Raul Castro, Fidel Castro's successor .
 Fidel Castro was fully prepared to authorize the use of nuclear weapons against U.S. troops on Cuban soil, author says . "I think that Fidel, and his immediate circle, were fully prepared"
 Che Guevara later talked about being willing to accept the deaths of hundreds of thousands, even millions, of people to ensure the ultimate defeat of the imperialists . The death toll is believed to be hundreds of millions .
 In your posting on the Web site leading up this chat, you mentioned that intelligence failed the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration failed to provide intelligence to the public, he says .
 Michael Dobbs: The intelligence record is mixed . Dobbs says the intelligence record for the U.S. has been mixed .
 CIA did discover the long-range missiles at the last moment, on October 14, when they sent a U-2 plane over the missile sites . On the one hand, the CIA discovered the missiles in the U.S. at the end of October 14 .
 The president had time to prepare a response before the missiles were armed with nuclear warheads . That was about a month after they arrived in Cuba, but it gave him time to plan a response .
 The intelligence agencies missed most of the tactical warheads, never learned about the FKR cruise missiles and grossly underestimated the numbers of Soviets on Cuba . On the other hand, the intelligence agency missed most tactical warheads .
 McNamara told JFK that there were 6-8,000 Soviet ""technicians"" on the island, when there were 43,000 heavily armed combat troops . McNamara said there were 7,000 "technicians" in the Soviet Union .
 Some have speculated that RFK's emotional demeanor in his critical meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin was more ploy than genuine . Some believe RFK may have been trying to get his emotional demeanor back on the surface .
 RFK was rattled by this stage in the game, and it was not simply a ploy . I think that RFK . was quite rattled, and that it wasn't just a ploy, says John Daley .
 It may have helped convince the Soviets that time was running out . Of course, it may also help convince them that time is running out.
 Kennedy requested removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey before the Crisis . Former U.N. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke recently said that Kennedy had requested removal .
 I've read that the president only requested that the Defense Dept. conduct a study on how to remove them from the U.S. President Barack Obama has requested a study .
 National security adviser Bundy says there is a distinction between a presidential wish and a presidential order . Bundy: There is a difference between a president's wish and an order ordered order .
 I do not think JFK ever gave a formal order for the removal of the Jupiters, although he several times encouraged his aides to get them out of there . JFK never gave an order to remove them from the White House, but he encouraged aides to do so, he says
 "As I researched the book, I was repeatedly struck by parallels between then and now," says author . As I researched, she was struck with parallels between the book and now .
 "irrational actors" push themselves onto the stage, as we were reminded on 9/11 . But they are not always rational actors, they push themselves into the stage .
 The White House was preparing to evacuate the White House on Black Saturday .
 A friend is trying to find a quote used in your book ""One Minute to Midnight"" but we are unable to locate it . A friend has been trying to locate the quote from your book .
 JFK did not feel that there was much sense hanging on to them, let alone going to war over them . They were pretty much obsolete by that stage, which is why JFK didn't want to go to war with them . JFK felt there was no sense of making war with the US
 The same job could be done much better by Polaris submarines, which are hidden beneath the oceans . Polaris submarines could be used to carry out the same job as submarines .
 The Jupiters were pretty much obsolete by the time they were fully operational in March 1962 . They were the first to be fully operational by the end of 1962 .
 The Turks decorated them with the Turkish flag . But they were a matter of prestige for the Turks, who decorated them .
 My twin sister worked as a Supervisory Archivist in NARA's records declassification division . Her twin sister also worked as an Archivist . NARA is a National Records Records Declassified Division .
 Some archivists regard Richard Nixon as a champion of glasnost . In your Op Ed, "Our History, Off Limits,"" you noted that some archivistists regard Nixon as an archivist . Richard Nixon is a "champion of democracy"
 If you are going to throw out such observations, some caveats are in order, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Some caveats are needed to be considered"
 As a federal agency, NARA is subject to message discipline so even as dogged a journalist as you never can survey and take the pulse of -all internal stakeholders . NARA has a reputation for being a secretive, secretive and secretive agency .
 Nixon's actions were separate and discrete actions by Nixon . Also, you need to distinguish carefully between two separate, discrete actions . Nixon took office in 1970s .
 My sis was involved in the former, I in efforts to deal with the latter, I said . My siblings were involved in both the former and the latter . My sister was involved with the former .
 This enabled NARA to start systematic declassification and release of some historical records that dated back 30 years or more . NARA declassified some records dating back to 30 years ago .
 Nixon's lawyers sought to delay or limit disclosures from his own records after he left office in 1974 . Nixon lawyers sought or limit disclosure of his records after leaving office . Nixon's attorneys sought to limit or delay disclosure of records .
 Archivists screened 3,700 hours of Nixon's taped conversations for public access during the 1980s . NARA only released 63 hours of his taped conversations while he was alive .
 Dobbs: I was not talking about Nixon's attitude to his own records, but his attitude toward historical records . Our History, Off-Limits Michael Dobbs says he's not just talking about his attitude to Nixon's own records .
 He did not have any problems about embarassing his Democratic predecessors . He did have no problems about embarrassing his predecessors .
 More historical records were declassified under Nixon than under the current administration . But the fact remains that more historical records are being declassified than under Nixon .
 More effort now is being put into reclassification than declassification . More effort is now being put to reclassifying than declassifying .
 It could well have begun at the tactical level in Cuba, with an attack on Guantanamo or an American beachhead, but it would likely have escalated to a full nuclear exchange .
 Of course, the United States would have ""won"" the war, because it had huge nuclear superiority at that time . The U.S. would have won the war because of its nuclear superiority .
 Even if only one or two Soviet nukes got through, the consequences for Americans would have been catastrophic . But even if only a handful of nukes were allowed through, they would be catastrophic .
 You label a photo as showing a Cuban anti-aircraft gun in a city square . You label it as a photo of the gun in the Cuban capital .
 The weapon couldn't be elevated high enough to take on aircraft . Also, it couldn't take on planes . The weapon could not be elevated .
 "All they had to go on was what they knew at the time. I think it's important to remember that when the . decision-makers were in the middle of this crisis, all they had . to go . on the crisis, she says .
 "I remember thinking, though, that we were all going to die or at the least never see the United States again," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We remember thinking that we might not see the U.S. again"
 I am sure there are some errors in the book, which I will correct for future editions . I'm sure there will be errors in this edition of the book .
 "They presented themselves to the Cubans as the real revolutionaries, as opposed to the gutless Soviets," he says . The Soviets presented themselves as the "real revolutionaries," he adds .
 Khrushchev was worried that Castro might end up siding with the Chinese . Castro was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 This was two years or so after the Sino-Soviet split, but intelligence people routinely referred to the Soviets on Cuba as Russ/Sino . That was the category they thought in at that time, and that was the way they thought .
 The Cubans gave me no help in my research, but I got valuable insights into Fidel's activities, point of view, from the conferences organized by the National Security Archive in Havana and elsewhere . The Cuban government gave him no help, but he says he was able to get valuable insights
 This comes from Khrushchev's memoirs, I believe, which talks about Kennedy's fear of a military coup . Kennedy feared a coup, according to the memoirs he wrote .
 In the end, Generals like LeMay obeyed civilian authority, but they were not shy about expressing their disapproval . LeMay was not shy of expressing his disapproval of the decision .
 I was an eight year old living in Cuba and remember Dad listening to the radio -not the Cuban stations -in secret and the overall feeling of impending catastrophe . Dad listened to the Cuban radio in secret and felt impending catastrophe in Cuba .
 VOA probably reflected the general tone of the American media during the 13 days, which was one of considerable alarm . VOA's coverage of the 13-day suspension of the U.S. government has been a source of concern .
 There was a lot that reporters did not know at the time, of course, and the Kennedy administration was quite effective in spinning the media . The Kennedy administration had to spin the media, and it was effective .
 The essay of yours did not seem to allow for the possibility that the whole ""crisis"" was unnecessary . Both the Soviet and Cuba were entirely within their rights under international law in installing the missiles, and that the United States was the one acting illegally .
 The problem was that the Soviets installed missiles in Cuba in total secrecy, having assured the U.S. that they would never do any thing . The problem is that the United States never knew what was going on .
 Castro wanted a public defense treaty, which would have put the U.S. in a much more difficult position, he says . Castro: "I want to see the United States in a very difficult position"
 It would have been difficult to object if the Soviets did the same thing in Cuba in Cuba . After all, we had already deployed missiles to Turkey, so it would be difficult for the Soviets to do the same .
 Some nukes were under the effective physical control of 25-year old Air Force lieutenants, flying solo . As I relate in the book, some nukes are under the control of .
 An accidental release of a nuke or an accident involving a nuclear accident was a bigger risk than U.S. military leaders defying the president . I believe, however, that an accidental release or an accidental . release of nuke is a big risk .
 I did write a book on the end of the Cold War, or at least the collapse of the Soviet Union, which I witnessed as a reporter in Moscow between 1988 and 1993 . I was a reporter for Moscow from 1988 to 1993 .
 When I was a history student in the '70s, I got a B for proposing that JFK averted a nuclear war . Hi Michael, Michael writes .
 JFK provoked the crisis to satisfy his macho instincts, his prof said . JFK was "macho" and provoked crisis, JFK's prof said. JFK was a macho man .
 You've made it clear that he was in fact thoughtful and calm in the face of pressure to go to war . You've also said he was thoughtful, calm and calm . He was a thoughtful man who was calm and determined to go on the attack .
 During the 13 days, both men helped avert the danger of nuclear war . Both men were involved in averting a nuclear war in the United States .
 They ended up being on the same side, struggling to control the chaotic forces of history they themselves had unleashed . Although they did not appreciate it at the time, they ended up .
 The U.S. learned of the existence of the missiles because a top Soviet walked into our embassy in Moscow and told us . I have read that the United States learned . from a top . Soviet officer walked in to the embassy and said the missiles were missiles .
 You are probably thinking of Oleg Penkovsky, but it is more complicated than that . You are likely thinking of him as a Russian spy, but he is more than that.
 Penkovsky provided the technical manual for the R-12 missile that was deployed on Cuba . He did not tip off the United States to the deployment itself .
 His info helped the CIA to identify the missiles accurately, and predict when they would become operational . He also helped predict when the missiles would be operational .
 This is the first time I've read that Kennedy horsetraded the dismantling of U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles from Cuba . This is a first time that Kennedy has read that he had a trade deal with the Soviet Union .
 "Yes, we had identified the precise location of the missile sites, but not the warheads," says the official . "We had identified . the precise locations of the . missile sites," he says .
 There were also reserve missiles, which were difficult to identify . However, there was also a reserve missile system .
 The Air Force told Kennedy that they were ""95 percent" sure of getting all the missile sites in a strike, but that was not good enough for him, he said . Kennedy was dissuaded from authorizing a strike by the Air Force .
 JFK fuming about deployment of Soviet missiles on Cuba, tells Bundy, his national security adviser, "why, that would be like us deploying missiles to Turkey" or words to that effect . JFK: "That would be really dangerous,""
 JFK had apparently forgotten that little detail in the midst of his indignation at being double-crossed by Khrushchev . JFK had evidently forgotten that . JFK was angry at being 'double crossed'
 The Cuban missile crisis contains a valuable lesson in diplomacy, writes David Frum . President Kennedy handled the crisis and how he handled it, he writes .
 When the Russians sent mixed responses , there was a realization in language to respond only to the messages that were encouraging and presented openings for further dialogue rather than addressing the more threatening messages . The Russians responded only to those messages that presented openings to further dialogue .
 This could easily have turned into an exercise of bravado with two sides that probably didn't want to fight feeling obligated to fight because they had dared each other into a fight . Otherwise, this could easily turn into a bravado exercise of bravery .
 Keeping the dialogue towards diplomatic solutions led to a diplomatic solution . Instead, keeping the dialogue was the best way to reach a solution .
 "Obviously, it was important to keep the lines of communication open during the crisis," he said . "It was important, obviously, that the lines were open," he added .
 We would not have got anywhere with Khrushchev by ignoring him, or freezing him out, we said . We would have got nowhere by ignoring or not freezing him, we added . We were not going to get anywhere with him, they said .
 The Vienna summit was ill-prepared, and might have encouraged JFK to test JFK's mettle . On the other hand, the Vienna summit may have encouraged him to test his mettle, but it might have been a mistake .