 He was also the youngest president at the end of his tenure, and his lifespan was the shortest of any president .
 He represented Massachusetts in both houses of the U.S. Congress prior to his presidency . A Democrat, he represented Massachusetts before .
 During World War II, he commanded a series of PT boats in the Pacific theater . He was a member of the Navy's PT boats .
 Kennedy's survival of the sinking of PT-109 and rescue of his fellow sailors made him a war hero for which he earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal, but left him with serious injuries . Kennedy survived the sinking but suffered serious injuries in the crash .
 Kennedy represented a working-class Boston district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953 . After a brief stint in journalism, Kennedy was elected to the House in 1953 .
 He was subsequently elected to the United States Senate . He served as the junior senator for Massachusetts from 1953 to 1960 . He was elected to Massachusetts in 1953 .
 While in the Senate, Kennedy published his book, Profiles in Courage, which won a Pulitzer Prize . Kennedy's book Profiles In Courage won the Pulitzer Prize for Courage .
 In 1960 presidential election, he narrowly defeated Republican opponent Richard Nixon, who was the incumbent vice president . He narrowly defeated Nixon in the 1960 election .
 Kennedy's humor, charm, and youth in addition to his father's money and contacts were great assets in his campaign . Kennedy won the presidency in 1964 .
 Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first televised presidential debates in American history . Kennedy's presidential campaign was inspired by first televised debates .
 Kennedy administration included high tensions with communist states in the Cold War . Kennedy's administration was at the center of high tensions in the 1950s and '60s .
 As a result, he increased the number of American military advisers in South Vietnam . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 In April 1961, he authorized an attempt to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro in the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . He authorized a failed invasion of Cuba .
 His administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962 . However, his administration continued planning for the invasion .
 Kennedy presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps, Alliance for Progress with Latin America, and the continuation of the Apollo program with the goal of landing a man on the Moon before 1970 . Kennedy was president of the United States during the first term .
 He also supported the civil rights movement, but was only somewhat successful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies . He supported the New Frontier, but only succeeded in passing some of his policies .
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson assumed the presidency upon Kennedy's death . Vice President Kennedy was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 Marxist and former U.S. Marine Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the assassination, but he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby two days later .
 The FBI and the Warren Commission both concluded Oswald had acted alone . The Warren Commission concluded Oswald acted alone in the assassination . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 After Kennedy's death, Congress enacted many of his proposals, including Civil Rights Act and Revenue Act of 1964 .
 Despite his truncated presidency, Kennedy ranks highly in polls of U.S. presidents with historians and the general public . Kennedy was the first president of the United States to hold office in office .
 His personal life has also been the focus of considerable sustained interest following public revelations in the 1970s of his chronic health ailments and extramarital affairs .
 Kennedy is the most recent U.S. president to die in office . Kennedy is most recent United States president .
 Navy and Marine Corps Medal citation: 3. Journalism, personal diary, 4. Congressional career 4. Navy, Marine Corps medal citation: 1. U.S. Senate Medal Citation: 1 .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts on May 29, 1917, at 83 Beals Street . Joseph P Kennedy Sr. was a businessman and politician, and Rose Kennedy a philanthropist and socialite .
 John F. Kennedy's maternal grandfather and namesake, John F ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, served as a United States Congressman and was elected to two terms as Mayor of Boston . Fitzgerald's father, John Fitzgerald Fitzgerald, is a former Congressman and mayor of Boston, Massachusetts .
 Kennedy lived in Brookline for the first ten years of his life . Kennedy lived there for ten years . Kennedy attended Dexter School in Boston .
 He was educated through the 4th grade at the Edward Devotion School, the Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School; all located in the Boston area .
 JFK's earliest memories involved accompanying his grandfather Fitzgerald on walking tours of historic sites in Boston and discussions at the family dinner table about politics . JFK's interest in history and public service led to his interest in public service .
 His father's business had kept him away from the family for long stretches of time, and his ventures were concentrated on Wall Street and Hollywood .
 In 1927, Dexter School announced it would not reopen before October after an outbreak of polio in Massachusetts . The Dexter School was closed in 1927 after a polio outbreak .
 The family spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts . They enjoyed swimming, sailing, and touch football in their home .
 Christmas and Easter holidays were spent at their winter retreat in Palm Beach, Florida .
 In September 1930, Kennedy, then 13, was shipped off to the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut, for 8th grade . Kennedy was then 13 when he was sent to the school .
 In April 1931, he had an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home . Kennedy started attending Choate, a prestigious boarding school in Wallingford, Connecticut, for 9th through 12th grade .
 Joe Jr. had already been at Choate for two years and was a football player and leading student . His older brother Joe Jr.'s older brother was already a football star and a leading student at the school .
 He spent his first years at Choate in his older brother's shadow . He compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a coterie .
 Their most notorious stunt was exploding a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker .
 Kennedy named his group ""The Muckers Club" after his roommate and lifelong friend Kirk LeMoyne ""Lem"" Billings . The group was the group's first band .
 Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization in 1934 at Yale New Haven Hospital, where doctors suspected leukemia .
 In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota . The ultimate diagnosis there was colitis . He was diagnosed with colitis in June 1934 .
 In September 1935, Kennedy made his first trip abroad when he traveled to London with his parents and his sister Kathleen . Kennedy traveled with his family to London in September 1935 .
 He intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics . His older brother had done the same, as his brother .
 He was then hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Brigham Hospital in Boston .
 He convalesced at family winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on the 40,000-acre Jay Six cattle ranch .
 "I feel that Harvard can give me a better background and a better liberal education than any other university," she says . She says she wants to study at Harvard University .
 I have always wanted to go there, as I have felt that it is not just another college, but is a university with something definite to offer . I have also always felt that I wanted to study at the University of Cambridge .
 He tried out for the football, golf, and swimming teams . He earned a spot on the varsity swimming team . He is a junior at the University of Columbia .
 Kennedy also sailed in the Star class and won the 1936 Nantucket Sound Star Championship . Kennedy also competed in the 1936 World Sailing Championship .
 In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings . Kennedy spent the last ten weeks in Europe, driving in a convertible .
 In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his father and older brother to work at the American embassy in London . His father was President Franklin D Roosevelt's United States Ambassador to the Court of St. Mary's . Kennedy was born in June 1938 .
 In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis . Kennedy was a member of the St. James's College of Medicine .
 Two days later, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the UK's declaration of war on Germany . Two days after the war, the British government declared the war against Germany .
 Kennedy was sent as his father's representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of SS Athenia before flying back to the United States from Foynes, Ireland, on his first transatlantic flight . Kennedy was the son of the ship's survivors .
 Kennedy was an upperclassman at Harvard . He developed an interest in political philosophy during his time there . Kennedy is a Harvard graduate .
 In 1940 Kennedy completed his thesis, ""Appeasement in Munich", about British negotiations during the Munich Agreement . Kennedy wrote a book about the British negotiations in Munich .
 The thesis eventually became a bestseller under the title Why England Slept . The thesis was published in 2004 and is now published in paperback .
 The book also called for an Anglo-American alliance against the rising totalitarian powers . In addition to addressing Britain's unwillingness to strengthen its military in the lead-up to World War II .
 Kennedy became increasingly supportive of U.S. intervention in World War II . His father's isolationist beliefs resulted in the latter's dismissal as ambassador to the United Kingdom .
 In 1940, Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard with a Bachelor of Arts in government, concentrating on international affairs . This created a split between the Kennedy and Roosevelt families . Kennedy graduated from Harvard .
 That fall, he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes there . That fall he enrolled in the business school . He is now a graduate of Stanford Business School .
 In early 1941, Kennedy left and helped his father write a memoir of his time as an American ambassador . Kennedy left the U.S. in early 1941 and helped write his father's memoir .
 He then traveled throughout South America . His itinerary included Colombia, Ecuador and Peru .
 Kennedy planned to attend Yale Law School after auditing courses on business law at Stanford, but canceled when American entry into World War II seemed imminent . Kennedy was a member of the United States Naval Reserve .
 In 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter the army's Officer Candidate School . In 1940 he attempted to become an officer in the army .
 Despite months of training, he was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems . He was unable to compete at the Rio Olympics because of his chronic back issues .
 On September 24, 1941, Kennedy joined the United States Naval Reserve . Kennedy joined with then director of the Office of Naval Intelligence and former naval attaché to Joseph Kennedy, Alan Kirk .
 In January 1942, Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters, Sixth Naval District, in Charleston, South Carolina . Lieutenant Kennedy with his PT-109 crew, 1943 .
 In November, Kennedy was still mourning the death of his close friend, Second Lieutenant George Houk Mead Jr., who had been awarded the Navy Cross for his bravery in Guadalcanal .
 Commander Hugo W Koehler, USN, had been buried in Middletown, Rhode Island, the previous year . The decorated, naval spy, was buried in the cemetery .
 Kennedy paused over Koehler's white granite cross grave marker in St. Columba's chapel . Kennedy hoped out loud that when his time came, he would not have to die without religion .
 Two decades later, Kennedy and Koehler's stepson, United States Senator Claiborne Pell, had become good friends and political allies . They had been acquaintances since the mid-1930s during their ""salad days"" on the same Newport debutante party ""circuit
 It was a patrol torpedo boat used for training while Kennedy was an instructor at Melville . It was used to train during Kennedy's time as an instructor .
 During the trip south, he was hospitalized briefly in Jacksonville after diving into the cold water to unfoul a propeller . He was hospitalized in Jacksonville briefly after diving in cold water .
 Thereafter, Kennedy was assigned duty in Panama and later in the Pacific theater, where he eventually commanded two more PT boats . Kennedy was stationed in the Panama and the Pacific Theater .
 In April 1943, Kennedy was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO . On April 24 he took command of PT-109, which was based at the time on Tulagi Island in the Solomons .
 Of the 24 torpedoes fired that night by eight of the American PTs, not one hit the Japanese convoy . Not one of the 24 torpedoed by the U.S. PTs .
 Around 2:00 p.m. on August 2, the men swam towards Plum Pudding Island 3. miles southwest of the remains of PT-109 . Shunning surrender, they swam around 3.5 miles from the site .
 Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman through the water to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth . Despite re-injuring his back in the collision, Kennedy re-tweets his back . Kennedy was able to pull the badly burned man from the water .
 Kennedy swam 3.75 miles southeast to Olasana Island, which was visible to the crew from their desolate home on Plum Pudding Island . On August 4, 1943, he and his executive officer, Ensign Lenny Thom, assisted his injured and hungry crew on a demanding
 It only took Kennedy a month to recover and return to duty, commanding the PT-59 . Kennedy returned to duty a month later .
 He refitted the vessel into a heavily armed gunboat, mounting two automatic 40mm guns and ten .50 caliber Browning machine guns . He and his crew removed the original torpedo tubes and depth charges from the vessel .
 The plan involved attaching a gunboat to each PT boat section adding gun range and defensive power against barges and shore batteries . The 59 went on to encounter on several occasions from mid-October to mid-November .
 59 acted as a shield from shore fire and protected them as they escaped on two rescue landing craft at the base of the Warrior River at Choiseul Island, taking ten marines aboard and delivering them to safety .
 Kennedy relieved of command of PT-59 on November 18, and sent to the hospital on Tulagi . Under doctor's orders, Kennedy was relieved of his command .
 After receiving treatment for his back injury, he was released from active duty in late 1944 .
 Kennedy was hospitalized at the Chelsea Naval Hospital in Chelsea, Massachusetts, from May to December 1944 . Kennedy spent the time at the hospital .
 On June 12, he was presented the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his heroic actions on August 1–2, 1943, and the Purple Heart Medal . He was presented with the Medal on June 12 . The Purple Heart was awarded for his back injury .
 Kennedy spent three more months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs, a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona . Kennedy spent the rest of 1945 recovering from back injury .
 After the war, Kennedy felt that the medal he had received for heroism was not a combat award . He asked that he be reconsidered for the Silver Star Medal for which he had been recommended initially . Kennedy was awarded a Silver Star for heroism .
 Kennedy's father also requested that his son receive the Silver Star . The Silver Star is awarded for gallantry in action . Kennedy was killed in the Vietnam War .
 On March 1, 1945, Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant . On August 12, 1944, Kennedy's older brother, Joe Jr., was killed while on a special and hazardous air mission for which he had volunteered .
 In 1950, the Department of the Navy offered Kennedy a Bronze Star Medal in recognition of his meritorious service, which he declined . Kennedy was awarded the Bronze Star in 1950 .
 Kennedy's two original medals are currently on display at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Kennedy's original medals were awarded to him in 1963 .
 Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his conduct during and after the loss of PT-109 . Kennedy also received the Purple Heart for being wounded in the war .
 He worked as a correspondent that May and went to Berlin for a second time . He covered the Potsdam Conference and other events in Berlin .
 During this time, he kept a diary in which he wrote that Adolf Hitler ""had a mystery about him in the way he lived and in the manner of his death that will live and grow after him" He speculated that the dictator could still be alive and that Hitler had a mystery .
 Kennedy gave the diary to a research assistant, who auctioned it in 2017 . Kennedy gave it to the research assistant who sold it to an assistant .
 JFK's elder brother Joe had been the family's political standard-bearer and had been tapped by their father to seek the presidency . JFK's brother Joe was tapped by the president to run for the White House .
 JFK was the second eldest of the Kennedy siblings . Joe's death during the war in 1944 changed that course and the assignment fell to JFK . Joe Kennedy died in 1944 .
 James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strongly Democratic 11th congressional district of Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946 . At the urging of Kennedy's father, Curley became mayor of the city of Boston .
 With his father financing and running his campaign under the slogan ""The New Generation Offers a Leader"", Kennedy won the Democratic primary with 42 percent of the vote, defeating ten other candidates .
 Kennedy called for better housing for veterans, better health care for all . Kennedy also called for support for organized labor's campaign for reasonable work hours, a healthy workplace .
 In addition, he campaigned for peace through the United Nations and strong opposition to the Soviet Union . In addition to peace, he was also opposed to the USSR .
 Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the 1946 election, taking 73 percent of the vote . Though Republicans took control of the House in 1946, Kennedy won the general election in 1946 .
 Kennedy was one of several World War II veterans elected to Congress that year . He served in the House for six years, joining the influential Education and Labor Committee .
 He supported the Truman Doctrine as the appropriate response to the emerging Cold War . He concentrated his attention on international affairs, supporting international affairs .
 He opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, which restricted the power of labor unions . He also supported public housing and opposed the labor management law .
 JFK set a goal of speaking in every city and town in Massachusetts prior to 1952 . JFK set out to speak in every town and city in Massachusetts .
 Joseph Kennedy again financed his son's candidacy . John Kennedy's brother Robert F Kennedy emerged as an important member of the campaign as manager .
 The campaign hosted a series of ""teas"" at hotels and parlors across Massachusetts to reach out to women voters . The campaign held the 'teas' at hotels across the state .
 In the presidential election, Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by a margin of 208,000 votes, but Kennedy defeated Lodge by 70,000 . Kennedy won the Senate seat in Massachusetts in the 1960s .
 Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years . The following year, he married Jacqueline Bouvier . Kennedy underwent a series of spinal operations .
 Often absent from the Senate, he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites . He was often absent from Senate .
 During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book about United States senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs . He won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957 for his work .
 Rumors that this work was co-written by his close adviser and speechwriter, Ted Sorensen, were confirmed in his 2008 autobiography . The work was written by Ted Soresen, a close friend of the President .
 At the start of his first term, Kennedy focused on Massachusetts-specific issues by sponsoring bills to help the fishing, textile manufacturing, and watchmaking industries . Kennedy endorsed Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago .
 In 1954, Senator Kennedy voted in favor of the Saint Lawrence Seaway which would connect the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean . Massachusetts politicians argued that the project would cripple New England's shipping industry, including the Port of Boston .
 Kennedy chaired a special committee to select the five greatest United States senators in history so their portraits could decorate the Senate Reception Room . Three years later, Kennedy chaired the committee .
 That same year, Kennedy joined the Senate Labor Racket Committee with his brother Robert to investigate crime infiltration of labor unions . Kennedy was in the Senate that same year .
 Kennedy introduced a bill which became the first major labor relations bill to pass either house since the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947 . Kennedy introduced the bill in 1958, which was the first to pass both houses of Congress .
 The bill dealt largely with the control of union abuses exposed by the McClellan committee . The bill did not incorporate tough Taft–Hartley amendments requested by President Eisenhower .
 Kennedy finished second in the balloting, losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee . Kennedy received national exposure as a result of the vote .
 Kennedy's margin of victory of 874,608 votes was the largest in Massachusetts political history . Kennedy won the election by more than 800,000 votes in Massachusetts .
 President Eisenhower's bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957 was passed in the Senate in 1957 . Kennedy was a senator in the late '60s when he was in office in Washington .
 Kennedy cast a procedural vote against it and this was considered by some to be an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill . Kennedy's decision to vote against the bill was seen by some as a concession to Southern Democrats .
 Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin . Majority Leader Lyndon B Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure .
 He proposed on July 2, 1957, that the U.S. support Algeria's effort to gain independence from France . He proposed that the United States support Algeria .
 In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the Senate . The following year, Kennedy authored A Nation of Immigrants, which analyzed the importance of immigration in the country's history .
 Kennedy's press secretary at the time, Robert E Thompson, put together a film entitled The United States Senator John F Kennedy Story . It exhibited a day in the life of the Senator and showcased his family life as well as the inner workings of his office .
 It was the most comprehensive film produced about Kennedy up to that time . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . The film was shot in New York City .
 In the aftermath of his re-election, Kennedy began preparing to run for president by traveling throughout the U.S. with the aim of building his candidacy for 1960 . Kennedy traveled throughout the United States to build his campaign for president .
 Kennedy wanted to make sure that the shorelines of Cape Cod remained unsullied by future industrialization . Kennedy was a supporter of the Massachusetts Audubon Society .
 Kennedy cosponsored the Cape Cod National Seashore bill with his Republican colleague Senator Leverett Saltonstall . Kennedy's father was a strong supporter of Senator Joseph McCarthy .
 Bobby Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Kennedy's sister Patricia . Bobby Kennedy was also a member of the McCarthy subcommittee .
 In 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, and Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure . Kennedy drafted the speech in support of McCarthy .
 Kennedy was hospitalized at the time of the delivery . The delivery was delayed because Kennedy was in hospital . Kennedy was not delivered because he was hospitalized .
 The speech put Kennedy in the apparent position of participating by ""pairing"" his vote against that of another senator and opposing the censure . Kennedy said he was participating by "pairing" his vote with another senator's vote .
 On January 2, 1960, Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination . Kennedy announced that he would run for president in 1960 . Kennedy ran for the nomination in 1960s .
 Kennedy's charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters . Though some questioned Kennedy's age and experience, some questioned his age .
 Kennedy's vocal support of separation of church and state helped defuse the situation . Many Americans held anti-Catholic attitudes, but Kennedy's support defused the issue .
 His religion also helped him win a devoted following among many Catholic voters . His religion was also a big part of his success .
 Kennedy's presidential campaign was funded by his father and with his younger brother acting as his campaign manager . Kennedy faced several potential challengers for the Democratic nomination, including Lyndon B Johnson, Adlai Stevenson II, and Hubert Humphrey .
 John preferred Ivy League policy advisors, but unlike his father, he enjoyed the give and take of Massachusetts politics . He built a largely Irish team of campaigners, headed by Larry O'Brien and Kenneth O'Donnell .
 Kennedy traveled extensively to build his support among Democratic elites and voters . Kennedy won the Democratic nomination for president in 1968 . Kennedy was a Democrat in New York City .
 Kennedy sought to win several primaries to boost his chances of winning the nomination . At the time, party officials controlled most of the delegates, but several states also held primaries . Kennedy won several primaries in the 1980s to win the Democratic nomination .
 In his first major test, Kennedy won the Wisconsin primary, effectively ending Humphrey's hopes of winning the presidency . Kennedy's victory in Wisconsin was the only major test of his presidential campaign .
 Kennedy and Humphrey faced each other in a competitive West Virginia primary . Kennedy could not benefit from a Catholic bloc, as he had in Wisconsin . Humphrey won the primary in West Virginia .
 Kennedy won the West Virginia primary, impressing many in the party . At the start of the 1960 Democratic National Convention, it was unclear as to whether he would win the nomination . When Kennedy entered the convention, he had the most delegates, but not enough to ensure that he'd win
 Stevenson, the 1952 and 1956 presidential nominee, was very popular in the party . Johnson hoped to win the nomination with the support of party leaders . Stevenson and Johnson were both popular in their respective parties .
 Kennedy's candidacy also faced opposition from former president Harry S Truman, who was concerned about Kennedy's lack of experience . Truman was also concerned about his lack of political experience .
 Kennedy knew that a second ballot could give the nomination to Johnson or someone else . Kennedy ignored opposition of his brother, who wanted him to choose labor leader Walter Reuther, and other liberal supporters .
 He believed that Texas Senator could help him win support from the South . He said he believed that he would win support in the state of Texas .
 At the start of the fall general election campaign, Richard Nixon held a six-point lead in the polls . Richard Nixon was the Republican nominee and incumbent vice president .
 Despite Kennedy's efforts to quell anti-Catholic concerns and similar statements by high-profile Protestant figures, religious bigotry would dog the Democratic candidate throughout the campaign .
 His score among white Protestants would ultimately be lower than Adlai Stevenson's in 1956 . Stevenson lost his election in 1956, though Stevenson lost .
 Some Catholic leaders also expressed reservations about Kennedy . But the vast majority of laypeople rallied to him .
 Kennedy and Nixon squared off against Nixon in the first televised presidential debates in U.S. history . Between September and October, 1960, they squared off in the nation's second televised presidential debate .
 During these programs, Nixon had an injured leg, ""five o'clock shadow"", and was perspiring, making him look tense and uncomfortable . Nixon had a injured leg and a five-minute shadow .
 Kennedy wore makeup and appeared relaxed, which helped the large television audience view him as the winner . Conversely, Kennedy wore make-up and appeared more relaxed .
 On average radio listeners thought that Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw . On average, listeners thought Nixon won or the debate was a draw.
 Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first debate, and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls . The debates are considered a milestone in American political history .
 On Election Day, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century . Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon in a close election in 1968 .
 Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to vote for Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement . They voted for Senator Harry F Byrd of Virginia, as did an elector from Oklahoma .
 Kennedy became the youngest person ever elected to the presidency . Theodore Roosevelt was a year younger at 42 when he automatically assumed the office after the assassination of William McKinley in 1901 . Teddy Roosevelt assumed the presidency after McKinley's assassination .
 For a chronological guide to this subject, see Timeline of the John F Kennedy presidency . For a chronicle of the Kennedy presidency, see timeline of the presidency .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren administers the presidential oath of office to John F Kennedy at the Capitol, January 20, 1961 . Chief Justice Warren was the first president to take office in the White House .
 John F Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961 .
 In his inaugural address, he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens . He famously famously said, "Ask not what your country can do for you"
 The address reflected Kennedy's confidence that his administration would chart a historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs . Kennedy's speech reflected his confidence that the White House would chart an historic course .
 The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities at home and abroad would be one of the main tensions running through the early years of his administration .
 Kennedy brought to the White House a contrast in organization compared to the decision-making structure of former General Eisenhower, and he wasted no time in scrapping Eisenhower's methods .
 He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment . He said he was ready to make an increase in quick decisions needed in such a situation .
 He selected a mixture of experienced and inexperienced people to serve in his cabinet . Mr Obama has been criticised for his lack of experience and experience .
 This was in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda . This was needed in exchange with votes to . expand the . membership of . the . Committee .
 Kennedy focused on immediate and specific issues facing the administration and quickly voiced his impatience with pondering deeper meanings . Kennedy voiced impatience for pondering of deeper meanings of the word .
 At the request of Senator Henry Jackson, Senator John McClellan held 46 days of mostly closed-door hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations investigating the TFX contract .
 During the summer of 1962, Kennedy had a secret taping system set up in the White House, most likely to aid his future memoir . Kennedy's memoir is likely to be a memoir .
 Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by confrontations with the Soviet Union . The Cold War was manifested by proxy contests in the early stages .
 In 1961 he anxiously anticipated a summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . In 1961, he was anxiously awaiting a meeting with the Soviet Premier .
 He reacted aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961 . He started off on the wrong foot by reacting aggressively to the speech in 1961 .
 The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union, but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge . Kennedy interpreted the speech as a challenge .
 His mistake raised tensions going into the Vienna summit of June 1961 . His mistake helped raise tensions going ahead of the summit .
 On the way to the summit, Kennedy stopped in Paris to meet French President Charles de Gaulle . De Gaulle advised him to ignore Khrushchev's abrasive style .
 French president feared the United States' presumed influence in Europe . The French president also feared the U.S. might be trying to influence Europe's borders .
 de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and his family . The French president was assassinated in March 1944 .
 Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna, 1961, and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him, despite the warnings he had received .
 He made it clear that any treaty interfering with U.S. access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war .
 Shortly after Kennedy returned home, the U.S.R. announced its plan to sign a treaty with East Berlin . The treaty abrogated any third-party occupation rights in either sector of the city .
 Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies . Kennedy began intense meetings with the White House .
 In a July 1961 speech, Kennedy announced his decision to add $3.25 billion to the defense budget, along with over 200,000 additional troops . The speech received an 85% approval rating . A month later, both the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of
 Kennedy's initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from the West to West Berlin continued . Kennedy's first reaction to the situation was that it would not matter if free access continued .
 This course was altered when West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the United States . This course of action was changed when the U.S. withdrew from Berlin .
 Kennedy sent Vice President Johnson and Lucius D Clay, along with a host of military personnel, in convoy through East Germany, including Soviet-armed checkpoints . Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960 .
 Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba . The Bay of Pigs Invasion was the White House invasion of Cuba . Kennedy and Vice President Johnson walked on White House grounds .
 U.S.-trained, anti-Castro Cuban exiles led by CIA officers . Plan was for an invasion of Cuba by a counter-revolutionary insurgency .
 The intention was to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people, hoping to remove Castro from power . The intention of the invasion was to instigate a revolt against Castro .
 Fifteen hundred U.S.-trained Cubans, dubbed Brigade 2506, landed on the island of Cuba . Brigade is a group of Cubans trained by the United States in Cuba .
 CIA director Allen Dulles later stated that they thought Kennedy would authorize any action that was needed for success once the troops were on the ground . By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles .
 Cuba released exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine . Twenty months later, Cuba released the captured exiles . Cuba released them in return for food, medicine . Cuba also released captured ex-cameras in exchange .
 The incident made Castro feel wary of the United States and led him to believe that another invasion would take place . Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations .
 When it proved unsuccessful, he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad, he said . He said he believed it was a set-up to make himself look bad when it was unsuccessful .
 He took responsibility for the failure, saying, "We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it"
 The White House formed the Special Group headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Secretary Robert McNamara, and others . Robert Kennedy was appointed to lead a committee to examine the causes of the failure .
 In March 1962, Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods, proposals for false flag attacks against American military and civilian targets . Kennedy rejected the plan to blame the Cuban government in order to gain approval for a war against Cuba .
 The administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962 . However, the administration continued planning the invasion .
 The United States would appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere . The U.S. would also appear to be less committed in the hemisphere.
 There was also some concern from the international community that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of the fact that Eisenhower had placed PGM-19 Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey .
 In concurrence with a majority of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval quarantine . Kennedy decided to quarantine the entire fleet .
 The U.S. Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24 . The decision was made by President Nixon on October 22 .
 Organization of American States gave unanimous support to remove missiles . Organization of America gave unanimous backing to removal of missiles . OAS gave unanimous approval of removing missiles .
 United Nations Secretary General U Thant requested both parties to reverse their decisions and enter a cooling-off period . U.N. secretary general U. Thant: Both parties should reverse their decision and enter an end to the crisis .
 One Soviet-flagged ship was stopped and boarded by Kennedy . Khrushchev agreed, but Kennedy did not . Kennedy agreed .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle missile sites subject to UN inspections . On October 28, he agreed to allow UN inspections of the sites, subject to a UN inspection .
 The crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or after . The United States publicly promised never to invade Cuba and agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, which were by then obsolete .
 It is considered that ""the humanity"" of both Khrushchev and Kennedy prevailed . It was considered that "the humanity" of both Krushchev and Kennedy prevailed.
 Kennedy's approval rating increased from 66% to 77% immediately after his inauguration . His approval rating rose to 77 percent after the inauguration .
 Kennedy sought to contain perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress . Kennedy sought aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region .
 He worked closely with Puerto Rican Governor Luis Muñoz Marín for the development of the Alliance of Progress . He began working to further Puerto Rico's autonomy .
 Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, had begun formulating plans to assassinate Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic . The Eisenhower administration had planned to assassinate both men . The assassination plans were never successful .
 When Kennedy took office, he privately instructed the CIA that any plan must include plausible deniability by the United States . His public position was in opposition .
 In June 1961, the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated . In the days following, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction .
 Robert Kennedy called Bowles ""a gutless bastard"" to his face . Robert Kennedy, who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called him a "gutless bastard" Robert Kennedy said Bowles was a "ugly bastard" to face .
 In one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps was one of Kennedy's first acts in office .
 Through this program, Americans volunteered to help developing nations in fields like education, farming, health care, and construction . The program is based in the United States .
 The organization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 by the year after . The organization was founded in 1963 and grew to 10,500 members .
 Kennedy publicly advocated for greater U.S. involvement in Vietnam in 1956 . Kennedy was a United States senator in 1956, when he was a senator in Washington . Kennedy is a Vietnam veteran .
 Eisenhower considered Laos to be ""the cork in the bottle" regarding the regional threat . Eisenhower emphasized that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority . Laos was considered to be the cork of the bottle by Eisenhower .
 In May, he dispatched Lyndon Johnson to meet with South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem . In May he dispatched Johnson to South Vietnam to meet President Diem in Vietnam .
 Johnson promised Diem more aid to mold a fighting force that could resist the communists . Johnson assured Diem that more aid would be given to him .
 During his presidency, Kennedy continued policies that provided political, economic, and military support to the governments of South Korea and South Vietnam . Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem to defeat of communism in Vietnam .
 "There's no other country in history that's carried this kind of a burden," says President Obama . "There are no other countries in history" that have carried such a burden, he says .
 Other countries have had forces serving outside their own country, but for conquest . Other countries also have forces serving abroad, but not for conquest.
 We have two divisions in South Korea, not to control South-Korea, but to defend it, says South Korean President Lee Lee . Lee: "We have two . divisions in . South Korea not only has two divisions, but also to defend South Korea's sovereignty .
 No other country in the world has ever done that since the beginning of the world . Greece, Rome, Napoleon, and all the rest, always had conquest. Well, no other country . Well, it's not the first time the U.S. has ever had conquest .
 The Viet Cong began assuming a predominant presence in late 1961 . Initially seized the provincial capital of Phuoc Vinh, Vietnam .
 After a mission to Vietnam in October, presidential adviser General Maxwell D Taylor and Deputy National Security Adviser Walt Rostow recommended the deployment of 6,000 to 8,000 U.S. combat troops .
 Kennedy increased the number of military advisers and special forces in the area from 11,000 in 1962 to 16,000 by late 1963 . He was reluctant to order a full-scale deployment of troops .
 In late 1961, Kennedy sent Roger Hilsman, then director of the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to assess the situation in Vietnam . In Vietnam, the U.S. went to Vietnam in 1961 .
 Hilsman met Sir Robert Grainger Ker Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission to South Vietnam, and the Strategic Hamlet Program was formed . The strategic Hamlet program was formed in South Vietnam .
 In April 1963, Kennedy assessed the situation in Vietnam, saying, ""We don't have a prayer of staying in Vietnam" Kennedy and McNamara met in April 1963 .
 Lodge was instructed to try to get Diem and Nhu to step down and leave the country . Lodge was told to try getting Diem, Nhu, to resign and leave country . Nhu was the prime minister .
 Lodge concluded that the only option was to get the South Vietnamese generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu . Lodge: "The only option" was to overthrow Nhu and Diem .
 In October 1963, Kennedy appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell D Taylor to a Vietnamese mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy . Kennedy was unaware that both men were so much at odds that they did not speak to each other on the return flight .
 Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination . Lodge offered to help with coup, but was not involved in assassination . Kennedy ordered Lodge to provide covert assistance .
 McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas . Kennedy was shocked by the deaths of the coup .
 President Kennedy was strongly considering pulling the U.S. out of Vietnam after the 1964 election . Secretary of Defense McNamara made statements in the film ""The Fog of War" that Kennedy was considering pulling out .
 The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position in which Johnson disagreed . The film contains a recording of Kennedy saying he would withdraw .
 At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision was made on Vietnam . No final Vietnam policy was made before Kennedy died .
 It reversed Kennedy's decision to withdraw 1,000 troops from Vietnam . It reaffirmed the policy of assistance to the South Vietnamese .
 JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speech was made in 1963 . JFK spoke at a time of particular vulnerability to the east of Germany .
 At the same time, French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a Franco-West German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence . At the time, the French President was building a French-German counterweight .
 To Kennedy's eyes, this Franco-German cooperation seemed directed against NATO's influence in Europe . Kennedy travelled to West Germany and West Berlin in June 1963 to reinforce the United States alliance .
 On June 26, Kennedy toured West Berlin, culminating in a public speech at West Berlin's city hall . Kennedy toured the city hall in front of hundreds of thousands of enthusiastic Berliners .
 He reiterated the American commitment to Germany and criticized communism . The speech was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience .
 The speech is known for its famous phrase ""Ich bin ein Berliner"" which Kennedy himself had begun to try out in preparation for the trip . Kennedy's famous phrase was known for his famous phrase 'Ich Bin ein ein . Berliner'
 As president, Kennedy initiated the creation of security ties with Israel . He is credited as the founder of the US-Israeli military alliance .
 Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Eisenhower and Truman administrations had enforced on Israel . The arms embargo was lifted by Kennedy's administration . Israel was the only Arab state to have been subject to the embargo .
 In 1963 the Kennedy administration was engaged in a now-declassified diplomatic standoff with the leaders of Israel . The Kennedy administration engaged in the standoff with Israeli leaders .
 Ben-Gurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes . Kennedy wrote that he was skeptical and stated that American support to Israel could be in jeopardy if reliable information was not forthcoming .
 Israeli government resisted U.S. pressure to open nuclear facilities to inspections . Israeli nuclear facilities have not been inspected by the International Atomic Energy Agency . Israeli government has resisted American pressure for inspections .
 In 1962 the United States and Israeli governments had agreed to an annual inspection regime . The U.S. and Israel agreed to the regime in 1962 .
 A science attaché at the Israeli embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been shut down temporarily to mislead American scientists . The Israelis set up false control rooms to show the Americans .
 The documents reveal the deep concern the Kennedy Administration had over Dimona . Kennedy understood the United States and the international community may not be capable of preventing Israel or any nation .
 Rodger Davies concluded in March 1965 that Israel was developing nuclear weapons . Davies was the director of the State Department's Office of Near Eastern Affairs .
 He reported that Israel's target date for achieving nuclear capability was 1968–1969 . He said Israel was aiming to achieve nuclear capability in 1968-1969 .
 On May 1, 1968, President Johnson told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year . Dimona produced enough plutonium for two bombs per year, the U.S. told him .
 The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should accept international supervision of its nuclear program . Israel's nuclear program is overseen by the United States .
 Israeli national interests to an extent were also at odds with Kennedy's endorsement of the United Nations's plan to return a small percentage of displaced Palestinians from the war of 1948 .
 Dag Hammarskjold's plan for Palestinian repatriation particularity disturbed persons who had a hard line view of even Arab resettlement in Israel, or even full repatriation .
 The later plan was spearheaded by the Palestine Conciliation Commission's Dr. Dr. Shira Sheba . Dr. Sheba led the later plan to build a Palestinian settlement .
 Joseph E Johnson, while the United Nations attempted to oversee progression from writing into action . The United Nations tried to oversee the U.N. to oversee progress from writing to action .
 Relations between the U.S. and Iraq became strained following the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, which resulted in the declaration of a republican government led by Brigadier Abd al-Karim Qasim .
 The United Kingdom responded by dispatching 5,000 troops to Kuwait to deter an Iraqi invasion . The U.K. had just granted Kuwait independence on June 19, and its economy was dependent on Kuwaiti oil .
 Kennedy dispatched a United States Navy task force to Bahrain, and the UK, at the urging of the Kennedy administration, brought the dispute to the United Nations Security Council . The proposed resolution was vetoed by the Soviet Union .
 The situation was resolved in October, when British troops were withdrawn and replaced by a 4,000-strong Arab League force . In December 1961, Qasim's government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the partially American-controlled Iraq Petroleum Company 's concessionary holding to those areas
 United States alarmed by the expropriation as well as the recent Soviet veto of an Egyptian-sponsored UN resolution requesting the admittance of Kuwait as UN member state, which they believed were connected .
 In April 1962, the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence there . The guidelines were issued in April 1962 .
 There have been persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup, but declassified documents and testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement . The CIA was actively seeking a suitable replacement for Qasim within the Iraqi military .
 Kennedy administration approved a $55-million arms deal for Iraq . The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and approved the deal .
 He visited the cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross, County Wexford, where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America . He was the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas, the Irish parliament .
 Kennedy later told aides that the trip was the best four days of his life . Kennedy later said it was the most memorable four days he'd spent in the military .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy both reached an informal agreement against nuclear testing in 1961 . The Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons in September 1961 .
 U.S. satellites began delivering images that made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the United States in the arms race . Shortly afterwards, new images were delivered that showed the Soviet Union was significantly behind the U.K.
 In July 1963, Kennedy sent W Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets . Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the United States was of little value as long as the U.S. perceived itself to be at parity .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty . The treaty prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground . The Soviets were reluctant to allow inspections that would verify compliance .
 The United States Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in October 1963 . The U.S. Senate ratified the bill in 1963 . Kennedy signed the bill into law .
 Kennedy added that the top rate should be set at 70% if certain deductions were not eliminated for high-income earners . Kennedy also said that certain deductions should not be eliminated . Kennedy said that the tax rate should also be set for 70% .
 Congress passed few of Kennedy's major programs during his lifetime, but did vote them through in 1964 and 1965 under his successor Johnson .
 Recession of 1960–1961 and Kennedy Slide of 1962 . Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy .
 He presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962 . His first budget in 1961 resulted in the nation's first non-war, non-recession deficit .
 The economy had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office . The economy accelerated notably throughout his administration . Kennedy's administration was one of the most successful presidents in history .
 Despite low inflation and interest rates, the GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% per annum during the Eisenhower administration . The GDP had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office .
 GDP expanded by an average of 5.5% from early-1961 to late-1963 . Inflation remained steady at around 1% and unemployment eased . Unemployment eased at the same time .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy took the position that steel executives had illegally colluded to fix prices . This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until 1969, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time .
 Yale law professor Charles Reich opined in The New Republic that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict United States Steel for collusion so quickly .
 The price increase would have caused a net gain for the GDP as well as a net budget surplus . Nevertheless, the administration's Bureau of Budget reported the price hike would have led to a net surplus .
 The stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedy's election in 1960, dropped 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry took place .
 Victor Feguer was sentenced to death by an Iowa federal court and executed on March 15, 1963 . During his administration, Kennedy oversaw the last federal execution prior to Furman Georgia, a 1972 case that led to a moratorium on federal executions .
 Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by a military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison . Kennedy signed into law HR5143 , which abolished the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder suspects in the District of Columbia .
 The death penalty has not been applied in the District of Columbia since 1957 . It has now been abolished in the city .
 The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s . Civil Rights Movement was a key part of the Civil Rights movement .
 Many schools, especially those in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's decision . Many schools did not .
 The Court also prohibited segregation at other public facilities but it continued nonetheless .
 Kennedy verbally supported racial integration and civil rights . He telephoned Coretta Scott King, wife of the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. during his 1960 presidential campaign . Thurgood Marshall was appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit by Kennedy in May 1961 .
 Robert Kennedy called Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained King's release from prison, which drew additional black support to his brother's candidacy . Robert Kennedy's brother ran for the White House in 1968 .
 Kennedy postponed promised civil rights legislation he made while campaigning in 1960, recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats controlled congressional legislation . Upon taking office in 1961, Kennedy postponed promises he made .
 Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress . Kennedy was concerned with other issues in the early part of his administration, such as the Cold War, Bay of Pigs fiasco, and the situation in Southeast Asia
 Civil rights movement participants, mainly those on the front line in the South, viewed Kennedy as lukewarm . The Freedom Riders, who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south, were repeatedly met with white mob violence .
 Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents . The Freedom Riders were protected by marshals rather than federal troops .
 It established the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity . The committee was established by President Nixon in 1964 .
 Martin Luther King Jr. and his associates produced a document in 1962 calling on Kennedy to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for Civil Rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation . Kennedy was criticized for his slow response to the
 Kennedy issued Executive Order 11063 requiring all federal agencies to prevent racial discrimination in federally-funded subsidized housing in the U.S. The order was issued in 1962 .
 Meredith did finally enroll for a class, and Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier . Meredith did not enroll for the class .
 Kennedy began doubting as to whether the ""evils of Reconstruction"" of the 1860s and 1870s he had been taught or believed in were true . Kennedy began questioning whether Reconstruction was true .
 The instigating subculture during the Ole Miss riot, and many other racially ignited events, was the Ku Klux Klan . The KKK was a subculture that instigated the riot .
 The Boston Housing Authority Board would continue to actively segregate public housing developments in the city during the John F Collins administration . BHA departments engaged in bureaucratic resistance against integration through at least 1966 .
 Both Kennedy and Robert Kennedy were concerned about King's ties to suspected Communists Jack O'Dell and Stanley Levison . King was assassinated in 1968 at the age of 60 .
 His brother Robert and Ted Sorensen pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front . Kennedy's brother and sister pushed him to push for more legislation .
 Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama U.S. National Guard . Wallace had just been federalized by order of the president . Wallace: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights on national television and radio . His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .
 Medgar Evers was shot to death in Mississippi in 1963 . He was the leader of the NAACP in Mississippi . Medgar was assassinated in 1964 .
 The day after Kennedy's TV speech, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two-year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans . As Kennedy had predicted, the day after his TV speech
 Earlier, Kennedy had signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961 . Kennedy signed the order creating a commission on the status of women .
 The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination . Its final report, documenting legal and cultural barriers, was issued in October 1963 .
 On June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, which amended the Fair Labor Standards Act and abolished wage disparity based on sex . Further, the act was amended in 1963, and the act abolished wage disparities based on gender .
 Over a hundred thousand, predominantly African Americans gathered in Washington for the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963 .
 Kennedy personally edited speeches that were inflammatory and agreed the March would be held on a Wednesday and would be over at 4:00 pm . Organizers and Kennedy edited speeches to ensure a peaceful demonstration .
 Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill . Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over .
 Four African American children died in the explosion at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham . Two other children were shot to death in the aftermath of the explosion .
 Due to this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president . The president was outraged by the amendments .
 Gaining Republican support, Senator Dirksen promised to bring legislation to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster . The legislation would prevent a filibuster .
 The legislation was enacted by Kennedy's successor President Lyndon B Johnson, prompted by his memory, after his assassination in November . It enforced voting rights, public accommodations, employment, education, and the administration of justice .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover presented the Kennedy Administration with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists . FBI Director Hoover was suspicious of civil-rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker .
 The FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months . The FBI was concerned by these allegations .
 Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy also warned King to discontinue the suspect associations . King's associations with the Kennedys have been linked to the Kennedy family .
 Robert Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization, in October 1963 . King's associations continued after the associations continued, Kennedy issued the directive .
 Kennedy proposed overhaul of U.S. immigration and naturalization laws to ban discrimination based on national origin . Kennedy proposed an overhaul of American immigration laws in 1960 .
 He saw this proposal as an extension of his planned civil rights agenda as president . He said it was an extension to his planned plans for civil rights .
 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia . Reforms later became law through the immigration and nationality act of 1965 .
 The policy change also shifted the emphasis on the selection of immigrants in favor of family reunification . The new policy shift also shifts the emphasis in selecting immigrants to reunite .
 The late president's brother, Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, helped steer the legislation through the Senate . The bill was passed by the late President Kennedy's brother in Massachusetts .
 Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene and to halt the project . Kennedy declined, citing a critical need for flood control . He cited the need to protect flood waters .
 He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca . He directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement .
 The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration . It was a follow-up to Project Mercury, to be used as a shuttle to an Earth-orbital space station, flights around the Moon, or landing on it .
 As senator, Kennedy had been opposed to the space program and wanted to terminate it . Wiesner was head of the President's Science Advisory Committee . He retained Eisenhower's last science advisor .
 Wiesner was strongly opposed to manned space exploration, having issued a report highly critical of Project Mercury . He was strongly critical of the project .
 President Kennedy was turned down by seventeen candidates for NASA administrator . Webb was an experienced Washington insider who served President Truman as budget director and undersecretary of state . Webb accepted the post after President Kennedy turned down seventeen candidates .
 Webb proved to be adept at obtaining the support of Congress, the President, and the American people . Webb proved that he was adept at getting support from Congress and the President .
 Kennedy persuaded Congress to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act to allow him to delegate his chairmanship to the Vice President . The change was to help keep the politically savvy Johnson occupied .
 Kennedy proposing a program to Congress that will land men on the Moon, May 1961 . Kennedy proposed a program that would send men to the Moon in 1961 .
 Kennedy had suggested international cooperation in space cooperation in 1961 . In 1961 State of the Union address, he had suggested such cooperation .
 Khrushchev declined to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities . The Soviets did not want to reveal their space and rocketry capabilities .
 Early in his presidency, Kennedy was poised to dismantle the manned space program but postponed any decision out of deference to Johnson . Johnson was a strong supporter of the space program in the Senate .
 Kennedy's advisors speculated that a Moon flight would be prohibitively expensive, and he was considering plans to dismantle the Apollo program due to its cost . However, this quickly changed on April 12, 1961, when Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in
 Kennedy was eager for the U.S. to take the lead in the Space Race . Kennedy now became eager for national security and prestige, for reasons of national security .
 On April 20, he sent a memo to Johnson, asking him to look into the status of America's space program . NASA is looking into programs that could offer NASA the opportunity to catch up .
 His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the U.S. would achieve it first . The memo concluded a manned moon landing was likely to happen in the near future .
 I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth .
 On November 21, 1962, in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator Webb and other officials, Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige . Kennedy: We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but
 Johnson assured him that lessons learned from the space program had military value as well as military value . Johnson assured Johnson that lessons from space program were also valuable military lessons learned .
 Khrushchev again declined, and the Soviets did not commit to a manned Moon mission until 1964 . The mission was the first manned mission to the Moon in 1964 .
 On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first manned spacecraft on the Moon . Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound in 1968 .
 For a chronological guide to this subject, see Timeline of the John F Kennedy assassination . For a chronicle of the assassination, visit the timeline of the event .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas at 12:30 p.m. Saturday . President Kennedy and the Connallys were in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination .
 He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy, and was shot dead by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be prosecuted . Jack Ruby shot him in the head after he refused to admit shooting anyone .
 Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967 . Ruby was sentenced to death in 1966 for his role in the murder . Ruby's new trial was being set for January 1, 1967, while the date was set .
 President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was created by Chief Justice Earl Warren to investigate the assassination .
 The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy . Oswald was found guilty of killing Kennedy in 1963 .
 The assassination proved to be a pivotal moment in U.S. history because of its impact on the nation, and the ensuing political repercussions . The assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln was a pivotal event in American history .
 A 2004 Fox News poll found that 66% of Americans thought there had been a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy . 74% thought that there was a cover-up, according to the poll .
 A Gallup Poll in November 2013 showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought Oswald did it alone .
 In 1979, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that it believed that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy . One third of the committee dissenting, with one third dissenting, the committee believed Kennedy was assassinated .
 The Justice Department concluded ""no persuasive evidence can be identified to support the theory of a conspiracy"" in the Kennedy assassination .
 A Requiem Mass was celebrated for Kennedy at the Cathedral of St. Louis Cathedral . State funeral of John F Kennedy was held at the United States Capitol Building .
 Kennedy was interred in a small plot, 20 by 30 ft., in Arlington National Cemetery . Afterwards, Kennedy was buried in a tiny plot in Arlington, Virginia .
 Over a period of three years, an estimated 16 million people visited his grave . Over a total of 16 million visitors to his grave visited him .
 On March 14, 1967, Kennedy's remains were disinterred and moved only a few feet away to a permanent burial plot and memorial . Kennedy was moved to a new burial plot in March 1967 .
 It was from this memorial that the graves of both Robert and Ted Kennedy were modeled . The graves were modeled by this memorial in honor of the Kennedy family .
 The honor guard at Kennedy's graveside was the 37th Cadet Class of the Irish Army . Kennedy's grave was marked by a guard of honor guards .
 Jacqueline Kennedy requested the Irish Army to be the honor guard at her husband's funeral . Jacqueline and their two deceased minor children were later interred in the same plot .
 Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States . The Kennedy family has produced a president, three senators, three ambassadors, and multiple other representatives and politicians .
 While a Congressman, Kennedy embarked on a seven-week trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel in 1951 . During that trip, Kennedy became close with his then 25-year-old brother Bobby, as well as his 27-year old sister Pat . The trip was a
 The brothers had previously seen little of each other . Because they were several years apart in age, they had previously been separated .
 This 25,000-mile trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in them becoming best friends . The pair became best friends after spending time together .
 Bobby would eventually play a major role in his brother's career, serving as attorney general and presidential advisor . Bobby would later serve as president of the United States .
 Bobby would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination . Ted, Bobby and Ted Kennedy brothers ran for president before their deaths .
 Kennedy came in third in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century . Kennedy was named the most admired person in the world .
 Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee ""Jackie"" Bouvier, when he was a congressman . The First Family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, in 1962 . The Kennedy family was born in 1963 .
 JFK's daughter Caroline was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family . After suffering a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956, their daughter Caroline is only surviving .
 Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to the presidents and first ladies who preceded them . Both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians .
 In 1961 the Radio-Television News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor, the Paul White Award, in recognition of his open relationship with the media . The award was presented to Kennedy in 1961 .
 Kennedy brought new art and furniture to the White House and directed its restoration . Kennedy also directed the restoration of the art and furnishings .
 On the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house . Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home .
 Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album sold about four million copies . The album parodied the president, the first lady, their family, and the administration . Meader: "First Family" sold about 4 million copies.
 Kennedy was plagued by a series of childhood diseases, including whooping cough, chicken pox, measles, and ear infections . Despite a privileged youth, Kennedy suffered from a variety of diseases .
 JFK spent a considerable amount of time in bed convalescing after suffering from ailments . JFK spent the rest of his life convaling from the ailments of his ailments .
 In September 1947, while Kennedy was 30 and in his first term in Congress, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder .
 Davis estimated Kennedy would not live for another year, while Kennedy himself hoped he could live for an additional ten . Davis estimated that Kennedy would live another year . Davis said Kennedy hoped to live for ten more years .
 Kennedy also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery . Kennedy also had surgery on his back pain .
 Kennedy appears to have been taking a combination of drugs to treat severe back pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Kennedy's condition may have had diplomatic repercussions .
 The combination included hormones, animal organ cells, steroids, vitamins, enzymes, and amphetamines . Possible potential side effects included hyperactivity, hypertension, impaired judgment, nervousness, and mood swings .
 Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by no fewer than three doctors, one of whom, Max Jacobson, was unknown to the other two . Jacobson's mode of treatment was controversial and used for the most severe bouts of back pain .
 Kennedy preferred the former because he was short on time and desired immediate relief . Kennedy preferred to the latter because he wanted immediate relief and needed immediate relief.
 Kennedy did stretching exercises for his back three times a week . During that time, the president's physician, George Burkley, set up some gym equipment in the White House basement .
 Details of Kennedy's medical problems were not publicly disclosed during his lifetime . Details of these and other medical problems weren't disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime .
 The President's primary White House physician, George Burkley, realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell, including the excessive use of steroids and amphetamines, were medically inappropriate . Burkley removed Kennedy from their care .
 Dallek was able to consult a collection of Kennedy-associated papers from the years 1955–1963 . Dr. Kennedy-related papers include X-rays and prescription records from the files of Dr. Robert Kennedy .
 During his presidential years Kennedy suffered from high fevers, stomach, colon, and prostate issues, abscesses, high cholesterol; and adrenal problems .
 His sister Rose Marie ""Rosemary"" Kennedy was born in 1918 with intellectual disabilities . She underwent a prefrontal lobotomy at age 23, leaving her incapacitated for the rest of her life until her death in 2005 .
 Another sister Kathleen Agnes ""Kick"" Kennedy died in a plane crash en route to France in 1948 . Another sister Kathleen Agnes "Kick" Kennedy was also killed in the crash in 1948.
 A son, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, died two days after birth in August 1963 . The president's son was born in 1963 and died in 1963 .
 Marilyn Monroe serenaded Kennedy with ""Happy Birthday, Mr President"" Kennedy was single in the 1940s while having relationships with Danish journalist Inga Arvad and actress Gene Tierney . Kennedy was also single in 1940s .
 During his time as a Senator, he had an affair with Gunilla von Post, who wrote that the future President tried to end his marriage to be with her before having any children with his wife .
 Kennedy was also reported to have had affairs with women such as Marilyn Monroe,Judith Campbell,Mary Pinchot Meyer,Marlene Dietrich,Mimi Alford, and Pamela Turnure .
 People at the White House switchboard noted that Monroe had called Kennedy during 1962 . Monroe called Kennedy in 1962 .
 J Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, received reports about Kennedy's indiscretions . Hoover received reports from Kennedy that he had affairs with Kennedy . Hoover was FBI director at the time of Kennedy's infidelity . Hoover: Kennedy's affair with Kennedy was a scandal .
 According to historian Michael Beschloss, in July 1963, Hoover reportedly informed Bobby Kennedy about the affair . Hoover reportedly told Bobby Kennedy that the affair was an affair .
 Bobby Kennedy reportedly took the matter seriously seriously to raise it with leading Democratic and Republican figures in Congress . Kennedy reportedly raised the matter sufficiently seriously with leading Democrats and Republicans in Congress.
 Former Secret Service agent Larry Newman remembered ""morale problems"" that the president's indiscretions engendered within the Secret Service . Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters .
 Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from public revelations about his sex life . Kennedy was Kennedy's ""oldest and best friend"" from the time they attended Choate together .
 The Kennedy half dollar was first issued in 1964 . Television was the primary source that kept people informed of the events that surrounded Kennedy's assassination .
 Kennedy helped inaugurate network television's first half-hour nightly evening newscast on September 2, 1963 .
 In this sense his assassination was the first major TV news event of its kind . The assassination was a major TV event in which he was assassinated .
 TV coverage united the nation, interpreting what went on, and creating memories of this space in time . CNN.com will feature the best of the day's coverage of the World War II .
 Many vividly remember where they were when they first learned the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, before it and the September 11 attacks after it .
 Many people have also spoken of the shocking news, compounded by the pall of uncertainty about the identity of the assassin, the possible instigators, and the causes of the killing, as an end to innocence . In retrospect, it has coalesced with other changes of the tumultuous decade of the
 Don't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot, Camelot . Don't forget that once, for a brief moment, once Camelot was a shining moment .
 There'll be great presidents again ... but there will never be another Camelot . On television, this era was represented by Mary Tyler Moore's Dick Van Dyke Show character .
 The United States Special Forces had a special bond with Kennedy . Kennedy was the President of the U.S. President .
 General Michael D Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington National Cemetery . General Healy spoke at the commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Kennedy's death .
 Kennedy was the first of six presidents to have served in the U.S. Navy . One of the enduring legacies of his administration was the creation in 1961 of another special forces command .
 President Kennedy's successor pushed the Civil Rights Act through a bitterly divided Congress by invoking the slain president's memory . President Lyndon B Johnson pushed the bill through by invoking Kennedy's memory and invoking his memory .
 President Kennedy's continuation of Truman and Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to South Vietnam left the door open for President Johnson's escalation of the conflict . This civil rights law ended what was known as the ""Solid South""
 At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam . Historians, cabinet members, and writers to continue to disagree on whether the Vietnam conflict would have escalated to the point it did had he survived .
 Vietnam War contributed greatly to a decade of national difficulties, amid violent disappointment on the political landscape . The Vietnam War was a major factor in the Vietnam War .
 Many of Kennedy's speeches are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office, he is considered by many Americans to be in the upper echelon of presidents . Despite his short term, and the lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term, many Americans still
 In 2018 The Times published an audio recreation of the ""watchmen on the walls of world freedom"" speech he was scheduled to deliver at the Dallas Trade Mart in 1963 .
 Kennedy also posthumously received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963 . Kennedy was awarded the Medal of Honor for his work in Washington, D.C.
 Statue of John F Kennedy by Isabel McIlvain on grounds of Massachusetts State House in Boston; dedicated on May 29, 1990 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum on Columbia Point in Boston, Boston .
 Oral History Interview – JFK #1, 2/6/1967 | JFK Library"". www.jfklibrary.org.com .
 Archived from the original on December 4, 2008 . O'Brien 2005, 645.
 Gerhard Peters and John T Woolley, The American Presidency Project. The project is based on the work of the American presidency .
 John F Kennedy's Address Before the 18th General Assembly of the United Nations . Dallek 2003, 654. John F. Kennedy's address before the UN General Assembly .
 Kennedy's final days reveal a man who craved excitement, says Forbes . Kennedy and Khrushchev were the two most powerful men .
 American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom. American Politics . American Politics. American politics . American politics and African American . Quest for . Universal Freedom . African American. Freedom .
 Manchester, William. Lynch, Grayston L Decision for Disaster: Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs . Manchester: The Bay of the Pigs was a major source of controversy .
 The Kennedy Half-Century: The Lasting Legacy of John F Kennedy . Schlesinger, Arthur Jr. A Life of Kennedy; hostile biography Sabato, Larry J. Sabato: The Kennedy half-century .
 Goldzwig, Steven R and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds. A Portrait of Power . The author of the book, "Portrait of the Power"
 Radio coverage of the assassination of President Kennedy as broadcast on WCCO-AM Radio and CBS Radio .
 Patrick Bouvier Kennedy Jack Schlossberg is the son of John Vernou Bouvier III . Janet Lee Bouvier Lee Radziwill was married to Hugh D Auchincloss . Edith Ewing Bouvier was the wife of Edith Beale .
 7th district Leonard Ward Sr. Bates Harrington Mavroules Torkildsen Tierney Moulton . 7th District Leonard Ward Jr. Bates .
 Averell Harriman, Thich Thien Hoa and Thich Tinh Khiet were the first two presidents of the U.S. House of Representatives . Thich was elected to the Senate in 1903 .
 Margaret Louise Coit Merlo J Pusey won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography . William S White Talbot Faulkner Hamlin, John F Kennedy Douglas Southall Freeman, John Alexander Carroll and Mary Wells Ashworth .
 E Hoover Johnson Humphrey Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War 2 Pepper Reagan Ford Inouye McCain Bush Cummings 3 Lewis Ginsburg 3,4 Dole Reid Young 3Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda .