 Fidel's Cuba in facts and figures"",""description"":""The beard, the cigars, cigars, fatigues, the interminable speeches not to mention the plucky defiance in the face of the big bad bully from just across the water"
 There's so much about Fidel Castro that we're going to miss when he's gone, and that moment, it seems, is not far off . Fidel Castro will be remembered as a leader of the Cuban revolution in Cuba .
 Scientist contaminated Fidel's favourite brand with botulinum toxin, but the cigars were never delivered . Scientist contaminated the cigars with the toxin .
 CIA planned to pack a mollusc with explosives and paint it in bright colours to attract Castro's attention . Exploiting Castro's love of scuba diving, the CIA wanted to use it to attract his attention .
 Plans to send Castro scuba-diving equipment contaminated with deadly fungi were never followed through . Plans were intended to send contaminated equipment to Castro's home .
 Agents planned to spray Castro's TV studio with the drug in an attempt to induce a humiliating psychedelic episode live on air . Castro's television studio was set to be sprayed with the psychedelic drug .
 She aborted the mission when they dissolved, but Castro, who was aware of the plot, handed her his gun . Castro was aware that she was trying to kill him, but she aborted it .
 It is illegal to buy a computer without government approval, which is rarely granted to ordinary Cubans . Cubans are rarely granted permission to buy computers without approval .
 Critics call it an illegal attempt to destabilise Cuba . It remains in place 44 years later . Critics say it is illegal to keep it in place .
 Washington says it will lift the embargo only if Havana embraces democratic reforms . Angel Castro, father of Fidel Castro, is one of Cuba's most prominent figures .
 Only emerged from his older brother's shadow when Fidel fell ill last year . Fidel emerged from the shadow of his brother when he was ill .
 Thousands celebrated the announcement of her brother's failing health . Criticised Miami's exile community after thousands celebrated the news .
 An Exile's Memoir of Cuba provoked a lawsuit from Castro's loyal sister, Juanita . Juanita Castro's sister, Fidel Castro, sued her for defamation of her sister .
 Rotterdam designer Merel Van't Wout persuaded Castro out of his fatigues and fitted him for several suits in dark blue, grey and dark green . Castro wore the suits in the 1990s, according to reports .
 His father is a waiter but in 2003 was elected to Cuba's National Assembly . He is also a member of the National Assembly in Cuba . His father was a waiter before being elected to the Assembly .
 A room in the town's museum is dedicated to Elian Castro . Castro was filmed at his seventh birthday party at his party .
 The 45 sq miles of Cuban territory was ceded in perpetuity to the United States under a treaty signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1903 . It is now on permanent display next to the Museum of the Revolution in Havana .
 More money is spent on meals for detainees than on U.S. troops stationed there . The United States is spending more money on meals than on troops stationed in Afghanistan .
 The library has 3,500 volumes available in 13 languages . The most requested books are the Harry Potter series .
 He joined Castro's movement to topple Cuban President Batista and became a key figure in the revolution . He became a leader in Cuba's revolution against the Batista regime .
 Castro flatly denies reports in a U.S. newspaper that he has been treated for a potentially fatal brain disease . Castro denies reports that he is being treated for the potentially fatal condition . Castro says he is not suffering from a brain condition .
 Two hours into a speech being broadcast live from Havana, Castro faints at the podium . Castro's speech was broadcast live on CNN . Castro was speaking at the time of his death .
 Denying rumours of Castro's failing health, his doctor says the Cuban leader could live at least to the age of 140 . Eugenio Selman Housein says Castro could live to at least 140 years .
 Castro trips and falls as he walks from the podium, shattering a kneecap and fracturing his right arm . Castro falls on TV at the end of a televised public speech . Castro's right arm was fractured in the fall .
 A leaked CIA report concludes that Castro is suffering from Parkinson's disease . CIA report concluded that Castro has Parkinson's Disease . Castro is believed to be suffering from the disease .
 Castro rejects the diagnosis, which apparently is based on analysis of his television appearances . Castro rejects it, saying the diagnosis is based upon analysis of television appearances.
 A spokesman for Castro announces the provisional transfer of power to Castro's brother, Raul . Raul Castro will take over from Fidel Castro, a spokesman for the Castro family .
 Castro is believed to have cancer of the colon, stomach or pancreas . U.S. officials say Castro is unlikely to survive through 2007 . Castro is expected to live through the next year .
 Sources close to Castro say he is refusing treatment for stomach cancer and could be dead by Christmas . Diplomatic sources close to the Castro family say he could die by the end of the year .
 Cuba has been accused of publishing articles or giving interviews critical of economic, social or human rights matters in Cuba . The prisoners have also been sentenced to prison terms for publishing articles critical of the Cuban government .
 President Obama declares naval blockade around Cuba as both sides prepare for war . He declares a naval blockade of Cuba .
 Khrushchev agrees to withdraw the missiles in return for a U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba and the removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The missiles were removed from Turkey and removed from Cuba .
 Kennedy agrees publicly to the first demand, and privately to the second . Kennedy agrees to the third demand, but not the second, he says privately .
 The bottom of the Reporters Without Borders 2006 Press Freedom Index:162.162. Press freedom in Iraq .
 In 2003, 27 independent journalists were tried summarily and imprisoned in a wide-ranging crackdown on political dissent . North Korea is known for its crackdown on dissent, including a crackdown on journalists .
 Cuba is one of the few countries in the world to deny the International Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons . Castro himself served two years of a 15-year sentence handed down after his failed attempt to topple President Batista .
 October 1953, while on trial for the failed rebel attack that launched the Cuban Revolution, was on trial . October 1953 was the Cuban leader's trial for a failed attack that started the Cuban revolution .
 Pope John Paul II became the first pontiff to visit Cuba in 1998 . In 1962 Pope John XXIII excommunicated the Cuban leader . In 1998, Pope Paul II visited Cuba for the first time .
 In 2005 Castro visited Havana's cathedral to mourn the Pope's death . Castro's younger brother is acting President .
 Raul, 75, has a reputation as Fidel's enforcer . Less charismatic than his brother, Raul is less charismatic than Fidel's brother .
 He was a committed socialist before Fidel Castro and played a key role in the revolution . He was committed to the socialist movement and was a key figure in the uprising .
 He draped a white handkerchief over the yellow light that would, after five minutes, signal the end of his allotted time, to begin his speech .
 He went on to speak for precisely five minutes, before removing the handkerchief and leaving the stage .
 Raul Castro, Fidel's 75-year-old brother and acting President, is Fidel's designated successor . His rule is expected to be transitional . Felipe Perez Roque, Foreign minister, is the post-CASTRO successor .
 Formerly Castro's representative at the UN and Fidel's chief advisor on U.S. relations . Fidel Castro was Fidel's top advisor on United States relations .
 Less well known outside Cuba but a key player in the country's economic affairs . Key player in Cuba's political affairs .
 Instrumental in post-Soviet economic reforms and recently secured a subsidised supply of oil from Venezuela . Recently secured subsidy from Venezuela for subsidised oil .
 Ran Cuba's nuclear energy programme until he was dismissed in the early 1990s . Ran the country's nuclear power programme until his dismissal in the 1990s.
 Recently appointed as an adviser to his father, to whom he bears a striking resemblance . George Galloway has been appointed as a senior adviser to the Scottish politician .
 During a 1998 trip to Havana, the supermodel compared Castro with Nelson Mandela . The supermodel also compared Castro to Mandela .
 The retired Argentinian footballer has a tattoo of Castro on his left leg . The former Argentinian international has also been tattooed with Castro's name .
 In 2005 he secured a rare interview with the Cuban leader on his talk show La Noche del 10 . In 2005, he secured an interview with Cuban president on his show .
 The former Canadian Prime Minister forged a friendship with Castro Castro in the 1970s . Castro was the leader of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Castro and Jimmy Carter attended Trudeau's funeral in Montreal in 2000 . Castro and Carter had a rare encounter with U.S. President Jimmy Carter in Canada .
 The acclaimed director praised Castro while promoting his film Comandante in 2003 . He praised Castro for his role in the country's second war .
 Cuba is a popular destination for American tourists . Direct flights are only available with the permission of the United States government . Cuba has a reputation for sex tourists .
 In 2004 President Bush accused Castro of ""welcoming"" the trade . In 2004 United States President Bush said Castro welcomed the trade trade .
 In May last year George Galloway appeared on Cuban TV to defend Castro .
 An estimated one-sixth of Cuba's 500,000 cars were imported from the United States in the 1950s . Some claim the true figure is in fact much higher, pointing to 'the Comandante's reserves'
 The Castropedia: Fidel's Cuba in facts and figures . The beard, the cigars, the fatigues, the interminable speeches not to mention the plucky defiance in the face of the big bad bully .