 In the Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro and an associated group of revolutionaries toppled the ruling government of Fulgencio Batista, forcing Batista out of power on 1 January 1959 . Fidel Castro is one of the most prominent figures in Cuba .
 Castro went on to serve as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 . Castro had already been an important figure in Cuban society .
 Castro officially became President of the Council of State in 1976 . Castro was President of State and President of Council of Ministers . Castro became President in 1976, officially becoming President of Cuba .
 He retained the title until 2008, when the presidency was transferred to his brother, Raúl Castro . Castro was the first Cuban to hold the presidency .
 Cuba attained international prominence under Fidel Castro's rule, for reasons including his staunch belief in communism and his criticisms of other international figures . Cuba's economic and social changes were initiated by Castro's regime .
 Castro's Cuba became a key element in the Cold War struggle between the U.S. and its allies versus the Soviet Union . Castro was a key figure in the struggle against the Soviet Russia in the 1950s and 1950s .
 Castro's desire to take the offensive against capitalism and spread communist revolution ultimately led to the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces fighting in Africa . Castro wanted to spread the communist revolution against capitalism . The Cuban revolutionary armed forces fought in Africa in the 1960s .
 His aim was to create many Vietnams, reasoning that American troops bogged down throughout the world could not fight any single insurgency effectively . He wanted to create more Vietnam, thinking that U.S. troops would not be able to fight a single insurgency .
 An estimated 7,000–11,000 Cubans died in conflicts in Africa . Castro died of natural causes in late 2016 in Havana .
 Castro's ideas continue to be the primary foundation and manner in which the Cuban government functions to this day . The Cuban government continues to rely on his ideas to govern its government .
 Castro is seen in Washington, D.C., arriving at the MATS Terminal, in April 1959 . Castro was the Cuban president of the United States from 1959 to 1961 .
 On February 16, 1959, Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba . Castro accepted the position on the condition that the Prime Minister's powers be increased . Castro's powers were increased .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower avoided meeting Fidel Castro . He was instead met by Vice President Richard Nixon, a man Castro instantly disliked .
 Castro traveled to Canada, Trinidad, Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina . Castro attended an economic conference in Buenos Aires, Argentina .
 Large land-holdings were broken up and redistributed . An estimated 200,000 peasants received title deeds . Large land holdings broken up .
 Castro broke the control of the well-off landowning class over Cuba's agriculture . To Castro, this was an important step that broke the . control of . the well off landowns . class . Castro: This was the . important step to break the control . of the
 Though popular among the working class, it alienated many middle-class supporters . Though popular with the working-class, it was also popular with middle class supporters .
 Castro appointed himself president of the National Tourist Industry as well . Castro also appointed himself as head of the national tourist industry .
 He introduced unsuccessful measures to encourage African-American tourists to visit . The island was advertised as a tropical paradise free of racial discrimination .
 Judges and politicians had their pay reduced while low-level civil servants saw theirs raised . Changes to state wages were implemented; judges and politicians were reduced .
 In March 1959, Castro ordered rents for those who paid less than $100 a month halved . The measures were implemented to increase the Cuban people's purchasing powers . Castro ordered the halved rents in Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro appointed advocates of Marxism-Leninism to senior government and military positions . Productivity decreased, and the country's financial reserves were drained within only two years .
 Air Force commander Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz defected to the United States . President Urrutia denounced the defection but publicly expressed concern with the rising influence of Marxism .
 Over 500,000 Castro-supporters surrounded the Presidential Palace demanding Urrutia's resignation, which was duly received . Castro supporters surrounded the Palace demanding the resignation .
 Castro used radio and television to develop a ""dialogue with the people" during 1960 testimony to the U.S. Senate . Castro posed questions and made provocative statements .
 His regime remained popular with workers, peasants and students, who constituted the majority of the country's population . The opposition came primarily from the middle class .
 Thousands of doctors, engineers and other professionals emigrated to Florida in the U.S. causing an economic brain drain . Florida is home to thousands of doctors and engineers, many of whom have emigrated .
 Castro's government cracked down on opponents of his government, and arrested hundreds of counter-revolutionaries . Castro cracked down, cracked down and arrested opponents of the government .
 Castro's government was characterized by the use of psychological torture . Prisoners were subject to solitary confinement, rough treatment, and threatening behavior . Castro was the leader of the Castro government .
 Militant anti-Castro groups, funded by exiles, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Dominican government, undertook armed attacks and set up guerrilla bases in Cuba's mountainous regions .
 This led to a six-year Escambray Rebellion that lasted longer and involved more soldiers than the revolution . The rebellion led to the death of more than half a million people .
 The government won with superior numbers and executed those who surrendered . "The government won," the government said .
 Pro-Castro printers' trade union disrupted editorial staff . After conservative editors and journalists expressed hostility towards the government, the union disrupted staff .
 In January 1960, the government proclaimed that each newspaper would be obliged to publish a ""clarification"" written by the printers' union at the end of any articles critical of the government . Thus began press censorship in Castro's Cuba .
 Castro and Che Guevara marched through the streets in protest at the La Coubre explosion in March 1960 .
 Castro agreed to provide USSR with sugar, fruit, fibers, and hides, in return for crude oil, fertilizers, industrial goods, and a $100 million loan . Meeting with Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan .
 Cuba's government ordered the country's refineries to process Soviet oil, but under pressure from the United States government, they refused . The refineries were then controlled by the U.S. corporations Shell, Esso and Standard Oil . They refused to process the Soviet oil .
 Castro nationalized most U.S.-owned assets on the island, including banks and sugar mills . In retaliation, the United States cancelled its import of Cuban sugar, provoking Castro to nationalize most of Cuba's assets .
 He ended this speech with ""¡Patria o Muerte!"" The proclamation was a proclamation that he made much use of in ensuing years .
 President Eisenhower authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to overthrow Castro's government . Inspired by their earlier success with the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, on 17 March 1960, President Eisenhower secretly authorized the CIA to overthrow the government of Castro .
 The Mafia were aggrieved that Castro's government closed down their businesses in Cuba . He provided them with a budget of $13 million and permitted them to ally with the Mafia .
 On 13 October 1960, the United States prohibited the majority of exports to Cuba, initiating an economic embargo . The embargo was initiated by the U.S. in October 1960 . Cuba was the first country to open an embassy in Cuba .
 On 16 December, the United States ended its import quota of Cuban sugar, the country's primary export . The U.S. ended its trade quota of sugar in December .
 Offended by the attitude of the elite Shelburne Hotel, he and his entourage stayed at the cheap, run-down Hotel Theresa in the impoverished area of Harlem .
 Relations between Castro and Khrushchev were warm; they led the applause to one another's speeches at the General Assembly . Relations between the two men were warm .
 In 1959, he spent $120 million on Soviet, French and Belgian weaponry . He feared a U.S.-backed coup and in 1959 he spent millions on weapons .
 By early 1960 the Cuban government had doubled the size of the Cuban armed forces . The government was intent on constructing the largest army in Latin America .
 Fearing counter-revolutionary elements in the army, the government created a People's Militia to arm citizens favorable to the revolution . The Militia trained at least 50,000 supporters in combat techniques . The militia was created in order to arm supporters favorable to revolution .
 In September 1960, they created the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution . They implemented neighborhood spying to weed out ""counter-revolutionary" activities .
 They organized health and education campaigns, and were a conduit for public complaints . They also organized health, education campaigns .
 Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy, in which the Cuban populace could assemble en masse at demonstrations and express their democratic will . Castro proclaimed that the new government would allow the Cuban people to express their will .
 He rejected the need for elections, claiming that representative democratic systems served the interests of socio-economic elites . As a result, he rejected elections as a result of the need to be held .
 U.S. Secretary of State Christian Herter said Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of communist rule . Castro's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba's standard of living, often to detriment of economic development .
 Major emphasis was placed on education, and under the first 30 months of Castro's government, more classrooms were opened than in previous 30 years .
 Health care was nationalized and expanded, with rural health centers and urban polyclinics opening up across the island, offering free medical aid . Rural health centers opened up across island, with free medical assistance .
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion and embracing socialism . There was no doubt about who the victors were. There was... no doubts about who was the victor were.
 The United States responded by ending diplomatic relations, and increasing CIA funding for exiled dissidents . Militants began attacking ships trading with Cuba, and bombed factories, shops, and sugar mills .
 Both Eisenhower and Kennedy supported a CIA plan to aid a dissident militia, the Democratic Revolutionary Front, to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro . The plan resulted in the Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 .
 On 15 April, CIA-supplied B-26's bombed three Cuban military airfields . The U.S. announced that the perpetrators were defecting Cuban air force pilots, but Castro exposed these claims as false flag misinformation .
 CIA and Democratic Revolutionary Front had based a 1,400-strong army, Brigade 2506, in Nicaragua . This was his first announcement that the government was socialist .
 Brigade 2506 landed along Cuba's Bay of Pigs, engaged in a firefight with a local revolutionary militia . At night, the brigade landed along the bay of Pigs and engaged in an exchange of fire with revolutionary militia.
 Castro ordered Captain José Ramón Fernández to launch the counter-offensive, before taking personal control himself . Castro ordered Captain Jos. Ramón Fernandez Fernandez to take control of the situation himself .
 Castro forced the Brigade's surrender on 20 April . After bombing the invader's ships and bringing in reinforcements, Castro forced his troops to surrender .
 The 1189 captured rebels were put on trial for crimes allegedly committed before the revolution . Others were returned to the United States in exchange for medicine and food valued at United States $25 million .
 Castro's victory was a powerful symbol across Latin America . But it also increased internal opposition among the middle-class Cubans who had been detained in the run-up to the invasion .
 Most were freed within a few days, many left Cuba for the United States . Many established themselves in Florida after being freed .
 The USSR was hesitant regarding Castro's embrace of socialism . Relations with the Soviets deepened after Castro's success in Cuba .
 Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling and while the first Soviet technicians arrived in June Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize . Fidelito Castro was given the Lenin peace Prize .
 Castro proclaimed himself a Marxist-Leninist in December 1961 . In his Second Declaration of Havana he called on Latin America to rise up in revolution . In December 1961, Castro declared himself Marxist Leninist .
 The U.S. successfully pushed the Organization of American States to expel Cuba . The Soviets privately reprimanded Castro for recklessness, although he received praise from China . In response, the United States successfully pushed Cuba to expel .
 The ORI began shaping Cuba using the Soviet model, persecuting political opponents and perceived social deviants such as prostitutes and homosexuals . Cuba allied with the wealthier Soviets, who offered economic and military aid .
 Government officials spoke out against Castro's homophobia, but many gays were forced into the Military Units to Aid Production . Castro took responsibility for and regretted as a ""great injustice"" in 2010 .
 By 1962, Cuba's economy was in steep decline, a result of poor economic management and low productivity . The United States trade embargo and the U.S. trade embargo were a major factor in the decline .
 Security reports indicated that many Cubans associated austerity with the ""Old Communists"" of the PSP . Castro considered a number of them – namely Aníbal Escalante and Blas Roca – unduly loyal to Moscow .
 Castro's relationship with Che Guevara became strained as the latter became increasingly anti-Soviet and pro-Chinese . On a personal level, Castro was increasingly lonely .
 Khrushchev wanted to install Soviet R-12 MRBM nuclear missiles on Cuba to even the power balance . Militarily weaker than NATO, the Soviet Union wanted to make it stronger than NATO . The missiles were installed in Cuba .
 Castro agreed, believing it would guarantee Cuba's safety and enhance the cause of socialism . Although conflicted, Castro agreed . Castro agreed to Cuba's first socialist revolution .
 Only Castro brothers, Guevara, Dorticós and security chief Ramiro Valdés knew the full plan . Undertaken in secrecy, only the Castro brothers knew the plan .
 The United States saw the missiles as offensive, though Castro insisted they were defensive . Castro insisted the missiles were defensive, but the U.S. saw them offensive .
 Castro urged Khrushchev to threaten a nuclear strike on the U.S. should Cuba be attacked, but Khrrushchev was desperate to avoid nuclear war . Castro was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a United States commitment not to invade Cuba . Castro was left out of the negotiations, in which the U.S. would remove their MRBMs .
 Castro proposes five-point plan to end U.S. embargo, cease supporting dissidents, stop violating Cuban air space and territorial waters and withdraw from Guantanamo Bay Naval Base . Castro demands that the United States end its embargo and stop violating Cuba's air space .
 Castro returned to Cuba with new ideas; inspired by Soviet newspaper Pravda, he amalgamated Hoy and Revolución into a new daily, Granma . He oversaw large investment into Cuban sport that resulted in increased international sporting reputation .
 The government agreed to temporarily permit emigration for anyone other than males aged between 15 and 26, thereby ridding the government of thousands of opponents .
 In 1964, Castro returned to Moscow to sign a five-year sugar trade agreement with Moscow . Castro was in Moscow to discuss the ramifications of the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 He supported Che Guevara's unsuccessful plan to set up a guerrilla movement in Bolivia, Peru and Argentina . He allowed revolutionary groups from across the world, from the Viet Cong to the Black Panthers, to train in Cuba .
 He considered western-dominated Africa ripe for revolution, and sent troops and medics to aid Ahmed Ben Bella's socialist regime in Algeria during the Sand war .
 Castro allied with Alphonse Massemba-Débat's socialist government in Congo-Brazzaville . Castro authorized Guevara to travel to Congo-Kinshasa to train revolutionaries against western-backed government in 1965 .
 Castro was personally devastated when Guevara was killed by CIA-backed troops in Bolivia in October 1967 . Castro was publicly attributed it to Che's disregard for his own safety . Castro blamed Che's death on his disregard for himself for his safety .
 In 1966 Castro staged a Tri-Continental Conference of Africa, Asia and Latin America in Havana . Castro staged the conference in Havana further establishing himself as a significant player on the world stage .
 From this conference, Castro created the Latin American Solidarity Organization . Havana's increasing role on the world stage strained his relationship with the Soviets . The slogan of the slogan of ""The duty of a revolution is to make revolution"
 Castro refused to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, declaring it a SovietU.S. attempt to dominate the Third World . Asserting Cuba's independence, Castro refused the treaty on nuclear weapons .
 In turn, Soviet-loyalist Aníbal Escalante began organizing a government network of opposition to Castro . In January 1968, he and his supporters were arrested for passing state secrets to Moscow . In turn they were arrested in January 1968 for passing secrets to the Kremlin .
 In August 1968, Castro denounced the Prague Spring as led by a ""fascist reactionary rabble" and praised the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . Castro ultimately relented to Brezhnev's pressure to be obedient, and in August 1968 denounced Prague Spring .
 In 1968 Castro proclaimed the Great Revolutionary Offensive, closed all remaining privately owned shops and businesses and denounced their owners as capitalist counter-revolutionaries . Influenced by China's Great Leap Forward, in 1968 Castro declared a Great Revolutionary offensive .
 In January 1969, Castro publicly celebrated his administration's tenth anniversary in Revolution Square . He asked the crowds if they would tolerate reduced sugar rations, reflecting the country's economic problems . Castro asked the crowd to accept reduced sugar ration .
 The majority of the sugar crop was being sent to the USSR . 1969's crop was heavily damaged by a hurricane . The government postponed the 1969–70 New Year holidays in order to lengthen the harvest .
 The military were drafted in, while Castro, and several other Cabinet ministers and foreign diplomats joined in . Castro, Castro and several Cabinet ministers joined in, as well as the military .
 Castro publicly offered to resign, but crowds denounced the idea . Castro offered to step down, but assembled crowds denounced it . Castro's resignation was widely denounced by crowds .
 Cuban-Soviet Commission of Economic, Scientific and Technical Collaboration . Soviet economists re-planned and organized the Cuban economy . Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin visited in 1971 .
 Florida-based dissident group Alpha 66 sank two Cuban fishing boats and captured their crews in May 1970 . Cuba joined the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance in July 1972 .
 Castro gained international condemnation for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Herberto Padilla in 1971 . In April 1971, Castro gained the world condemnation for his arrest of Padilla .
 The government formed the National Cultural Council to ensure that intellectuals and artists supported the administration . Soon after, the government formed .
 In November 1971 he made a state visit to Chile, where socialist President Salvador Allende had been elected as the head of a left-wing coalition .
 Castro supported Allende's socialist reforms, where he toured the country to give speeches and press conferences . Castro was one of the leaders of Chile's socialist revolution .
 Castro advised Allende to purge right-wing elements in the Chilean military before they led a coup . Allende was overthrown by the Chilean government in 1973 .
 In 1973, Chile's military led a coup d'état, banned elections, executed thousands and established a military junta led by Augusto Pinochet . Castro was proven right; in 1973, Pinochet led a junta that banned elections and executed thousands .
 Castro proceeded to West Africa to meet socialist Guinean President Sékou Touré, where he informed a crowd of Guineans that theirs was Africa's greatest leader . Castro then proceeded to meet the socialist president of Guinea .
 Algeria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 On every trip he was eager to meet with ordinary people by visiting factories and farms, chatting and joking with them . "On every trip, he met people by chatting and chatting with them," he said .
 In private he urged governments to do more to aid revolutionary movements in other parts of the world . Although publicly highly supportive of these governments, he urged them to help in the Vietnam War .
 Fidel Castro visited East Germany in 1972 . Castro visited the East German capital during his visit to the country . Castro was one of the leaders of the communist East Germany .
 NAM members were critical of Castro's attendance, claiming that Cuba was aligned to the Warsaw Pact and therefore should not be at the conference . Castro praised the Soviet Union in a speech that asserted that it was not imperialistic .
 Castro's government sent 4,000 troops to prevent Israeli forces from entering Syrian territory . Yom Kippur War broke out in October 1973 between Israel and an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria . Castro's troops were sent to prevent Israel from entering Syria .
 Cuba broke off relations with Israel in 1974 over the treatment of Palestinians during the Israel-Palestine conflict . In 1974, Cuba became increasingly close to the U.S. and their increasingly close relationship with the United States .
 That year, Cuba experienced an economic boost, due primarily to the high international price of sugar, but also influenced by new trade credits with Canada, Argentina, and parts of Western Europe . This earned him respect from leaders throughout the Arab world, including Muammar Gaddafi, who became his
 The country adopted a new constitution based on the Soviet model . It abolished the position of President and Prime Minister . It also abolished the role of the President and PM .
 Castro took the presidency of the newly created Council of State and Council of Ministers, making him both head of state and head of government . Castro took over as head of the new council of ministers . Castro has been in power for more than a decade .
 During this time he participated in many foreign wars including the Angolan Civil War, Mozambique Civil War and Ogaden War; as well as Latin American revolutions . During this period he fought in the Angolian and Mozambican Civil War . He also participated in the Mozamb
 Castro also faced other difficulties as the President of Cuba, for instance the economic crisis that occurred during the Reagan Era .
 Beginning in the 1990s Castro led Cuba in an era of economic crisis known as the Special Period . Castro led the Cuban government during that period, known as 'Special Period'
 Castro reformed Cuban Socialism due to withdrawal of the Soviet's backing . Castro reformed Cuba due to the withdrawal of Soviet backing .
 On July 31, 2006, Castro passed his duties as the President of Cuba to his brother Raúl due to health reasons . Castro passed the duties of the Cuban president to Raúel due to ailing health . Castro was born in 1961 .
 Castro renounced his positions as President of the Council of State and Commander and Chief at the February 24 National Assembly meetings in February 2008 . Castro renounces his positions in a letter dated February 18, 2008 .
 The U.S. and South Africa stepped up their support of the opposition FLNA and UNITA . Castro ordered a further 18,000 troops to Angola, which played a major role in forcing a South African retreat .
 Castro visited Guinea, Guinea and Guinea-Bissaun President Luís Cabral . They agreed to support the communist government against RENAMO in the Mozambique Civil War .
 In February, Castro visited Algeria and Libya and spent ten days with Muammar Gaddafi before attending talks with the Marxist government of South Yemen . Castro also spent 10 days with Gaddafi in Libya and visited Algeria in February .
 Castro was greeted by crowds as a hero for Cuba's role in opposing Apartheid-era South Africa . From there he proceeded to Somalia, Tanzania, Mozambique and Angola, where he was greeted as hero .
 He sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the Ethiopian army . He sent forces to help Ethiopian army in the aftermath .
 Castro extended support to Latin American revolutionary movements, namely the Sandinista National Liberation Front in its overthrow of the Nicaraguan rightist government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979 . Castro extended his support to Sandinistas in the overthrow of his government .
 Castro's critics accused the government of wasting Cuban lives in these military endeavors . The anti-Castro Carthage Foundation-funded Center for a Free Cuba has claimed that 14,000 Cubans were killed in foreign military actions .
 His speech was greeted with much applause from other world leaders, though his standing in NAM was damaged by Cuba's abstention from the U.N.'s General Assembly condemnation of the Soviet–Afghan War .
 Cuba's relations across North America improved under Mexican President Luis Echeverría, Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, and U.S. President Jimmy Carter .
 Reagan and Gorbachev were major players on the world stage in the 1980s . They would heavily affect Castro's governance of Cuba . Castro's leadership of Cuba would heavily influence his country .
 By the 1980s, Cuba's economy was again in trouble, following a decline in the market price of sugar and 1979's decimated harvest . Cuba's economic woes were compounded by the collapse of the country's sugar prices .
 Cuba secretly sold off paintings from national collections and illicitly traded for U.S. electronic goods through Panama . Desperate for money, Cuba's government secretly sold them off paintings .
 Increasing numbers of Cubans fled to Florida, who were labelled ""scum" by Castro . Castro labelled Cubans 'scum' by Castro, who was labelled 'nonsense' by the dictator .
 Castro's government loaded criminals and the mentally ill onto the boats destined for Florida . Hundreds of boats arrived from the U.S. leading to a mass exodus of 120,000 .
 In 1980, Ronald Reagan became United States president and then pursued a hard line anti-Castro approach . By 1981, Castro was accusing the United States of biological warfare against Cuba . Although despising Argentina's right wing military junta, Castro supported them in the 1982 Falklands War against
 Castro supported the New Jewel Movement that seized power in Grenada in 1979 . Castro sent doctors, teachers, and technicians to aid the country's development . Castro also befriended the Grenadine President Maurice Bishop .
 Castro cautiously continued supporting Grenada's government . When Bishop was murdered in a Soviet-backed coup by hardline Marxist Bernard Coard in 1983, Castro continued to support Grenada .
 The United States used the coup as a basis for invading the island . However, the U.S. used it to invade the island, which was invaded by the Americans .
 Castro denounced the invasion and compared the U.S. to Nazi Germany . Cuban construction workers were killed in the conflict .
 A reformer, he implemented measures to increase freedom of the press and economic decentralisation in an attempt to strengthen socialism . He was a reformer who implemented measures that increased freedom of press .
 Gorbachev conceded to U.S. demands to reduce support for Cuba, with Cuba–Soviet Union relations deteriorating . Cuba–U.S.-Cuba relations deteriorated in the 1980s .
 When Gorbachev visited Cuba in April 1989, he informed Castro that perestroika meant an end to subsidies for Cuba . Castro was forced to give up subsidies to the Soviet Union .
 Castro continued to clamp down on internal dissidents and kept tabs on the military, the primary threat to the government . Ignoring calls for liberalisation in accordance with the Soviet example, Castro clamped down .
 Castro's image was painted onto a now-destroyed lighthouse in Lobito, Angola, 1995 . Castro was painted on the now-defunct lighthouse . Castro is a former leader of Angola's Angolan rebels .
 By November 1987, Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War, in which the Marxists had fallen into retreat . Castro was spending most of his time working in Angola .
 Angolan President José Eduardo dos Santos successfully appealed for more Cuban troops . Castro later admitted that he devoted more time to Angola than to the domestic situation . Castro believed victory would lead to the collapse of apartheid .
 Castro was angered by Gorbachev's approach, believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world's poor in favour of détente . Castro believed that he had ditched the poor to make peace with the world .
 In Eastern Europe, socialist governments fell to capitalist reformers between 1989 and 1991 and many western observers expected the same in Cuba . In Cuba, Cuba's socialist government was overthrown in 1991 .
 Cuba improved relations with Manuel Noriega's right-wing government in Panama . But it was overthrown in a United States invasion in December 1989 . Increasingly isolated, Cuba improved its relations with Panama's government in 1989 .
 In February 1990, Castro's allies in Nicaragua were defeated by the U.S.-funded National Opposition Union . President Daniel Ortega and the Sandinistas were defeated in an election by the National Opposition .
 The United States secured a majority vote for a resolution condemning Cuba's human rights violations at the United Nations Human Rights Commission . With the collapse of the Eastern Bloc, the U.S. secured majority vote .
 Cuba refused to allow an investigative delegation to enter the country . Cuba asserted that this was a manifestation of U.S. hegemony, and refused to let it enter .
 Castro in front of a Havana statue of Cuban national hero José Martí in 2003 . Castro in the Special Period Castro in Havana in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Castro admitted that Cuba faced the worst situation short of open war, and that the country might have to resort to subsistence farming . Castro said that Cuba could be forced to rely on subsistence farming instead of war .
 By 1992, the Cuban economy had declined by over 40% in under two years, with major food shortages, widespread malnutrition and a lack of basic goods . Cuba's economy declined by 40% .
 Castro hoped for a restoration of Marxism–Leninism in the USSR, but refrained from backing the 1991 coup in that country . Castro hoped to restore Marxism-Leninism, but backed a coup in 1991 in the Soviet Union .
 When Gorbachev regained control, Cuba-Soviet relations deteriorated further . Soviet troops were withdrawn from Cuba in September 1991 .
 Yeltsin despised Castro and developed links with the Miami-based Cuban American National Foundation . He despised Castro, developed links to the foundation's Cuban American group .
 He welcomed western politicians and investors to Cuba, befriended Manuel Fraga and took a particular interest in Margaret Thatcher's policies in the U.K. He believed that Cuban socialism could learn from Thatcher's low taxation .
 He ceased support for foreign militants in 1994 . Refrained from praising FARC on 1994 visit to Colombia . Called for negotiated settlement between Zapatistas and Mexican government in 1995 .
 Havana hosted the Pan-American Games in 1991, which involved construction of a stadium and accommodation for athletes . Fidel Castro admitted that it was an expensive error, but it was a success for Cuba's government .
 Support for Castro remained strong, and although there were small anti-government demonstrations, the Cuban opposition rejected the exile community's calls for an armed uprising .
 A larger pro-Castro crowd confronted them, and joined by Castro who informed the media that the men were anti-socials misled by U.S. media . Castro told the media they were misled by the United States media .
 Fearing that dissident groups would invade, the government organised the ""War of All the People" defence strategy . The unemployed were given jobs building a network of bunkers and tunnels across the country .
 Free farmers' markets and small-scale private enterprises would be legalised in an attempt to stimulate economic growth . United States dollars also made legal tender .
 Further democratisation was to be brought in by having the National Assembly's members elected directly by the people, rather than through municipal and provincial assemblies . The National Assembly will be directly elected by people, not through municipal or provincial assemblies.
 Castro's government diversified its economy into biotechnology and tourism . The latter outstripped Cuba's sugar industry as its primary source of revenue in 1995 . Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the reforms .
 Economic hardship led many Cubans to turn towards religion, both in the forms of Roman Catholicism and the syncretic faith of Santeria . Economic hardship has led many to turn to religion, such as Roman Catholicism .
 Castro viewed the Roman Catholic Church as a reactionary, pro-capitalist institution . But he decided to organise a visit to Cuba by Pope John Paul II in 1998 . The visit strengthened the position of both the Church in Cuba, and the government .
 By 2006, Cuba was the only nation in the world which met the WWF's definition of sustainable development, with an ecological footprint of less than 1. hectares per capita and a Human Development Index of over 0.0 .
 Castro also became a proponent of the anti-globalisation movement . Similarly, Castro became an opponent of the globalisation movement in Cuba .
 He criticized the U.S. global hegemony and the control exerted by multinationals . He also criticized the control of multinational companies .
 Castro also maintained his devout anti-apartheid beliefs . At the July 26 celebrations in 1991, Castro was joined onstage by Nelson Mandela, recently released from prison .
 Mandela would praise Cuba's involvement in battling South Africa in Angola . Mandela would also thank Castro personally for his role in fighting South Africa .
 He would attend Mandela's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994 . He would later attend Mandela inauguration .
 Mired in economic problems, Cuba would be aided by the election of socialist Hugo Chávez to the Venezuelan Presidency in 1999 .
 In 2000, Castro and Chávez signed an agreement through which Cuba would send 20,000 medics to Venezuela, in return receiving 53,000 barrels of oil per day . In 2004, this trade was stepped up, with Cuba sending 40,000 doctors and Venezuela providing 90,
 That same year, Castro initiated Mision Milagro, a joint medical project which aimed to provide free eye operations on 300,000 individuals from each nation . Castro initiated the project in 1994 .
 In May 2005 Castro doubled the minimum wage for 1.6 million workers, raised pensions and delivered new kitchen appliances to Cuba's poorest residents . The alliance boosted the Cuban economy .
 Cuba broke off diplomatic ties with Panama in 2004 after it pardoned four Cuban exiles accused of attempting to assassinate Fidel Castro in 2000 . Panama's centrist President Mireya Moscoso pardoned the exiles after they were accused of trying to assassinate Castro .
 Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martín Torrijos . Castro successfully proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States after Hurricane Michelle in 2001 .
 Castro expressed solidarity with the U.S. following the 2001 September 11 attacks . He offered Cuban airports for the emergency diversion of any United States planes . Castro also condemned Al Qaeda .
 He recognized that the attacks would make U.S. foreign policy more aggressive, which he believed was counter-productive . He said he believed that the attack would make the United States more aggressive .
 At a summit meeting of 16 Caribbean countries in 1998, Castro called for regional unity . Castro said that only strengthened cooperation between Caribbean countries would prevent their domination by rich nations in global economy .
 Caribbean nations have embraced Cuba's Fidel Castro while accusing the U.S. of breaking trade promises . Caribbean nations accuse the United States of breaking its promises to Cuba .
 Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Dominica, Suriname, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . Dominica is Dominica; Dominica also has Dominica . Surinamese, St. Vincent and Saint Vincent also has a large island nation .
 Cuba is the only country to have embassies in all independent countries of the Caribbean Community . Castro was known to be a friend of former Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau .
 They had continued their friendship after Trudeau left office until his death . Trudeau and Trudeau were friends for decades .
 Canada became one of the first U.S. allies openly to trade with Cuba in Cuba . Canada became the first American ally to trade openly with Cuba .
 On 20 April 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba to meet President Castro and highlight their close ties . The Canadian PM was the first Canadian to visit Cuba in 1998 .
 He is the first Canadian government leader to visit Cuba since Pierre Trudeau was in Havana on 16 July 1976 .
 On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People's Power unanimously voted Raúl as president . Raúel was elected president of Argentina in February 2008 .