 Fidel Castro came very close to starting a nuclear war in 1962 between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro predicted imminent nuclear war between the United States and Russia in a speech .
 Castro: Yankees are powerful, but also a bit naïve and submissive . Castro: Those Yankees are certainly powerful but also naive . Castro says Yankees are submissive and naive .
 Nikita Khrushchev later wrote in his memoirs, ""security for Fidel Castro’s regime and American missiles removed from Turkey. We ended up getting exactly what we'd wanted all along,""
 Nixon wrote about the Bay of Pigs and Missile Crisis . “Kennedy pulled defeat out of the jaws of victory,” Nixon wrote .
 Missile crisis 'resolution' gave Castro a new status, protection assured by the two most powerful countries on earth . For us, war was unthinkable. For us,. For us .
 The Coast Guard in Florida got 12 new boats and seven new planes to make sure Castro and his Soviet patrons remained virtually unmolested . Castro was consolidating Stalinism 90 miles from the United States shores .
 It is a shame he overlooked our neighbor just a little south of Key West, Key West . It's a shame our neighbor overlooks our neighbor in Key West.
 Castro predicted Cuba would be shining example of progress and prosperity under his brand of socialism . As for Castro’s prediction of nuclear war, he also predicted Cuban progress under socialism .
 It wasn't until I saw the Robert McNamara documentary ""Fog of War" that I really grasped how close the world came to nuclear war during the missile crisis . Gary says he was shocked to see how close came to a nuclear war . Gary
 For me, it also made understand how important it was that no other country in Latin America be allowed to go communist . For me I think it's important to see how important Latin America is not allowed to be communist .
 The real blame for Cuba lies with whoever is responsible for allowing Castro to come to power and for those who failed to remove him in the early days of the regime . For me, the real blame is for whoever was responsible for bringing Castro to power .
 Non intervention in Cuba was probably wise even if it was hard to stumoch . For stability sakes, non intervention in the country is probably wise for stability reasons .
 Castro manages to blame the worlds problems on Israel . Incidentally, isn't it amazing how he manages to do this .
 There was a lot of deep anger directed at everyone involved in the Cuban operation . In my early days I worked closely with some some people who had been involved in it .
 You are right. So much that it could easily be why I have not spent much time on it these days . I'm not sure why I've not spent a lot of time working on it, but it's a good idea .
 You are also right that unless things change, best course is to watch and let the whole thing play itself out as it will inevitably do . You are right to watch, but you're also right to be patient and watch .