 This kept European powers out of South America, while the commercial interests of the U.S. increased, as did incidents of American interventions to install .
 It was responsible for the invasion of Honduras in 1911, and in a classic case of nexus between the U.S. government and its corporate sector, engineered the overthrow of Guatemala and overthrow of its reformist President Arbenz in 1954 . It was also responsible for invasion of Guatemala in
 This was done in collaboration with the State Department, headed by John Foster Dulles, and the CIA . The State Department and CIA were involved in the creation of the CIA in 1964 .
 Both the brothers had served as legal advisors to the United Fruit Company . Both brothers had been legal advisors for the U.S. Fruit company .
 Ernesto "Che" Guevara was in Guatemala at the time, and was forced to flee with other Arbenz supporters to Mexico . Ernesto “Che” was in Mexico when he fled with other supporters .
 The Guatemalan experience was a turning point in Che's life, for he wrote to his mother that independence for South America could only be achieved through revolution and not reform . Che joined Castro's band of revolutionaries in Mexico and joined Castro’s army in Mexico .
 The measure affected American interests directly, as concerns like the United Fruit Company owned large holdings . This measure affected U.S. interests .
 Even before this measure, the U.S. National Security Council had met to discuss measures for regime change in Cuba .
 Castro accepted an invitation from the American Association of Newspaper Editors . Castro accepted the invitation from an invitation to the group .
 He had come to meet the people rather than the government, and won them over . He had met the people, rather than meet the government . He said: "I'm not going to be afraid of the government. I'm not afraid of it. It's just a matter of
 His meeting with Vice President Nixon was not a great success, but he lunched at the National Press Club and gave an interview on television . He re-iterated each time that the Platt Amendment , inserted into the constitution of Cuba in 1902, was not acceptable .
 Cuban-Soviet rapprochement had begun in early 1960, and the United States feared that Castro was joining the communist bloc . The United States was worried that Castro would join the Soviet Union .
 Two explosions blew up the French cargo ship La Coubre, carrying munitions bought by Cuba from Belgium against American opposition . The ship was blown up by explosions on March 4, 1960, in Cuba .
 The same month President Eisenhower ordered the CIA to launch a series of anti-Castro operations . The CIA launched the operations against Castro in the same month .
 Castro feared a repeat in Cuba of the 1954 invasion of mercenaries into Guatemala . Castro feared it would be a repeat of a similar invasion in Guatemala .
 By June 1960 the trade war between Cuba and the U.S. had escalated, and in October the United States imposed an embargo on Cuba . The embargo was imposed on Cuba in October .
 From September 1960 onwards there were a number of assassination attempts on the life of Castro . Castro was the subject of a series of attempted assassination attempts .
 Even the mafia was contracted for that purpose, for they had lost millions of dollars of business in casinos, hotels, prostitution and drugs as a result of the revolution . The mafia was contractually contracted to do that .
 Eight B-26 bombers took off from Nicaragua to bomb Cuban airports and destroy its miniscule air force . The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Cuba on January 3, 1961 .
 The invasion began with the landing of 1400 trained Cuban emigres at the Bay of Pigs . Two days later the invasion began using ships supplied by the United Fruit Company .
 The Cuban air force sank two cargo ships, which had transported these men, the rest of the ships retreated . The ships had been transporting men to Cuba .
 The Soviets warned Castro in 1962 that the U.S. was planning another invasion of Cuba . The Soviets suggested that he deploy defensive strategic weapons in Cuba . Castro responded to the Soviets' suggestion .
 Khrushchev denied to Kennedy that they had any plans to deploy strategic weapons in Cuba . U2 plane photographed a missile base being built in Cuba in 1962 .
 Kennedy announced on October 22, that he was going to put a naval blockade around Cuba . Kennedy announced the blockade in Cuba on October 23, 1962 .
 The world waited for the outbreak of a nuclear war with bated breath as the Soviet ships, escorted by submarines, came in contact with the United States warships on October 24 . U.S. warships came into contact with Soviet warships on that date .
 At the last minute wisdom prevailed, Khrushchev ordered the withdrawal of Soviet navy . The Soviet navy was ordered to withdraw from the Soviet Union .
 Two days later he proposed to Kennedy the withdrawal of missiles in exchange for a commitment that the United States would not invade Cuba, and would dismantle its missiles in Turkey . The U.S. would also withdraw its missiles from Turkey and dismantle them .
 As the new year begins, let us also start anew . Let us also begin anew. Let us start anew. As we begin anew .
 I’m delighted to extend, on behalf of the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and in my own name, new year's greeting and sincere wishes to YOULIN magazine's staff and readers .
20 was an extraordinary year. Only with courage can we live to the fullest. Only courage can be found in courage. We need courage to live our lives. Only that can be done with courage .
 China and Pakistan supported each other and took on the challenge in solidarity . Confronted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the two countries took on each other in solidarity.
 The China Pakistan Economic Corridor projects have advanced steadily in difficult times, become a standard-bearer project of the Belt and Road Initiative in balancing pandemic prevention .
 The handling capacity of the Gwadar Port has continued to rise . Afghanistan transit trade through the port has officially been launched . The port's handling capacity has also increased in recent years .
 The Karakoram Highway Phase II upgrade project is fully open to traffic . The project is the first phase of a major highway upgrade in the region .
 A batch of green and clean energy projects, such as the Kohala and Azad Pattan hydropower plants, have been substantially promoted . Green and green energy projects will be substantially promoted in India .
 The China-Pakistan Community of Shared Future has become closer and closer . China and Pakistan have become closer than ever before .
 "We are confident to write a brilliant new chapter. Reviewing the past and looking to the future, we are confident of writing a brilliant chapter," says manager .
 Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the founding father of Pakistan, said, “We are going through fire.” Jinnah said . Jinnah was the founder of the country .
 Pakistan’s best days are ahead, China will stand with Pakistan firmly all the way, China says . Yes, Pakistan's best days will be ahead, says the Chinese .
 YOULIN magazine is dedicated to promoting cultural exchanges between China and Pakistan . YOULIN is a window for Pakistani friends to learn about China, especially the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region .
 YOULIN can listen more to the voices of readers in China and Pakistan, better play its role as a bridge to promote more effectively people-to-people bond . It is hoped that with the joint efforts of China and . Pakistan, YOULIN will be able to hear more from readers
 I would like to wish all the staff and readers of YOULIN a warm year in 2021 .