 In October 1962, the United States discovered that the Soviet Union was deploying in Cuba medium-range missiles armed with nuclear weapons that could hit much of the continental United States . President John F Kennedy had vowed never to allow such an act and the Soviets denied they would ever do such a thing
 Kennedy and his advisers undertook almost two weeks of intense analysis, debate and back-channel diplomacy . The deal led the Soviets to remove the missiles in exchange for an American guarantee not to invade Cuba and a secret promise to remove nuclear-tipped missiles from Turkey .
 Aficionados of the crisis still debate scores of smaller details that likely appear confusing and obscure to most outsiders . Many of the details are still unclear to most people outside the United States .
 Despite countless books, articles and reams of declassified documents, the origins of the crisis remain contentious and murky . The origins, resolution and consequences of the . crisis remain both contentious, murky .
 Some scholars have noted the almost romantic attachment Russian leaders had to the revolution in Cuba .
 Cuba was the first communist country in the Western Hemisphere . It was constantly threatened by its superpower neighbor, the U.S.
 The Soviets wanted to protect the charismatic Fidel Castro and his regime . They also needed to burnish their waning revolutionary credentials in the face of challenges from Mao’s China .
 In the late 1950s, many American analysts feared that the Soviet Union was gaining a significant and threatening lead over the United States in nuclear capabilities . The U.S. has never seen a nuclear war with the Soviets .
 Improved U.S. intelligence capabilities revealed there was a large gap, but one that favored the United States . The Corona satellites produced by the Corona satellites revealed the gap .
 In October 1961, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric gave a speech laying out America’s great advantages in its ability to target the Soviet homeland with strategic nuclear weapons . The ploy may have embarrassed Premier Khrushchev and increased his desire to catch up to and cancel out
 Several important geopolitical issues in Central Europe had not been resolved when the crisis began in October 1962 . The crisis was triggered by the Second World War, which ended in 1962 .
 The Soviets were especially perturbed by the unsettled status of West Berlin, located in East German territory . West Berlin was affiliated with a politically open and economically booming West Germany, defended by NATO .
 In late 1958 and again in 1961, Khrushchev issued ultimatums demanding a resolution of West Berlin’s status that would have forced a removal of these troops . The ultimatum was issued in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Marc Trachtenberg has argued that the Soviet’s real worry was increased access to nuclear weapons . The Soviets saw this as a grave threat to their interests, he said .
 Many of the key American decision makers involved in the crisis believed the nuclear balance was irrelevant and that the crisis ended on terms favorable to the U.S. because of its overwhelming conventional superiority over the Soviets in the Caribbean .
 One of the most controversial issues from the crisis is calculating what the precise balance of strategic nuclear forces actually was and what role this imbalance played in determining the outcome .
 There is little doubt that the U.S. possessed an overwhelming superiority in deliverable strategic nuclear capability, as much as seventeen to one in some estimates .
 Many scholars have argued it is impossible to translate nuclear superiority into effective coercive power . Others have argued the opposite .
 In a non-nuclear world, the credibility of threats often turned on calculations of the balance of conventional military power between adversaries . In a nuclear world, threats often turn on calculations on balance of military power, experts say . The U.S. has a long history of using conventional weapons
 A threat made by a country with more tanks, battleships and troops than its adversary often carried more weight, and was more likely to be successful, than threats from states that lacked military superiority . A threat from a state with more than its own tanks, battle ships and troops often carried
 There is little agreement on whether and how nuclear threats work, regardless of the balance of forces . In the nuclear age, however, there is little consensus on whether or not threats work .
 The Cold War rivalry heated up considerably in the late 1970s and early 1980s . Never again was the danger of thermonuclear war so imminent .
 The crisis ended peacefully, tensions over Berlin abated and negotiations commenced for a limited test-ban treaty . The crisis in Berlin ended peacefully and negotiations began .
 While U.S.-Soviet relations improved, America’s relations with key NATO partners such as France, Great Britain and West Germany became more strained .
 Many scholars have pointed to the deliberations of Kennedy’s executive committee during the ‘thirteen days’ as a model for managing complex, dangerous crises . Kennedy's executive committee was a model of managing complex crises .
 A less useful consequence of the executive-committee process may have been a misplaced faith by American policy makers in their ability to control crises, send effective signals and calibrate escalation . Lessons that many believe led to some of the tragic mistakes behind the military escalation in Southeast Asia .
 The final historical lesson may be about the validity of historical lessons themselves . The final lesson is that history is not just a lesson .
 Policy makers and international relations experts have crafted theories, morals and rules from this brush with Armageddon . They have applied them to contemporary foreign policy dilemmas .