 The tropical climate, the landscape, the food and the food, the politics, the parades – and of course, the rum – all of it adding up to make this a place like nowhere else I've ever been .
 It was less than a month before I started getting withdrawal symptoms, and flew straight back for another visit . "It was a great experience," she said .
 A week later, I went on a road trip looking for the island’s abandoned nuclear power station . If you've been following this site, perhaps you’ve already read about my somewhat disastrous arrival in Havana .
 Che Guevara’s Mausoleum in Cuba was visited by Young Pioneer Tours . The group also visited Trinidad in the south and visited the island's south . It also stopped off at the Mausolum and got back to Havana, the capital, just in
 The Cuban Revolution was the start of the Cuban Revolution in 1959 . The revolution was the first of its kind in Cuba . It was the country's first independence from Cuba in 1961 .
 A Concise History of Cuba is worth knowing a little about how things came to be the way they are . While I don’t plan to make this blog post into a comprehensive history of Cuba .
 I won't simply regurgitate facts and dates from Wikipedia, though – I’ve found a much more interesting source than that . I won’t just regurgate facts from Wikipedia – I've found a better source .
 A Brief History of Cuba is published on the island by the Instituto de Historia de Cuba . The book was published in Havana, Cuba, and is published in Cuba .
 It should be no surprise that Cuban historians tell a very different story to what you’ll hear elsewhere . What follows won’t always be the same version of events that you learned in school .
 That’s the beauty of travel, though, though – discovering new perspectives on things . The beauty of traveling is to discover new perspectives, though .
 Christopher Columbus stumbled across Cuba in 1492 . The island had a population of some 100,000 people by the time Columbus arrived . The population of Cuba was 100,500 by the end of the 16th century .
 By 1510, the Spanish Empire began to colonise the island . Sometimes converting the natives to Christianity, sometimes converting them to Christianity . Other times slaughtering them en masse .
 Islanders were caught and burned alive to set an example . When the islanders resisted, they were caught . They were burned to set example .
 The largest massacre reported during those years happened at Caonao, where an alleged 3000 villagers were butchered by Spanish missionaries . An alleged 3,000 people were killed in the massacre .
 By 1514 the Spanish had taken full control of the island, and they founded the city of Havana on its north coast . The city was founded by the Spanish on the north coast of Cuba .
 The population of Cuba grew with Spanish colonists, and later, with the importation of African slaves to work in gold mines and sugar cane plantations . The population grew with . Spanish colonists .
 Cuba’s economic growth stagnated under the stranglehold of Spain, who barred the island from trading with foreign ships . Spain barred Cuba from trading in foreign ships in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The British briefly captured Havana in 1762, lifting the blockade to import food, horses and farming equipment . But less than a year later, they traded Cuba for Florida in negotiations with the Spanish .
 At the turn of the 18th century, the revolution in nearby Haiti brought an influx of French refugees who introduced new expertise in the coffee and sugar trades .
 The national mood in Cuba would lean towards reform, independence and the abolition of slavery . Increasingly the national mood would lean to reform and independence .
 There were black revolts, which the Spanish suppressed with mass executions . The Spanish suppressed the revolts with mass execution . The Spaniards suppressed the black revolt in the 17th century .
 In 1886 slavery was eventually abolished, and black Cubans joined the growing ranks of a discontented working class . In 1886, slavery was abolished in Cuba .
 By 1895 Cuba had entered its War of Independence against Spanish rule . After a series of increasingly liberal and reformist governors on the island, by 1895 Cuba entered its war of independence against Spain .
 The United States proposed the idea of annexing Cuba for themselves . Meanwhile, across the water, the U.S. proposed a similar plan .
 José Martí & The Cuban War of Independence are the essence of life . Like bones to the human body, the axle to the wheel, the wing to the bird and the air to the wing, so is liberty the essence to life .
 Before the tour started, I had a week to myself and I spent it exploring the capital . ‘Whatever is done without it is imperfect.” – José Martí .
 President Obama visited two monuments dedicated to Cuba's independence in Cuba . He visited the sites of the Cuban independence movement .
 A poet and philosopher, José Martí wrote prolifically on the subject of Cuban independence . Martí was also a philosopher and a poet .
 He travelled extensively throughout Cuba, Latin America and the US, preaching the cause of Cuba’s liberation . He wrote for numerous international papers, even founded a few of his own .
 José Martí may have been a champion of the written word, but he didn't prove to be quite so effective on the battlefield . Martí died in the Spanish Civil War at the hands of General Franco Franco .
 He was shot and killed at the Battle of Dos Ríos on 19th May 1895; his first experience of real warfare . He was killed in the battle .
 His death sparked the onset of all-out war against the Spanish . Nevertheless, his death would provide the necessary springboard that brought Cuba to its feet, and sparked the war .
 The monument stands on a raised hillock, in front of the former offices of Fidel Castro . The monument was erected on a hillock near the former office of the Cuban leader .
 The five-pointed star is layered up into a vast tower and with a statue of José Martí at its feet . It takes the form of a five pointed star, layered up with a giant statue of the Martí .
 In front of the memorial, meanwhile, the plaza opens up as a huge clearing amongst the buildings of Havana’s Vedado district .
 At 72,000 square metres, it’s the 31st largest city square in the world . The square is the world's 31st biggest square square .
 Havana is not a big city, and it hardly seemed to need a plaza of such extreme volume . Havana is a city that hardly seems to need such an extreme volume of noise .
 Plaza de la Revolución was not designed with automobile traffic in mind; but rather for rallies and parades, when millions of Cubans descend upon the plaza . Every one of these 72,000 square metres is a constricting mass of bodies and banners .
 José Martí criticised the Spanish, but also warned against future U.S. expansionism into Cuba . The Sinking of The USS Maine was the first time the US had sunk the ship .
 He was worried the U.S. imperialists would annex Cuba before the revolution had been allowed to run its course and establish an independent government .
 In 1896, the United States offered to buy Cuba from the Spanish – but were refused . The remains of a downed U.S. plane were found at Playa Girón .
 A year later Madrid began to concede defeat in the Caribbean, and by 1898 the United States decided to intervene . Madrid was defeated by the U.S. a year later .
 There had already been press coverage of Spanish atrocities committed in Cuba, stirring public support for Cuban independence . But the sinking of the USS Maine provided the final motivation .
 The Maine was an armoured cruiser, commissioned in 1895 . It was deployed largely in response to the increasing naval forces of Brazil and other Latin American countries .
 Due to rapid advances in technology, the ship was virtually obsolete by the time it launched . Due to a long, drawn-out construction period, the long-delayed ship was almost obsolete .
 The ship had been stationed in Havana Harbour to ‘protect U.S. interests’ during the conflict between Cuba and Spain .
 Three-quarters of the crew were killed in the explosion on 15th February 1898 . The ship was the last ship to leave the station .
 In April 1898 the United States declared war on Spain, and sent their armies into Cuba under the agreement that Cuba should remain independent . The United States would withdraw immediately after the conflict, and that the U.S. would withdraw .
 Cuban historians maintain that the sinking of the USS Maine was a false flag operation . The sinking gave Washington the necessary pretext for intervening in the war . It didn't exactly go that way though .
 Down at the Malecón, the sea wall that runs around the coastline of Havana, Cuba, there stands a monument to the sailors who died aboard the USS Maine .
 The Maine was sunk by a coal fire that ignited the ship’s ammunition stores . Engineers have speculated that the Maine may have been sunk .
 Recently declassified documents detail proposals made by Pentagon officials to Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1962 . However, there might be something to the Cuban story after all .
 One proposed idea was to sail a U.S. Navy ship into Guantanamo Bay, blow it up, then blame Cuba . One of the ideas was to blow up the ship and blame Cuba for the attack .
 Whatever really happened to the USS Maine that night in 1898 remains open to speculation . The proposal was ultimately rejected, and it certainly doesn't prove anything .
 At the end of the American-Spanish War, the United States installed their own ‘United States Military Government’ in Cuba . The Neocolonial Republic .
 The Cubans were prevented from representing themselves at international peace talks . Cuban generals were excluded from the Spanish surrender ceremony held on Cuban soil .
 Spain simply transferred Cuba to the guardianship of the U.S. with no consideration for self-representation on the part of the Cubans . Cuba's sovereignty was transferred to the United States by Spain .
 Washington dissolved the island’s revolutionary party and passed the Platt Amendment . The amendment gave the U.S. the right to intervene in Cuba's economy, politics and foreign relations whenever it deemed appropriate .
 In the United States media, the Cuban people were presented as children incapable of functioning without parental support . In the U.S. media, Cuba was portrayed as children unable to function without parents' help .
 A constitution was drawn up which supported Washington’s power on the island . The United States also maintained full control over various military stations in Cuba, including the naval base at Guantánamo Bay .
 The way the Cubans tell it, their island became a place where mainlanders came to do their dirty laundry . The island was a place for mainlanders to come clean their laundry .
 During prohibition, some of the most notorious gangsters in America used Cuba as their refuelling depot . Cuba was used by some of America's most notorious criminals .
 Guantánamo Bay eventually grew into one of the most notorious detention centres in the world . Crime bosses had their holiday homes here; and, much to the Cubans’ horror, Cuba .
 For Cuban liberals, it became clear that so long as Washington continued to manipulate politics in Cuba, democracy would remain broken . The U.S. continues to manipulate the Cuban government, Cuban liberals say .
 Fidel Castro led a revolutionary strike against the Batista regime in 1953 . A new approach was required; Castro led the strike . Castro was a young lawyer named Fidel Castro . Castro is now a leader of the Cuban revolution .
 The movement failed, but the attention it drew to Castro’s cause gave him the opportunity to address the nation in his famous “History Will Absolve Me” speech . Castro's speech was the first of his attempts to oust Castro from Cuba .
 Castro proved himself to be an excellent orator, and by 1955 Castro had founded a growing Revolutionary Movement . Castro was a leader of the Cuban Revolution, which he founded in 1953 .
 There followed more failed attempts at seizing power from Batista, until eventually Castro realised that victory was impossible without outside help .
 He left for Mexico, where he met the Argentinian freedom fighter Che Guevara . He recruited him to the cause of Cuba’s liberation . He met the Argentine freedom fighter and recruited him .
 On 2nd December 1956 Fidel Castro returned to Cuba on a yacht named Granma . He led a team of 82 guerrilla fighters – including Che Guevara, Camilo Cienfuegos and the younger Castro brother, Raúl – to overthrow Batista .
 There was no person more feared by the than Che Guevara because he had the capacity and charisma necessary to direct the struggle against the political repression of the traditional hierarchies in power in the countries of Latin America . The Battle of Santa Clara was the first major battle between Che G
 The UK is home to some of the most interesting sites and monuments around the country . Visit the UK's most interesting monuments and monuments in the country's capital .
 The 1958 Battle of Santa Clara marked a significant victory for the Cuban Revolution . The Cuban Revolution was defeated by the Cuban Army in 1958 .
 Che Guevara led a column of troops along the central highway of Las Villas, defeating one military garrison after another . As Fidel’s revolutionary troops spread out across the island, liberating towns and villages .
 An armoured train was sent to the town carrying ammunition supplies for Batista’s troops . It was stationed outside of Santa Clara to form a command post . The train was stationed in Santa Clara outside of the town .
 The rebels were poorly equipped, engaging the military in the streets with hand grenades and Molotov cocktails . As they approached the command post the train withdrew to safer ground, taking its weaponry with it .
 Che Guevara directed tractors and bulldozers to destroy the tracks ahead of it . Realising that the capture of the train would prove the turning point in this battle, he directed tractor and bulldozer to destroy tracks .
 News of the battle in Santa Clara spread, and many of the government’s soldiers abandoned their posts to join the revolution . The government's soldiers were forced to abandon their posts in the wake of the fight .
 Within 12 hours of the city’s capture Fulgencio Batista fled Cuba seeking sanctuary in the US . Fidel Castro declared a nationwide victory for the rebels . The city was the Cuban capital of Cuba .
 We made a stop at the Tren Blindado – or 'Armoured Train' – Memorial Park . The park is situated close to the main station in Santa Clara .
 The park is now considered a national monument, featuring carriages from the train derailed in 1958 along with a series of angular, brutalist installations by the Cuban sculptor José Delarra .
 On a concrete plinth beside the road, sits the bulldozer that Che Guevara’s men borrowed from the local university in order to dig up the tracks . The bulldozer was borrowed from a local university and is now on the ground .
 An inscription on the plinth is dated July 1986, beneath a dedication to the fighters in the Battle of Santa Clara . The inscription is dated to July 1986 .
 Inside the carriages, a series of museum-style exhibits had been set up for visitors .
 They featured antique rifles, examples of the uniforms worn by rebel fighters and Batista’s soldiers, and a series of black and white photographs detailing the events of 1958 .
 The museum experience left me somewhat indifferent however, but I found it far more interesting to walk around the train, the tracks, and try to picture how this place had looked half a century earlier .
 Cuba's history is still alive and well in Cuba, says CNN.com's John Defterios . He says the museum was an attempt at memorialising the past in the form of a museum .
 Private beaches were made public, and numerous private estates were nationalised . Private estates were also nationalised, with many being nationalised by the government .
 Washington suffered the loss of many of its economic interests in Cuba . As a result of the loss, Washington suffered a loss of much of its interests .
 Castro responded by nationalising all remaining remaining US-owned property on the island . Cuba's sugar quota was cut off by the U.S. in 1960 when it cut off Cuba’s sugar quota .
 Cuba began looking overseas to new trading partners – amongst them, the Soviet Union . As it moved out from the shadow of the United States, Cuba looked overseas . The Soviet Union was one of Cuba's biggest trading partners .
 US President Dwight Eisenhower was intent on bringing Cuba back into the fold . Eisenhower was keen to prevent the island from further developing its friendship with Moscow .
 In 1960, he allocated over $13 million to CIA projects aimed at overthrowing Castro . In 1960 he allocated more than $13 billion to the CIA projects .
 In April 1961 they launched their attack on Cuba, sending B-26 bombers in first to take out Cuban air defences . The U.S. launched the attack in April 1961 .
 The next day five infantry battalions invaded by sea, numbering over 1,400 paramilitary troops . Over 1,000 paramilitary troops were involved in the invasion .
 They landed at Playa Girón on the Bay of Pigs – but the operation would not last long . The operation would be the first time they had landed in the area .
 Fidel Castro led the resistance himself, and within three days of fighting the local revolutionary militia forced the U.S. brigade into surrender . The United States brigade was forced to surrender .
 Museo Girón is a small museum dedicated to the conflict in Playa Girón . Today there is a museum in the coastal town of Playa .
 The museum consists of a series of rooms filled with archive photos, maps and uniforms, as well as weaponry such as rocket launchers, machine guns and grenades . The museum is located in central London, England .
 Most captions were provided solely in Spanish – perhaps more interesting than such dates and details was the overwhelming sense of reverence . The deep, almost-religious respect with which Cubans presented the story of this attempted take-over .
 One installation was decorated with personnel portraits under the title ‘Héroes de Girón’ One installation featured vases full of fresh flowers laid in tribute .
 At a secret meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev the following July, Castro asked for help in defending Cuban independence from the imperial aggressors . Castro asked the Soviet Premier to help defend Cuban independence .
 Khrushchev acknowledged Castro’s request, agreeing to deploy Soviet ballistic missiles in the Caribbean . The missiles were deployed to the Caribbean by the Soviet Union in 1960s .
 The launch facilities were constructed over the summer of 1962, at a site some 90 miles south of Florida . Launch facilities were built in the late 1960s .
 Jupiter missiles were placed with the stated intention of blocking Soviet expansionism into Europe . But from Turkey they could quite easily have reached Moscow with their nuclear payload .
 The way Moscow saw it, placing Soviet missiles in the Caribbean would go a long way towards levelling the playing field, Moscow said . Moscow said it would be a 'game changer' for the Caribbean .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy would prove to be the longest 13 days of the Cold War . The concept of 'mutually assured destruction' became a familiar household phrase .
 The US, in return, would publicly agree to end its harassment of Cuba; and to never again invade without direct provocation . The U.S. would also agree to stop harassing Cuba and never invade without provocation, the U.N. would say .
 Behind the scenes, the United States agreed to remove its Jupiter MRBMs from Italy and Turkey . The U.S. also agreed to pull the Jupiter missiles from Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 The existence of these weapons had been kept secret from the public though, and so in the ensuing PR battle the Soviet Union came off worse . Moscow appeared as the aggressor, whereas the Cuban missiles might truthfully have been considered a defensive move .
 By November 1962 the missiles had been withdrawn, the military blockade around Cuba was lifted and the Moscow–Washington hotline established . The Moscow-Washington hotline was established in November 1962 .
 The events referred to as the ‘October Crisis’ would contribute to the nation’s growing sense of frustrated impotence . The world breathed a sigh of relief… but in Havana, the events would contribute .
 Cuba had been used as a pawn in a larger game, but when it came time for serious conversations the Cubans themselves would not be granted a seat at the negotiation table . Cuba had provided the battleground, but was not granted a sit at the negotiating table .
 After the resolution of the crisis, he was particularly outspoken about his feelings of betrayal . He came to distrust the Soviet Union almost as much as he distrusted the United States .
 The last remaining relics of the Missile Crisis are displayed with pride at La Cabaña . The 18th-century fortress is just across the bay from Havana .
 These days the leftover missiles at Havana are long-since deactivated – but the Cubans keep them clean, well maintained, and pointed, poignantly, in the U.S.
 The Death of Che Guevara is a tribute to the late revolutionary leader . The author of this article has published a book about the death of the revolutionary revolutionary . The book, "The Che Che Che" is published by Simon Tisdall, and is available on Amazon.
 The image of a man in a beret has become symbolic of rebellion and revolution, to the point of growing detached from the history behind it . It’s particularly ironic to note its popularity as an anti-authoritarian fashion statement in the US .
 In Cuba that face appears on billboards, on clothing, on flags and on coins . In Cuba, the face of the Cuban government is on display in Cuba .
 Guevara is a cult of personality immortalised by the fact that he died a martyr’s death . He smiles out at passers-by from propaganda-heavy billboards the length of the country .
 After the revolution, Guevara was made finance minister and president of the National Bank of Cuba . He was also made president of Cuba's National Bank .
 In the 1960s, Che Guevara would frequently represent Cuban interests overseas . He would often represent his country's interests abroad .
 His final years would be devoted to advancing the cause of Marxism worldwide . He would spend his final years dedicated to advancing Marxism worldwide.
 His plan was to advise and support a revolt against the military dictator Mobutu, though the mission ultimately ended in failure . His mission was ultimately unsuccessful .
 Che Guevara flew to La Paz, Bolivia, disguised as a middle-aged Uruguayan businessman in November 1966 . In November 1966, Che flew to Bolivia disguised as an Uruguan businessman .
 There he began forming a guerrilla army of 50 men – the ‘National Liberation Army of Bolivia’ – with the intention of inciting a Marxist revolution . The army was formed in Bolivia and Bolivia .
 The Bolivian Army was bolstered by CIA commandos . Guevara noted in his diary that little support came from the locals .
 In October 1967, one of those informers revealed the location of Guevara to Bolivian Special Forces . The next morning, 1,800 soldiers surrounded the guerrilla camp .
 He was interrogated, but refused to speak; he even turned violent when one guard tried to steal his tobacco pipe . He was held captive for 13 years .
 Fearful that Guevara might escape – and dreading the public drama of a long and drawn-out trial – the Bolivian president ordered that the prisoner be executed immediately . This was against the wishes of the United States government, who had hoped to interrogate him further
 One Bolivian volunteered himself as executioner, but initially he hesitated to pull the trigger . The executioner was killed in Bolivia's capital, Bolivia . Bolivians have been executed in Bolivia since 2002 .
 Bolivian authorities ordered that Guevara was not to be shot in the head, but rather in a manner that might suggest he had been killed in action . Bolivians ordered that he was shot in a way that might have suggested he was killed in a military action .
 The next day his body was flown to Vallegrande, where it was displayed for the world’s press in the laundry house of a hospital . The body was displayed in a laundry house in a hospital in the city .
 Art critics would later comment on the ‘Christ-like’ appearance of the corpse, surrounded by soldiers and journalists .
 Guevara’s hands were cut off, and sent to Buenos Aires for fingerprint identification . The hands were then sent to Argentina for fingerprints identification .
 Fidel Castro gives a sorrowful speech to packed-out crowds in Plaza de la Revolución . Later they flew on to Cuba, where Fidel Castro gave a mournful speech . Fidel Castro is the son of Fidel Castro, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 It had vanished after identification, and many assumed that it was cremated in Vallegrande . But following a tip-off from a retired Bolivian general, a team of forensic experts discovered the corpse in 1997 .
 One of the bodies was missing its hands, and had a familiar tobacco pouch tucked into a hidden jacket pocket . The tobacco pouch was found in the body of a man missing his hands .
 Later that year Guevara’s remains were transported to Cuba, along with his those of his fellow soldiers, and laid to rest inside a mausoleum at Santa Clara . Later in the same year, the remains of the revolutionary were transported back to Cuba .
 The ‘Ernesto Guevara Sculptural Complex’ was designed by José Delarra – the same artist responsible for the train memorial – and it was originally opened in 1988 as a memorial to Che . The complex was originally designed by the artist behind the
 It featured scenes from his life, tributes to his achievements and was decorated with the full text of his farewell letter to Fidel Castro . All of it presided over by a 6-metre bronze statue of the man himself . The bronze statue was also decorated with a text of the full
 It wasn’t until 1997, on the discovery of the mass grave in Bolivia, that the sculptural complex became a mausoleum . It wasn't until 1997 that the sculpture complex was transformed into a mauoleum.
 Visiting the Che Guevara Mausoleum felt like making the pilgrimage to some holy site . Visiting a MaUSoleum is like making a pilgrimage to a holy site.
 Guards stood at the entrance, ensuring that visitors wore appropriately respectful clothing . Guards stood by the entrance to the museum .
 Candles burned inside the tomb, illuminating the sculpted faces of those executed in Bolivia . In the centre Che’s own portrait peered out from a dense bouquet of funerary flowers .
 After the death of Che Guevara, the U.S. and Cuba would continue to sink into increasingly entrenched positions . Elián González & The Anti-Imperialist Platform are on the platform .
 This was the scene of protests, in 2000, over the fate of Elián González – a six-year-old Cuban boy whose mother drowned on the journey to Florida . The boy's mother drowned in Cuba, but he was able to stay in Cuba .
 Elián was placed into United States custody, despite his father's wishes that he be returned to family in Cuba . Elián's father wanted him returned to Cuba, but he was taken into custody .
 There were impassioned protests along the Malecón and outside the United States Interests Section that summer, until the boy was returned . The boy was taken into custody in the summer .
 The plaza has been a popular site for political rallies since the 1960s . Ever since then, the plaza has become a popular political rally site .
 An electronic billboard had been affixed to the fifth floor of the U.S. Interests building . It displayed anti-communist propaganda to the Cuban people .
 A ticker message was positioned behind Fidel Castro's speech that contradicted many of the things he said . It was particularly distracting during a speech that Castro gave from the platform that January .
 At the time of my visit, the building still existed as a controversial, diplomatic loophole . At the . time of the . visit, it still exists as a . controversial, legal loophole .
 Armed guards stood around the Swiss Embassy then, and right along the Malecón . Armed guards were positioned around the Switzerland Embassy then . The Swiss Embassy is located in the capital .
 Walking past one day, I decided to take a closer look at the embassy . I began to cross the road, from the seaside towards the embassy, but immediately one of the guards left his post and marched in my direction .
 When I took out my camera and tried to photograph the building from there, the soldier sprang into life once again . This time he raised his rifle to point the business end at me .
 Since Raúl Castro met with Barack Obama in July 2015, the building behind the flags has resumed its role as a United States embassy . It is the first U.S. embassy in Havana for 54 years, and a bold move towards repairing relations between the two countries .
 Cuba is changing so fast these days that already, my own experience at the plaza belongs to another era . Cuba's changing is so fast, it seems to belong to a different era, the author says .
 Fidel eventually passed the presidency to his brother Raúl in 2008 . In 2008, Fidel eventually handed over the power of the country to Raúel .
 Fidel Castro would traditionally make his address to millions of Cubans gathered in parades around Plaza de la Revolución . The date is celebrated across Cuba as International Workers’ Day .
 On the year of Fidel Castro's visit, he was absent from the celebrations . Instead it was Raúl Castro, stood on a podium at the foot of the José Martí Memorial .
 Over the heads of a million Cuban socialists with their drums and whistles and colourful banners, two faces were drawn in steel across the side of the far buildings . Across the square meanwhile, the faces of two people were drawn across the wall .
 Fidel Castro went on to outlast ten U.S. presidents . Guevara may have met a martyr’s end in the 1960s, but Castro survived .
 He outlived the Soviet Union, and survived numerous assassination plots along the way . But sooner or later, change becomes inevitable, he says .
 Right now, as things stand, it is a bizarre, socialist time warp . It is an anachronistic would-be utopia, a unique glimpse into a world that, anywhere else, could never have survived this long .
 Contrary to what Che Guevara might have believed, nothing is Everlasting. Contrary to whatever Che GUEvara may have believed. Nothing is everlasting.
 I would be happy to share some of the truth that you are missing in your story on Che and the Revolution .
 Much of it is a humorous bit of revisionist Cuban history provided you by the Cuban authorities, and one which the cuban people themselves refute . I found it funny that you would buy the tale that Castro was directly involve in fighting during the Bay of Pigs .
 I realise that some of the history featured here is a revisionist version created by Castro’s party. Ana .
 I don't doubt that it has been engineered to serve the party’s own political purposes . I mentioned the history book I bought, for example, and while it was interesting to explore that version of history I don’t doubt that .
 I would very much like to speak with you, and learn more about your own experiences and impressions of these events . I would like to talk to you about your experiences, your impressions and experiences .
 The Ancient Ram Inn: A Visit to ‘England’s Most Haunted House’ The Ram Inn is a 1000-year-old pub with a ghostly reputation . A month-long monument hunt, and what I learned along the way .