 Historian Marc Trachtenberg has argued that the treaty was the capstone of the “constructed peace” he believes had been in the making since the onset of the Cold War . The treaty ensured peace for the remainder of the . Cold War and beyond .
 Other authors have regarded the treaty as a Berlin settlement in disguise and therefore a decisive step toward the solution of the German question . Other authors say the treaty was Berlin's Berlin settlement .
 The LTBT is the only other arms control treaty of the Cold War era that has retained importance afterward . John Van Oudenaren depicts the LTBT as having “dramatically” improved the prospects for the later signing of the Nonproliferation Treaty .
 The treaty may have helped ‘détente’ to become a household word by the end of 1963 . But the East-West conºict kept dragging on for another quarter of a century .
 The nuclear standoff that was a hallmark of the Cold War befuddled the relationship between military power and politics . The standoff was the first nuclear standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Common sense suggests that an arms race is a symptom rather than the cause of political rivalry, but the nuclear arms race had its own momentum that deªed common sense .
 Arms control seemed to be conducive to détente, but in retrospect it appears it appears 1.1.1 . Arms control seems to have been conducive to peace, but it appears that it is not .
 The story of the LTBT is a case study of interaction between arms control and détente . The LTBT was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in arms control .
 The negotiations that led to the LTBT are among the most extensively documented episodes of the Cold War . The LTBT is the longest-ever Cold War deal in the world .
 The abundance of sources, overwhelmingly of Western origin, has tended to hide the forest behind the trees, making it difªcult to relate details to the larger picture . Yet the very abundance of Western sources, .
 This article attempts to clarify that picture by supplementing U.S. and British sources with new evidence from the Soviet side . This article has been updated to reflect that picture .
 The article shows that the more important political obstacles were on the Soviet rather than the American side . The article was published in the New York Times, October 8, 2013 .
 The weakness of Nikita Khrushchev in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis served as an impediment rather than incentive to negotiating . The article illustrates how the weakness of the Soviet leader served as a hindrance rather than an incentive .
 The article highlights the reasons for his indecision in assigning the treaty the priority it deserved as well as the reasons behind his eventual embrace of the concept of a limited treaty .
 Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC, 22 October 2002 . The book was published at the center of the center for Scholars in 2002 .
 Sources from Eastern Europe reveal the Soviet Union’s inability as well as unwillingness to use the treaty as the starting point toward a deeper détente . The Soviet Union was unwilling to use it as a starting point for a deeper, deeper denteente .
 Not only had tests fouled the atmosphere, but they also had also been unexpectedly disruptive . The tests had also left the atmosphere in a state of chaos .
 In late 1961 the Soviet Union had exploded a hydrogen bomb so powerful that it could not be of any conceivable military use and instead merely created unanticipated environmental havoc . The bomb was so powerful it was not intended to be used for military purposes .
 U.S.-Soviet-British negotiations on cessation of nuclear testing had been held on and off since 1958 . Talks were an exercise in exasperation futility .
 The respective governments were reluctant to make the necessary concessions to reach an agreement .
 They believed they had higher priorities, particularly the German question, which was aggravated by the unresolved Berlin crisis, they said .
 Signiªcant minorities of scientists in both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had come to believe that the programs had already gone too far . Weapons designers and armament bureaucracies on both sides had a vested interest in keeping their programs going and growing .
 The weaker of the two superpowers, the Soviet Union, insisted that it would accept only a comprehensive ban that would impede further development of nuclear weapons . That would reduce the value of America’s superior nuclear arsenal, while preserving the value .
 The U.S. saw the need for continued testing to keep its nuclear arsenal up to date as an indispensable deterrent of what it perceived as a perennial threat of Soviet aggression . The United States, for its part, saw a need to continue testing as a deterrent .
 The test ban negotiations were closely connected with the similarly sluggish nonproliferation talks aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries, such as West Germany and China . The test test ban talks were closely linked with the similar sluggish non-pro-nuke talks .
 China is pursuing the acquisition of its own nuclear weapons as an independent safeguard of its security as well as a putative attribute of great-power status . By contrast, France is pursuing nuclear weapons, as it did in the past .
 Chinese leaders opposed anything that would hamper the attainment of this goal . Chinese leaders are opposed to anything that will hamper this goal, say officials .
 Soviet Union’s numerous disarmament initiatives suffered from a lack of credibility . The Soviet Union's disarmament initiative was a failure to have credibility .
 Moscow's September 1962 proposal for general and complete disarmament impressed some Western experts as the ‘most feasible’ to date . Moscow’s September 1962 . proposal was the “most realistic” to date, according to experts .
 Khrushchev was surreptitiously introducing nuclear missiles into Cuba to confront the U.S. with an unprecedented threat to its security . Yet it could have hardly been meant seriously at a time when it was introduced .
 The secret deployment of the Soviet missile system was not reassuring about Soviet intentions . Nor was the subsequent exposure of this deployment that provoked the Cuban missile crisis .
 The peaceful resolution of the crisis after both sides had turned away from the brink has been judged as having created the best conditions for détente since the onset of the Cold War . Conversely, the peaceful resolution has also been judged to have helped create conditions for peace .
 The consequences of the crisis seemed to point in the opposite direction . But this was not self-evident at the time, when the consequences seemed to be the opposite way .
 Khrushchev for his own internal reasons could not easily afford to be accommodating to the West . Regardless of the U.S. posture, the United States posture was not always favorable . Khrushchevsvs: "Khrrushchev's internal reasons were not for the West"
 The European allies were willing to credit President John F Kennedy for having managed the crisis wisely . But they were less willing to excuse him for having allowed it to develop in the first place .
 French President Charles de Gaulle felt the U.S. ‘nuclear umbrella’ was full of holes and needed to be replaced by France’s own impermeable shield . De Gaulle: The United States 'nuclear umbrella' was full with holes and needs to be
 Kennedy’s ‘grand design’ for Europe was faltering . A confrontation between Washington and London was looming because of the approaching climax of the ‘Skybolt’ controversy .
 The Kennedy administration failed to provide Skybolt missiles, intended to prolong the life span of Britain’s aging nuclear bombers, and offered to transfer more advanced, submarine-based Polaris missiles that would make the bombers obsolete .
 Novotný, speech to the Czechoslovak party central committee, 2 November 1962, Ceský Národní Archiv, . Ceskoslovenska, 01/98/85 .
 The European allies, while favoring détente in principle, were nervous about a superpower deal over their heads . European allies were nervous that the deal would be over their head .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff were dead set against a nuclear test ban . They argued that it would compromise the U.S. strategic deterrent .
 Only the British favored the ban, urging U.S. concessions to make it possible . Among Washington’s major allies, only the British favor it .
 The issue gained urgency at the peak of the Cuban missile crisis . The issue had accidentally gained urgency during the Cuban crisis .
 On 28 October, a U.S. reconnaissance plane strayed into Soviet air space while on a mission monitoring nuclear tests in the Far East . The plane was on its way to monitor nuclear tests .
 Khrushchev immediately conveyed his alarm to Kennedy, who promptly apologized . Kennedy apologized—all in one day .
 He wanted to resist anything that might pierce the secrecy that Soviet rulers deemed indispensable to protect their closed society along with their arbitrary power . He said he wanted to protect the secrecy of Soviet rulers .
 Khrushchev also declared that he would not agree to a partial ban that would allow the U.S. to continue testing underground . The former Soviet leader also said he would also oppose a ban on underground testing .
 President Obama challenged Washington to accept a comprehensive ban on underground tests . He claimed that “we did it but once and we are not going to do it anymore,” and challenged Washington .
 Unlike his American adversaries, Khrushchev approached the ban as a political rather than technical issue . Unlike his U.S. adversaries, the ban was a political issue, not technical .
 Dean hinted to Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister Vasilii V Kuznetsov that 15.5 million people could be killed in the Soviet Union . Dean hinted at the deaths of 15.6 million people in the 1980s and 1990s .
 U.S. demanded removal of Soviet medium-range missiles from Cuba . Khrushchev's accession to the United States led to the removal of the missiles from the island .
 He still had to cope with the furious Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, who chafed at the humiliation and sought to assert control of the additional Soviet tactical missiles .
 If these deadly weapons had come to light at the time, the U.S. government would have interpreted their deployment as evidence of Soviet treachery, nipping in the bud any chance of détente .
 Moscow's further diplomatic initiatives had to await the elimination of this potentially embarrassing nuclear secret in Cuba . Moscow’s further diplomatic initiative had to wait .
 Khrushchev’s remaining missiles were sent home by the end of the year . The missiles were meant to be sent back to Moscow by end of 1962 .
 Khrushchev began to specify the conditions under which the Soviet Union would sign a test ban agreement . Only at this point, he said, would be willing to sign such a deal . The Soviet Union signed the agreement in 1956 .
 In fact, the Berlin question had largely been resolved even before the test ban treaty became topical . The Berlin question was largely resolved before the treaty was mooted .
 Khrushchev explained to Ulbricht that the intended goal of a separate treaty had already been accomplished through the building of the Berlin Wall . The intended goal was to create a treaty between Russia and the West .
 The Wall provided a de facto solution to the Berlin question, though not to the larger German question, prior to the test ban treaty and independent of it . The Wall was provided by the Berlin Wall .
 Mikoyan stopped in Washington, DC, to meet with Kennedy at the White House . He made no mention of Berlin or the test ban .
 Mikoyan raised the subject of a non-aggression treaty between NATO and the Warsaw Pact . Khrushchev’s pet project since 1955 was Khrushche's pet project .
 It may seem puzzling that the hardnosed Kremlin leaders craved a paper promise from their presumably untrustworthy capitalist foes . It may be puzzling that they craved paper promises from their supposedly untrustable foes . But it's not the first time it's been puzzling that Kremlin leaders
 What they were really craving was to offset their deªcit of legitimacy by being recognized as equals . What they really craving is to offset that de‪cit by being accepted as equals, they said . What was really needed was to be recognized as equalities, they added .
 By duplicating the commitments that all major countries had already assumed by subscribing to the U.N. Charter, the pact might cast doubt on the strength of those commitments . The pact could cast doubt doubt on strength of the commitments .
 Western governments suspected a Soviet ploy to convince NATO member-states that the alliance was no longer needed . More to the point, Western governments believed it was a ploy . The Soviet Union was behind the withdrawal of NATO membership .
 NATO experts conclude that Moscow was not ready for détente . NATO's experts concluded that Moscow wasn't ready for peace . The Soviet maneuvering made NATO’s experts conclude . NATO experts say Moscow wasn’t ready for a peace treaty .
 The Soviet leader then informed Kennedy that he would go along with an annual quota of two to four inspections, previously hinted at by Dean and Wiesner during similar such conversations . Kennedy then said he would allow the inspections to take place .
 President Obama said eight to ten inspections would be needed to reach agreement . But he replied that eight to 10 inspections would need to be needed, raising technical issues .
 It was unwise of Kennedy to up the ante before negotiations had even started . Khrushchev had a pretext to charge that the U.S. had been acting in bad faith .
 Other means of veriªcation were becoming available, the government said .
 In any case, no number of inspections could guarantee compliance unless the Soviet Union regarded the cessation of testing as being in its interest . The question remained an undecided question for the country’s leaders .
 The resumption of the test ban negotiations coincided with dramatic developments within NATO that affected the ‘correlation of forces”—the traditional guiding formula of Soviet foreign policy . The resuming of the tests ban negotiations coincides with dramatic .
 Moscow chose to revive non-aggression proposal at a time when Kennedy was facing difªcult discussions with Macmillan at Nassau about the Skybolt issue .
 The U.S. offered Polaris missiles not only to the British but also to the French, defusing the NATO crisis . By the end of December, however, the successful outcome of the Nassau meeting, the United States offered the Polaris missiles .
 Moscow's relations with the United States took a turn for the better as the two governments announced publicly that their dispute over Cuba was resolved . Moscow’s relations with U.S. relations with Russia have taken a turn .
 On a visit to the White House, Kuznetsov expatiated on the Soviet Union’s 24th birthday . The Soviet Union was founded in 1961 .
 Soviet media rejoiced with Schadenfreude . Andrei Gromyko displayed to U.S. Ambassador Foy Kohler his usual sour face .
 Gromyko had reason to be pessimistic, knowing that his own government the next day was to make public, without consultation with Washington, the secret correspondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy regarding the ban .
 Kuznetsov delivered a “long, propagandistic, and inºexible speech” putting forth an even less acceptable draft of a NATO–Warsaw Pact non-aggression pact . The draft was intended to complement the test ban .
 The test ban was doubly deadlocked by being linked to the intractable German question as well as the inspection issue . This would amount to the GDR’s international recognition, which both Bonn and Washington were known to rule out in principle .
 Rusk observed that a pact between the two military groupings should be a crowning achievement of détente rather than the ªrst step toward it . Rusk: A pact between two military groups should not be a first step toward denteente .
 Neither superpower regarded the test ban treaty as a high enough priority to separate it from other military and political issues . Neither superpower considered the treaty a priority .
 For the U.S. military balance was central and was the reason for insisting so strenuously on inspections, which Moscow could not afford for political reasons . For the United States, the military balance in Russia was central . The United States has insisted on inspections for the sake of the military
 For the Soviet Union, the political balance was more crucial, spurring attempts by Soviet ofªcials to extract concessions from the West . The test ban issue would be politically beneficial to the East .
 Sergei describes his father as acting with his customary vigor in clashing with military commanders during a Defense Council meeting at the army base of Fili .
 Marshal Matvei Zakharov, the chief of the Soviet General Staff, apparently fared no better . Marshal Matvizi Zakarov was the head of the General Staff in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev suggested that a small professional army, supported by territorial militia, was all that the country might need . The CPSU Presidium was the subject of a visit to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev, for all his dangerous antics, was ahead of his time in deprecating the military utility of nuclear weapons . The former Soviet Union leader was a leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Whatever illusions he may have previously entertained on this matter had been dispelled by the embarrassment such weapons had caused him in Cuba . Whatever illusions . had been . entertained by the . embarrassment such . weapons had . caused him to .
 Khrushchev was more open to the simple but sound view that the mere possession of nuclear weapons sufªced as a deterrent . Kennedy was in thrall to the fanciful theories of U.S. “defense intellectuals” about the increasingly complex nuclear postures required
 Khrushchev made his remarks at a meeting of the CPSU Presidium on 8 December 1959 . The Soviet Union leader was the leader of the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Kremlinologists identiªed intra-party opposition animated by CPSU Presidium member Frol Kozlov . Kozlov is a CPSU member who is accused of leading the opposition .
 The situation called for negotiations without a rigid agenda, rather than searching for a breakthrough on matters on which agreement was most important, such as disarmament or the Berlin question .
 The situation in 1963 was similar to that of a decade earlier after Stalin’s death . Khrushchev was ‪nding it difªcult to make up his mind, says historian .
 The secret Soviet decree of 30 March provided for mass production of intercontinental ballistic missiles, contradicted Khrushchev’s reasoning at the recent Defense Council meeting, thus signaling the strength of the opposition he was facing . On the one hand, the secret Soviet . decree provided . mass production
 Khrushchev sent the insulting message to Kennedy through Ambassador Anatolii Dobrynin a few days later . On the other hand, the message he sent to Kennedy was vintage Khrushvich .
 The Soviet leader ruminated about America's disrespect for his country’s status as a great power . Echoing the rumblings around him, the Soviet leader said . The Soviet Union leader said the U.S. was disrespecting his country .
 At the same time, Kennedy and Macmillan chose to respond with restraint to Khrushchev’s outburst . At the time, the two presidents chose restraint to respond to the outburst .
 The two leaders focused on the test ban treaty while ignoring the Berlin question . In accordance with the United States State Department analysis, the U.S. State Department said .
 Moscow had already acquiesced in the status quo of Berlin, an assumption now vindicated by evidence from the archives . They assumed that Moscow would already acquiesce in Berlin, they say .
 Khrushchev told the envoys that Germany was the key to everything and that the test ban treaty no longer mattered . After receiving the Kennedy-Macmillan message from the U.S. and British ambassadors on 24 April, he told the ambassadors that Germany is the key .
 The next day he secretly proposed to the CPSU Presidium that the two sides move ahead with the treaty but limit it to tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water . He proposed the next day that the treaty would only be limited to tests under water and in outer space
 To justify this reversal, he referred to the view of unnamed “military comrades” that atmospheric testing was no longer necessary for defense purposes .
 He saw continued utility of underground explosions for peaceful purposes . He said he saw continued use of underground explosion as a peaceful means .
 Khrushchev’s argumentation on this point, however, bore close resemblance to anything advocated by the military but to the position laid out in a memorandum several months earlier by a leading Soviet nuclear scientist, Viktor Adamskii .
 There is no evidence that Khrushchev actually read the memorandum . The idea of a limited ban had been circulating for some time, initially in the West .
 Khrushchev decided to endorse the idea as not only mutually beneªcial but also good for public relations . Khrushvic: "It's good for the public relations. It's a good thing for the world"
 He continued to keep this important decision secret, subject to tactical considerations and proper timing . He continued, however, to keep it secret .
 The evidence of Khrushchev’s reversal in April 1963 changes the prevailing view of how the treaty became possible . The evidence changes the view of the treaty becoming possible .
 In reality, Khrushchev had already found the basis for the ban and separated it from political issues . The ban was a political issue rather than an issue of national security .
 His effort to link it again with the elusive German settlement, described as the key to détente, was a delaying maneuver . He was increasingly preoccupied with cracks in the unity of the Communist camp, he says .
 In April 1963, a senior CPSU ofªcial, Yurii Andropov, traveled to Bucharest on an urgent mission to placate Romanian leaders . They were upset about Khrushchev’s plan for an international ‘division of labor” within the
 Andropov’s proposal for a summit to settle the disagreements elicited no more than a noncommittal Romanian response . The proposal for the summit was met with no response .
 Fidel Castro came to the Soviet Union at the end of April for a month-long stay . Meanwhile another difªcult ally, Fidel Castro, came to Russia at the beginning of April .
 Castro demanded massive economic aid and security guarantees for Cuba, including admission into the Warsaw Pact . The visit started inauspiciously as Castro demanded huge economic aid, security guarantees .
 Khrushchev placed his remaining hopes on inviting China’s top leaders for a brainstorming session in the Soviet capital . Beijing and Moscow went from bad to worse in the 1960s .
 He proposed 15 May as the starting date, but the Chinese were in no hurry to accept the invitation .
 Khrushchev egged them on by moving closer to the test ban treaty . The treaty was intended in part to counter China’s ambition to become an independent nuclear power .
 Khrushchev notiªed Kennedy of the Soviet Union’s readiness to resume the test ban talks without indicating his own willingness to accept a limited treaty, as proposed by the West .
 Khrushchev kept fulminating against inspections and lecturing the president about the need to treat the Soviet Union as an equal . Instead of inspections, he lectured the president on the need for treating the Soviets as an equals .
 President spoke of respect for the Soviet Union as an equal partner . The president speciªed his preference for a limited rather than a comprehensive treaty .
 Kennedy’s speech, by all accounts, was well received in Moscow, but no change in Soviet policy ensued for another three weeks . Kennedy's speech was well-received in Moscow but the Soviet policy was not changed for months .
 During the interval, the Sino-Soviet split reached the point of no return . During the 1950s and 1960s, China and the Soviet Union were the closest allies of Russia and China .
 The 25-point denunciation of Khrushchev’s ‘revisionist’ sins reached the Soviet capital, and copies were sent to the ‘fraternal’ parties . Four days after Kennedy spoke, Beijing sent copies of the '25-point' den
 Pro-Chinese Albanians and the ostensibly uncommitted Romanians promptly published a summary of the inºammatory document . Not only the pro-Chinese Albaniaians but also the ostensibly uninterested Romanians .
 The Chinese had taken Romania’s side in the intra-CMEA dispute, posing as a champion of national sovereignty against Soviet encroachments . The Chinese were seen as championing national sovereignty in Romania .
 On 24 June, Khrushchev rushed to Bucharest to discard his ill-conceived plan for 40,000 . The plan was discarded by the Soviet leader on 24 June .
 Khrushchev revived his demand for a non-aggression pact as the supposedly necessary complement to the treaty . The test ban no longer linked the test ban with the German settlement, he revived the demand .
 He harped on this specious linkage in a conversation with the visiting former secretary general of NATO, Paul-Henri Spaak . Spaak is a former NATO secretary general, who was in charge of NATO .
 What cleared the way for the LTBT was the collapse of the SinoSoviet talks held in Moscow from 5 to 20 July . The talks collapsed in Moscow in July .
 Mao’s emissary, Deng Xiaoping, lambasted Soviet leaders for assorted ‘revisionist” treachery . Deng Xiaop singled out for special condemnation their readiness to pursue disarmament agreements with the U.S.
 Pravda had disclosed on 15 July the full text of the 25-point Chinese statement along with a Soviet rebuttal . Khrushchev had summoned the Warsaw Pact allies for an urgent meeting .
 The test ban negotiations resumed in Moscow and swiftly moved toward conclusion . A day later, the test ban talks resumed in the Russian capital .
 The treaty was signed on 25 July, just as the leaders of the Warsaw Pact were convening in the Soviet capital . It was signed just before the leaders met in Moscow to sign the treaty .
 The East-bloc gathering, its agenda hidden from contemporaries, was not about the treaty, but about China . All the participants welcomed it, but China was not invited to the treaty .
 The conferees included Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal, the party chief of neighboring Mongolia . Mongolia, an observer state within the Warsaw Pact, is a member of Mongolia .
 Tsedenbal had applied for his country’s admission as a full-ºedged ally, and Khrushchev, in contrast to his 42-year-old . Attesting to the recent worrisome turn in Sino-Soviet relations, Tsedenb had applied to his country
 The danger of a confrontation with Beijing over the LTBT made the difference, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Romanians did not want to say yes or no but highlighted the likely adverse consequences of Mongolian membership . The Romanians are not sure whether they will accept the membership .
 Polish Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki argued that Mongolia’s admission to the alliance would bring no advantages but only risks while giving Beijing an excuse to charge that the USSR was militarizing the thus far mainly ideological .
 Any alteration of the Warsaw Pact’s terms would require unanimous consent from existing members . Rapacki concluded that the unity of the alliance was at risk . He concluded that any alteration of Warsaw Pact's terms would need unanimous consent .
 It is unclear whether the East European allies had communicated their objections to Moscow before the Soviet Union itself . The Soviet Union decided to withdraw its support of Mongolia’s application .
 Soviet ofªcials justiªed the reversal to the conference by suggesting that the expansion of the test ban treaty would send the wrong signal to the West rather than China .
 The promise of an uncertain détente with Washington took precedence over the certain deterioration of relations with Beijing . China's promise of a denteente with the U.S. took precedence, the Chinese president said .
 The ªnal version was much less bold, it at least expressed hope that 45.5% of the world's population would be 45% . Although it was not the first version of the original version of this article, it was much more bold .
 Moscow could assess the repercussions of the treaty, particularly the reactions of the two recalcitrant outsiders, China and France . In the meantime, Moscow has to assess the reaction of those who signed the treaty .
 The signatories could also decide whether they should proceed from a limited treaty to a comprehensive ban .
 He did not mean a comprehensive treaty, nor did he want to entertain Harriman’s proposal to cut the production of ªssionable materials and start dismantling nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet leader returned to his vintage calls for a non-aggression pact and a German settlement . Instead, the Soviet leader called for an agreement with Germany .
 President Obama spoke in favor of signing the pact as well as recognizing the GDR and the Oder-Neisse Line as Germany’s eastern border, as Moscow desired .
 Such farreaching concessions presupposed that the Soviet Union was committed to détente . The Soviet Union would have made such concessions to the West . Such concessions would have been far more than a compromise .
 "The majority opinion in Washington was skeptical about the ªrmness of that commitment," the president's spokesman said .
 It is extremely important that we so comport ourselves with our Allies to avoid any semblance of impression that we have incurred any indirect obligation with the Soviets in regard to non-aggression arrangements .
 We should also avoid any appearance of indecent or anxious haste in an attempt to move forward in the entire ªeld of relations with the Soviet Union .
 Soviet policy is too realistic and based upon long-range considerations for that, says CNN.com.com's John Defterios .
 Khrushchev’s contention that the test ban was no unilateral Soviet concession conformed to his own reasoning at the CPSU Presidium meeting in April .
 What was missing from the analysis, however, was any suggestion that making the limited ban comprehensive would be worth trying on its own merits . The ban is a limited version of the ban, but it is not comprehensive enough .
 Once political obstacles to the partial treaty had been removed, the remaining technical impediments to its completion were rendered more manageable . The divisive issue of inspections was losing its relevance as the divisive issue was losing their relevance .
 Both sides preferred scrutinizing each other’s ‘good faith’ in détente . Rather than moving in that direction, both sides wanted to scrutinize each other's “good faith .
 He found Khrushchev ill-prepared, repeating standard Soviet positions, and obviously unwilling to address the ‘difªcult issues” he had been saying should be addressed, particularly Germany . He found him unprepared for the meeting .
 U.S. ofªcials took the sensible view that consolidation of the recent gains was more important than moving ahead fast . United States of cials said consolidation of recent gains more important .
 Rusk believed that, instead of a “comprehensive discussion . . . looking toward some negotiated détente across the board,” they should explore speciªc issues . Rusk: Instead of looking toward a ‘comprehencive discussion
 National Security Council has reached sobering conclusion that a preemptive strike is no longer an option for the U.S. It's particularly topical now that the NSC has concluded that such a strike is not an option .
 Neither was such a strike feasible for the Soviet Union, thus making the reduction of the increasingly superºuous nuclear weaponry all the more imperative .
 The UN General Assembly favored steps toward making the limited test ban comprehensive, but found the superpowers unresponsive . The United States has not responded to requests for a comprehensive ban .
 Once the LTBT came into effect, the superpowers’ interest shifted to the related but more complex problem of nonproliferation .
 The issue involved not only the nuclear haves but also the have-nots, it was more politically charged than the test ban and hence more intractable . Because this issue involved the nuclear . haves and nots, the issue was politically charged .
 The negotiation and signing of the Nonproliferation Treaty took another ªve years . Negotiating and signing took another 15 years .
 The hurdles to the NPT included not only China’s pursuit of the bomb but also the MLF, and with it the German question . The NPT was formed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Soviet Union evaded Washington's overtures about possible joint action to check Beijing’s nuclear ambitions and remained publicly hostile toward the MLF as well .
 Khrushchev at that very time began to feel out Moscow’s East European allies about the possibility of a qualiªed acceptance of the MLF . Unbeknownst to Rusk, the East was feeling out allies . Perhaps in return for East Germany's acceptance
 On 2 October the Soviet Foreign Ministry informed the Polish leader Wladyslaw Gomulka that the Soviet Union would not insist on including a prohibition of joint nuclear forces in a nonproliferation agreement that was to be negotiated with the United States . The Soviet Union refused to include
 Gomulka wrote to Khrushchev that tolerating Bonn’s access to nuclear weapons in any form would violate the spirit of the test ban treaty . Poland's security and the Warsaw Pact's prestige was at risk, he wrote . The Polish leader was appalled by the
 Gomulka added that if the MLF were to come into effect, the Soviet Union should create a joint nuclear force with China . The decline of Moscow’s standing among the previously docile Eastern European Communists became evident .
 Khrushchev appeared genuinely shaken by this sudden reminder of the fragility of power, including his own . The former Soviet leader was visibly shaken by the incident .
 Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B Johnson, tried to maintain the link by agreeing to create a conªdential channel to Khrushchev through Dobrynin .
 Rusk sensed that the U.S. now had a “hunting license for means to develop a détente.” Rusk felt that the United States now had “a hunting license” for means of reaching a peace deal .
 By the end of 1963, détente was in the air far more so than it had been in the wake of the test ban treaty or ever before .
 Soviet ofªcials were prepared to consider the none-too-forthcoming December 1963 communiqué of the North Atlantic Council as an invitation to promote détente . The Soviet Union considered the communique as a way to promote a denteente .
 As 1964 began, the Soviet Union announced a 4. percent cut of its defense budget . Washington responded with a 2 percent cut in its own budget and a 25 percent reduction in the procurement of enriched uranium needed for nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev reciprocated by stopping the construction of two new plutonium plants that served the same purpose . The two new plants were built in the 1960s and 1960s .
 If the budding détente did not bloom, this was for reasons independent of the lost momentum of the test ban treaty . The Atlantic Powers and the Reorganization of Western Europe, 1955–1963, 123; 23 Mastny .
 His overthrow in October 1964 by leaders committed to reversing his innovations put the brakes on détente for the remainder of the decade .
 The resurgence of détente in the 1970s, independent of arms control, did not build on the foundations of 1963 but on what came to be considered common values and political interests . Détente came to an end in the 1960s and 1970s .
 1963 détente went further than any of its predecessors but not far enough . Détente was a missed opportunity for the U.S. and Europe .
 United States ofªcials’ inclination to think of the Cold War in terms of a potential military confrontation rather than the actual political competition was an obstacle, though not one that varied .
 In that sense, the more important obstacles were on the Soviet side, including those posed by such extraneous issues as relations with Cuba and China and political inªghting in the Kremlin . The Soviet-Russian conflict was the most significant obstacle in the Cold War .
 The test ban treaty was not a goal in itself but a way toward achieving more important political objectives . Khrushchev's scheme of things suffered from improvisation and inconsistency, he says .
 The nuclear standoff over Cuba did not make him more willing to conclude the treaty, but the humiliation he had suffered increased his need for a success . The humiliation he suffered increased the need for success .
 He tried to link the LTBT to progress toward progress toward a settlement in Germany and accommodation between the alliances . Hence he tried to . progress toward . a settlement . in Germany .
 Once the treaty was signed, however, its value as a tool for achieving political goals diminished for the U.S. as well . The value of the treaty, which had never been high for the United States, diminished .
 At issue in the treaty’s follow-up was not making détente permanent, much less ending the Cold War . At issue is not making permanent, but ending the cold war was not possible .
 The Berlin question had already been effectively solved by Soviet acquiescence in the continued division of the city, though without a solution to the larger German question . Berlin question was effectively solved in the Soviet-occupied Berlin .
 Nothing happened to satisfy West's demand for guaranteed access to Berlin or Moscow’s demand for recognition of the GDR . The two points were the two points that facilitated the emergence of détente in the early 1970s .
 In 1963 the systemic crisis that eventually resulted in the demise of the Soviet bloc and, with it, the end of the Cold War was still nowhere in sight . In 1963, the system that eventually led to the demise was still in its infancy .
 It is intriguing, if pointless, to speculate whether the end would have come earlier if the 1968 SovietCzechoslovak crisis had occurred while Khrushchev was still in power .
 "The system was still strong enough to block him. The reason he was no longer in power is that the system was strong enough," he said . The system was "still strong enough" to stop him, he added .
 No opportunity for détente, much less for the Cold War’s termination, was missed . The Cold War's termination was therefore missed .
 What was missed was a unique opportunity for making the limited ban complete. What was missing was the chance to make the ban complete, it was missed .
 For a brief period, the eclipse of the inspection issue, which had previously been the main stumbling block, would have made it easier for both superpowers to proceed toward a total ban .
 Had this goal received the priority it deserved in the immediate aftermath of the LTBT, a comprehensive treaty could have been signed before further testing allowed for technological advances that would fuel the arms race and make its reversal more difcult .
 This missed opportunity not only prolonged the Cold War but also multiplied the stockpile of useless nuclear weaponry that remains its most deplorable legacy . The U.S. should have been able to stop the nuclear arms race, the author says .