 Kennedy had a well-organized campaign and was handsome and charismatic . He promised to get America moving again .
 The incident captured the attention of the African-American community, whose votes JFK would carry in key states . The incident was captured by the black community .
 Nixon dominated the west, while Kennedy won the south and the east coast . Kennedy dominated the south, while Nixon won the west .
 Of all of his elite advisors who filled Kennedy's inner circle, he relied most on his 35-year-old brother Robert . Robert, whom he appointed attorney general, was the attorney general .
 Eisenhower gave the CIA permission to secretly train Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba in 1960 . In March 1960, Eisenhower gave permission to the CIA to train exiles to prepare for the invasion .
 1,200 Cuban exiles met 25,000 Cuban troops backed by Soviet tanks in April 1961 . They were soundly defeated by Soviet troops backing by tanks and Soviet tanks . In April, 1961, the Cuban government was defeated by the Soviet Union .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev promised to defend Cuba with Soviet weapons . Soviet leader later promised to protect Cuba from Soviet invasion .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the nuclear weapons from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. promise NOT to invade Cuba . The deal was made in return for a United States promise not to invade .
 Just after midnight on August 13, 1961, the Soviets began construction of a 90-mile wall separating East and West Berlin . The wall was built on the border between West Berlin and East Berlin .
 Neil Armstrong took the first steps on the moon in 1969 . Neil Armstrong was the first astronaut to walk on the Earth's first moonwalk .
 Space and defense-related industries sprang up in Southern and Western states . Defense-related space and defense industries thrived in the 1960s .
 The nation mourned the death of the young president while Jackie Kennedy remained calm and poised . Jackie Kennedy was calm, poised and poised at the time of her death .
 Like 9-11, Americans can recall where they were when they heard the news of the President\u2019s death . Americans can remember when they were at the height of the tragedy .
 Jack Ruby broke through the crowd and shot Oswald to death . He was charged and as a national television audience watched his transfer from one jail to another, he was shot dead .
 Johnson admired Franklin Roosevelt who took the young congressman under his wing . Johnson admired FDR for his work in Washington .
 Johnson became a senator in 1948 and by 1955 he was Senate majority leader . Johnson was Senate Majority Leader in 1955 .
 The Act prohibited discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin . It granted the federal government new powers to enforce the law . The Act was passed in 1996 .
 The act prohibited literacy tests or other discriminatory practices for voting . The act also banned literacy tests for voting in America .
 The Community Action Program which encouraged the poor to participate in public works program. The program was a public works project .
 Reform and change was not limited to the Executive and Legislative branches . Reforms and change were also included in the U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives . Reform was not only in the Senate, but also in the House and the Senate .
 In Escobedo Illinois the court ruled that the accused has the right to have an attorney present when questioned by police . The court also ruled that an attorney should be present when questioning the accused .
 Kennedy’s Background Wealthy Family that expected public service . Roman Catholic Charismatic and highly appealing to American. years old Roman Catholic Catholic Charistatic . .
 A fourth-generation Texan, Lyndon B Johnson entered politics in 1937 as a congressman . Johnson admired Franklin Roosevelt who. admired FDR who. Franklin Roosevelt .
 Have you ever experienced a historic event so moving or influential that it made you remember it? Share your memories of the historic events that made you think of it? Send your photos to CNN iReport.com/Heritage .
 Next Week: Kennedy, LBJ, The Great Society, The Civil Rights Movement . Next week: Kennedy and LBJ will be featured on CNN.com's "The Kennedy Years"
 Kennedy had trouble getting his ideas for a New Frontier passed . Kennedy's ideas for the New Frontier were not passed .
 Some federal programs provide assistance to the poor and some Americans call entitlement . What are some federal programs that provide assistance for the poor? What do you think entitlement programs do?