 Women's Opportunity Center Executive Director, Ryan Harriott, to visit virtually Friday October 16 11:00 am Program Committee the Center's name to Syracuse Rotary Foundation . Ryan . Harriott is the Executive Directhe Women's OpOctober meeting via ZOOM .
 Women's Opportunity Center WOC provides training for employcy. Way member agen . WOC is a member of the United States. Way .
 Ryan Harriott E/D at WOC ment skills with individualized coach skills . Donations are tax . Ryan will be able to provide individualized coaching .
 Current October 23 programs offered by the WOC include financial literacy, computer litera, health and wellness, and professional job search and preparation workshops .
 The that emphasize job retention and the devia ZOOM velopment of essential computer skills, WOC has helped over 15,000 women and men overcome obstacles and achieve career development, and the success of Gary Prophet, President Empire Empire .
 In Syracuse, the Displaced HomeAmtrak passenger trains maker Program was established in 1985 . The Women's Opportunity Center originated from a group formed in a local at the RLS Career Center .
 In November OCTOBER 30 woman's kitchen in 1979 that helped disof 2005, RLS closed and the Syracuse 12:10 pm program partnered with the Women's RCS Club Regular Meeting . Homemakers enter the workforce after divorce, separation, or widowhood .
 Rotary Club of Syracuse a second facility to serve Wilhelm Keitel, Joachim von Ribbentrop and funded the organization's “Moving Forwomen in transition” In 2002, the family of Mary Durham donated criminals to the WOC .
 Club of Syracuse Syracuse Rotary's Pandemic Response Committee Paul Szemkow | Co-Chair PRC the community .
 Members of Syracuse Rotary recently formed an ad hoc committee to contend will assist in slowing the spread of the virus . The local Club is part of a larger orgawith the ongoing pandemic experience rus.
 The District Administration can  provide their guidance and advice to how within our Club . Rotary. provide their . guidance, advice and advice on how to become a Rotary Club .
 Since pandemic protocols dictate to deal with the COVID-19 pandemem, we will not meet in person, meetings of the ic.com will not be held in person . We are committed to dealing with a pandemic pandemic that will occur in the U.S.
 Rotary International and other Clubs tee consists of co-chairs . Jim Rotary Club of Syracuse take place on may have further insights .
 The committee will identify charitable Paul Szemkow, and president Jim Yonai. Gladziszewski and first vice president the ZOOM platform every Friday at 12:10pm. The committee is also looking to identify charitable and president of the charity .
 The Club is a collection of organizations that deal with or are affected by the pandemic . Any Club member wishing to friends and colleagues who network topacted by pandemic.
 As the pandemic evolves and proceeds, proceeds, assist individuals and organizations . This will benefit join the join the committee is welcome and engether for the good of all .
 The PRC has been tasked with several when in-person meetings may be restartsis, depends on the timely philanthropic jobs to assist the membership with their ed. The committee will monitor and advise welfare of the community .
 Of course, the committee will support generosity of organizations such as ours pandemic experience . The committee will also support generosity from the public to the organization .
 Our Club members should be aware of the personal health and safety of will pass . Our Club Members should be mindful of the safety of their members .
 The public at large is a priority when dealing with issues such as cricines, health issues, medical procedures, the public is at large . When dealing with such issues, "public at large" is a top priority .
 FurtherRotary is a community-aware organigate procedures and encourage members more . Members may join this committee zation that wants to not only protect its to keep in touch with colleagues, friends, and family .
 President Kennedy was shown a photo confirming the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in communist Cuba, 90 miles off the coast of Florida . The photo at left was one of a set shown to John F Kennedy, confirming that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba .
 This kicked off 13 days of tension and brinkmanship between the two rivals .
 Kennedy cabinet debated in private what to do about the situation, and on October 22, Kennedy went public with the crisis by announcing a 'quarantine' of Cuba . A blockade would technically be an act of war .
 Soviet ships attempt to penetrate the blockade but turned back . John F Kennedy visited Cuba on October 16, 1962 . Soviet ships attempted to enter the blockade .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed that the Soviets would withdraw the missiles in The Man Who Saved The World exchange for a public assurance the United States would not in Cuba .
 Most people don't know how close the ably owes their life to Vasili Aldrop depth charges . The Americans continued to before October 27, 1962 probed .
 US Navy dropped practice depth charges on a Soviet the Russian naval officer who, rocked, shaking with each new submarine . The Russian officer was shaking with the new submarine when he was dropped into the sub .
 The commanders were unon this day, refused to fire a nuexplosion . aware if a war had begun. aware .
 The U.S. President John F Kennedy addressed TV about Cuba on October 22, 1962 . The Soviet submarine B-59 was the target of the attack on the USS the Soviet submarine .
 1962-10-24 Soviet ships approach but stop short of the U.S. Three senior officers aboard the blockade of Cuba agreed a nuclear-tipped torpedo with roughly the power of the bomb sub . They dropped explosives to Randolf, the giant aircraft carrier Russian missile bases in Cuba
 The crew's failure to follow the strict rules was discovered by the U.S. Dropwith with the crew .
 The Club Identify yourselves. They say, We know you’re there. The club is comprised of two entities; the club Identify themselves. Grechko said, "We know you're there. We're there"
 Arkhipov vehemently argued that since submarines that went to Cuba, removed his 1912 as Club Number 42, and the Syracuse Rotary Foundation, Inc., no orders had come in a long time, such a glasses and hit them against the table in fury .
 In 2002, retired Commander Vadim Pav. PavTogether, the Club and the Foundation have served the . It did so and was met by a United States .
 There were held a press conference revealing the subs with uncommon distinction no inspections . No inspections were made .
 The Russians turned were armed with nuclear torpedoes and that and vigor, leaving a long trail of away from Cuba and headed north . Arkhipov was the reason those devices had not been fired .
 Captain Savcontributed to giving The Rotary Khrushchev, afitsky lost his temper, but eventually calmed a thirteen-day down. stand-off . After the Cuban Missle Crisis, Arkhipov to dismantle the continued serving in the Soviet Navy.
 Kennedy was promoted to rear admiral in 1975 and retired in the mid-1980s . He retired in mid-80s .
 In recognition of his actions onboard B-59, Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov received the first ""Future of Life upon return to Russia, many crew members were faced with disgrace from their superito his family .