 Scholars suggest the two superpower’s relationship improved as a result of the crisis . Many scholars have suggested the two countries' relationship improved .
 Study of how the crisis affected Nikita Khrushchev to determine if his beliefs became more cooperative following the crisis . The study will determine if Khrushchevitch's beliefs changed after the crisis to become more cooperative .
 In this study, learning is defined as a statistically significant change in operational code beliefs . The study was conducted by a team of psychologists and psychologists .
 Changes in philosophical beliefs indicate diagnostic learning and changes in instrumental beliefs indicate simple learning . Changes of philosophical beliefs indicates diagnostic learning .
 Khrushchev’s public speeches from before and after the crisis were analyzed . Verbs in Context System was used to create numerical data in order to determine if the operational code changed as a result .
 A difference in means test was performed from the VICS numerical data to determine if the mean scores of each belief were different at a statistically significant level .
 The results indicate that the majority of Khrushchev’s beliefs before and after the crisis were not significantly different . The results show that the results were not significant .
 The stability of Khrushchev’s beliefs following the crisis can be attributed to retrospective rationality, his personality rigidities, and the doctrinal nature of the Marxist/Bolshevik belief system . The stability can also be attributed to retrospective rationality .
 This event has been used to evaluate crisis management, policy process, crisis decision-making, bargaining theory, and the use of nuclear weapons in foreign policy .
 In this research one of the main questions is what lessons leaders and policy makers learned from the event . In this article, we ask what lessons we have learned from this year's events .
 The development of a more cooperative relationship between the U.S. and Soviet Union following the crisis prompts speculation on how the crisis affected the beliefs of one of the main participants in the event .
 In order to determine if Nikita Khrushchev’s beliefs changed and if he learned as a result of the crisis, his operational code will be examined . The code will determine if changes in his instrumental and philosophical beliefs occurred .
 The Operational Code is a key to understanding political leaders' beliefs . Political leaders’ beliefs are their operational code, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Operational code has been used as a tool to evaluate leaders’ views of international politics . Operational codes have been used in the past to evaluate world leaders' views .
 Nathan Leites conducted the first operational code analysis to determine how the Bolsheviks approached international conflict by analyzing their belief systems . The analysis was conducted by Leites to determine the Bolshevik's approach to international conflict .
 Leites sought to explain Soviet bargaining behavior, which perplexed Western policy makers . Hired by the Rand Corporation, Leites was hired to explain the Soviet behavior .
 Leites determined consistent patterns of behavior in foreign policy could be found by examining ideology, socialization, and leadership pressures of policymakers . He focused on the cognitive, psychoanalytic, and psychocultural aspects of Soviet behavior .
 Alexander George’s Ten Questions About Operational Code Beliefs . Alexander George answers ten questions about the code's beliefs .
 What are the prospects for the eventual realization of one’s fundamental political values? 3. What do you think of the future of your political vision? 4.5.4.5 . 5.6.5: What do we think of our political future?
 The ten questions are further disaggregated into five questions that consist of philosophical beliefs . Five questions that pertain to instrumental beliefs and five questions about philosophical beliefs are also included in the ten questions .
 According to George, philosophical beliefs are defined as a leader’s view of international politics . This includes the fundamental nature of politics and the perception of other political actors .
 George further clarified operational code by expanding philosophical and instrumental beliefs . George continued to clarify operational code . George also expanded philosophical beliefs .
 George labeled philosophical beliefs as ‘diagnostic’ which guide the leader’s view of the political environment and help the leader diagnose the situation . The instrumental beliefs are ‘choice’ and ‘optical’ . George labeled the philosophical beliefs of the leader as
 Carter’s operational code reflected conflictual beliefs toward the Soviet Union . However, his beliefs toward human rights remained cooperative . Following the invasion of Afghanistan, Carter's operational code changed .
 Researchers are limited in the number of options available to measure the belief systems of leaders . Researchers say it is difficult to measure leaders' belief systems .
 Unlike typical psychological analysis, it is difficult to study a political leader directly . Unlike typical analysis, political leaders are not subject to psychological analysis .
 Most operational code analysis requires discerning political leaders’ beliefs through public and private statements, interviews, and memoirs . Most political leaders' beliefs can be discerned through public statements and interviews .
 The use of the operational code as an analytical construct has primarily consisted of . qualitative research with scholars combing through leaders’ statements in order to answer George’s ten operational code questions .
 Scholars such as Leites , George , and Hoagland have all studied the operational code of Khrushchev . However all of the studies have been conducted from a qualitative approach .
 The Verbs In Context System is a coding procedure that produces quantitative answers to Alexander George’s ten operational code questions by creating indices to evaluate a leader's philosophical and instrumental beliefs . It is the result of an indexing procedure to evaluate the leader's philosophy .
 Transitive verbs are chosen because they convey actions that have an object . In other words, the action of the verb is transferred to the object directly . The verb is chosen because it conveys the actions of an action to an object, such as the object .
 Coded verb constructs are created from these procedures that illustrate how the leader thinks about self and others in the political universe based upon his cooperative and conflictual verb attributions .
 Each index contains a specific formula in which the coded verb constructions are calculated in order to define the leader’s belief to each question .
 By using the results of the coded verb constructions, the data is placed into the respective indices in order to answer the operational code questions . The data is used to answer questions such as: 'What do you say? What do you think? Please submit your comments .
 Diagnostic propensities focus on the leader’s diagnosis of the political universe by examining how the leader views others . They provide quantitative answers to George's philosophical questions . George's philosophy is that the leader's diagnosis of political universe is critical .
 The indices that are defined as diagnostic include which defines the nature of the political universe, the realization of political values, which concerns the political future, and the extent the leader can influence historical development, and which measures the leader's belief in the role of chance .
 The first question among the diagnostic propensities, concerns how the leader views the political universe and his opponents . The first is how he views the world and his political opponents .
 The scale for ranges from -1 representing a conflictual view of the political universe to +1 which represents a cooperative view . The scale represents a range of political views that range from conflict to cooperative .
 The second diagnostic question, examines the leader’s prospects for realizing his political values . The question is whether he will be able to achieve his political goals .
 The third diagnostic question, concerns the predictability of the political future . The third question, is whether the future of the U.S. political future is real .
 If the leader views the political action of others as unpredictable, more variation will occur . Less variation in attributions indicates the leader view political action as predictable . If a leader views others' political actions as unpredictable more variation is likely .
 The scale for ranges from .00 which represents other locus of control to +1. which represents self . control . The scale ranges from 0.00 to 0.01 which represents the self . self .
 The fifth diagnostic question, concerns the role of chance in determining political outcomes . The fifth question, is whether chance can be used to determine political outcomes in elections .
 The scale for .00 indicates a low role of chance in determining political outcomes . The scale ranges from .00 to 1.00 indicating a high role of . chance .
 Choice propensities examine the leader’s view of self and how self acts in the political universe . While diagnostic propensity examine others, it examines the leader's view of the self .
 The choice propensity indices include which indicates how cooperative or conflictual the leader believes he should act in the political universe, which identifies the tactics the leader utilizes to achieve political goals . The indices also identify the utility and role of different means in which the leader exercises power .
 The first choice propensity question, , identifies the strategies the leader employs in order to accomplish political goals . The first question is the first choice question, which questions the leader's first choice .
 The scale for conflictual strategies ranges from –1 to +1 which indicates a cooperative strategy . The scale ranges from -1 to -1 and -1 indicates a conflictual strategy . It also indicates a cooperation strategy .
 The leader implements a cooperative or conflictual strategy in order to obtain his political goals . Although does not indicate the political goals the leader pursues, it does determine if the leader is trying to achieve his goals .
 Choice propensity refers to the utility and role of different means in exercising political power . Choice propensity is the utility of different ways to exercise political power in a democracy .
 Shift propensities identify the risk and timing of tactics the leader implements . The leader's tactics can be used to identify the risks and risks associated with a shift .
 The first shift propensity, determines how the leader approaches and handles political risk, is a key to his leadership .
 If self-attributions are concentrated in conflictual categories, the leader is acceptant to the risk of deadlock . Self-attribution is a sign that a leader is willing to accept a leader's decision .
 The leader's positive and negative self-attributions are measured to determine how often shifts occur between cooperative and conflictual acts . In order to determine the leader times political action, his positive and . negative self attributions are . measured .
 The final shift propensity, measures a leader’s propensity to shift between words and deeds . This is the leader's use of timing regarding political action . The leader's shift propensity is measured by his willingness to shift from words to deeds .
 A low propensity to shift between words and deeds is more acceptant of risk . A higher shift represents an aversion to risk, while a low shift represents a low risk .
 Political Learning: Khrushchev learned as a result of the Cuban missile crisis . Political scientists examine the different conceptions of learning utilized by political scientists .
 Political science research regarding political learning focuses on three different aspects including who learns, what is learned, and when it is learned . Political science is concerned with who learned, what was learned, when it was learned .
 Learning is also observed under various circumstances such as learning from direct experience, from historical events, as well as from international crises . Learning is often observed under different circumstances, such as direct experience .
 There are numerous definitions of political learning and methodologies for evaluating learning . There are also numerous definitions for political learning .
 There is much debate among political science scholars regarding who or what learns from political science . Political science is the subject of much of the political science debate .
 Organizational theorists argue that institutions and governments are just as capable of change as individuals . Organizations and governments can be just as resilient as individuals, they say .
 Cognitive theorists argue that learning can only occur at the individual level through a change in an individual’s cognitive beliefs, and governments can only learn if the individual implements these new ideas at the institutional level .
 Levy notes that an individual may learn, but if they fail to institutionalize the lessons, the organization or government procedures will remain unchanged . Levy: "If an individual fails to learn, the lessons will be lost to the public"
 One area of debate involves determining if leaders ‘learn’ from historical events in order to prevent past mistakes or repeat past successes . The debate is over whether leaders “learn” from historical history to prevent mistakes .
 Experience-based learning is also studied in order to determine if an individual learns as a result of political experiences .
 This research focuses on crises in order to determine if a crisis experience creates policy change or belief change among individuals . This research is done to determine whether crises experience create policy change .
 Scholars such as Stern argue that the experience of a crisis may create a cognitive openness that facilitates individual learning .
 The Cuban missile crisis is recognized as a classic example of a learning crisis . The Cuban crisis was recognized as one of the world's greatest learning crises .
 Scholars argue that the Cuban missile crisis altered the participants understanding of the superpower relationship . Scholars such as Blight and Welch argue that this changed the participants' thinking .
 Craig & George also argue that the crisis provided an awakening for both leaders, which led them to pursue a more cooperative relationship between the two powers . Craig and George say the crisis led to an awakening from both leaders .
 An examination of learning produces several different definitions of learning in political science research . Political science is a form of learning that can be defined by a variety of definitions .
 Tetlock identifies two conceptions of learning utilized in political science research . The neorealist approach and the belief system approach are the two approaches to learning . Tetlock: Neorealist and belief system approaches are used to study political science .
 The neorealist approach to learning focuses on the state as the unit of analysis . It defines learning as a response to events in the international system . Neorealist approaches to learning focus on state as an analysis unit .
 The belief system approach to learning focuses on the individual, and argues that learning creates a change in the beliefs or belief structure of a particular leader . In contrast, the belief system approaches focus on individual learning .
 An examination of each definition is conducted in order to fully understand the concept of political learning . Political learning is a form of learning that can be applied to students .
 In the neorealist approach, learning is regarded as a rational response to changes in the international system . Learning is seen as an attempt to cope with international changes .
 Tetlock indicates that in the neorealist approach, the structure of the international system rather then the minds of particular individuals lead to learning . Tetlock says that in order to learn from the world's international system, people learn from their minds .
 According to neorealists, the state is the unit of analysis and it can be treated as a rational actor that responds to changes in the international system . The state can be seen as an example of how it reacts to international changes .
 The state perceives changes in the international system and responds to those changes in order to maintain power . The state is responding to changes in international system to keep power, says the president .
 Jarosz & Nye note that most studies regarding learning in the Cuban missile crisis have implemented the neorealist approach in order to explain the Soviet Union’s decision to remove the missiles from Cuba as a rational response by the state, classified as learning .
 The belief system approach (also known as the cognitive psychological approach) of learning focuses on how a political leader views events in the international system . Unlike neorealism, it focuses on the belief system of political leaders .
 Observations regarding the political universe and perceptions of other actors in the system make up a leader’s belief system . Observations about the world make up the belief system of a leader's belief system.
 The concept of learning in the belief system approach is not determined by the structure and laws of the international system, but rather by the beliefs of the political leader . The concept is based on the belief of a political leader, rather than the structure of the global system .
 Belief systems contain the leader’s perceptions of the political universe, and help guide his policy decisions . Belief systems help guide the leader's perception of the world and policy .
 Scholars disagree on how to determine the conditions and forms of learning within a leader’s belief system . Scholars say it is difficult to determine how to make a leader's belief system learn .
 Learning within the belief system is defined in numerous ways including a change in the leader’s beliefs, a change of the cognitive structure, and the efficiency definition of learning . Learning within a belief system can be defined in many ways including the leader's beliefs .
 Levy defines learning as a change in beliefs or the development of new beliefs as a result of the observation and interpretation of experience . Levy says learning is a process of observing and interpreting experience .
 Levy restricts learning to belief change . He indicates that his definition does not require learning to involve policy change, an advanced understanding of the political universe or a more complex cognitive structure .
 Learning can occur at different levels within the belief system . Levy indicates simple learning leads to a change in means and diagnostic learning indicates a change .
 This study measures Khrushchev’s instrumental and philosophical beliefs before and after the Cuban missile crisis to determine if they were significantly different . The study was based on scholars’ observations regarding the increased cooperation between the two powers following the Cuban crisis .
 Khrushchev only experienced a significant change in his operational code beliefs regarding his exercise of power in his use of appeals and rewards following the Cuban missile crisis . The results of this study, however, appear to indicate that .
 Khrushchev’s remaining operational code beliefs remained constant before and after the crisis . ‘I’m not sure what happened to the Soviet Union,’ he said. ‘Krushchev had a long-term commitment to the U.S.’
 Khrushchev is remembered by many for his hare-brained schemes, deStalinization, and his decision to place nuclear weapons ninety miles off the coast of the U.S., bringing the world close to nuclear destruction . He is also remembered for his de-Stalin
 A discussion of Khrushchev’s rise to power and his leadership of the Soviet Union provide insight into his success and failures as leader of the . Soviet Union . The discussion includes a discussion of his rise and failures in leadership .
 Nikita Khrushchev rose from a peasant to become the leader of one of the most powerful countries in the world . He rose from humble beginnings to become one of Russia's most powerful nations .
 Khrushchev started his political career in 1918 when he joined the Bolsheviks . He served in the Red Army as a junior political officer during the civil war during the war . He joined the Bolshevik Party in 1918 and was a junior officer in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was appointed party boss of the Petrovo Manivsky district in Ukraine . By 1928 he became head of the Ukraine’s Central Committee Organization Department . Khrushchchev was head of Ukraine's Central Party Organization Department in 1928 .
 Khrushchev was always concerned about furthering his education . In 1929 the party allowed him to attend the Stalin Industrial Academy in Moscow . In 1950 he was allowed to study at the Stalin industrial Academy .
 While in Moscow, Khrushchev began a rapid rise up the party ladder . Stalin’s wife Nadezhda Alliluyeva, who brought him to Stalin's attention, helped bring him to the top of the party .
 During the purges Khrushchev rose to the number two position in the Moscow party organization . Zubok & Pleshakov indicate that during the . purges he became the number . two in the party organization in Moscow, Russia, during the 1950s .
 During World War II he was a political commissar . He spent a great deal of time at the battle of Stalingrad keeping Stalin informed of the battle’s progress .
 Khrushchev reassumed his position as first secretary of the Ukrainian party in 1944 . After Ukraine’s liberation in 1944, he was re-elected to the party's first secretary . He was the leader of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 In 1949 Stalin called him back to Moscow as head of the Moscow city party . He was appointed secretary of the Central Committee . In 1949 he was called back to the Soviet Union .
 Following Stalin’s death in March 1953, Khrushchev became leader of the party . He had to overcome many obstacles in order to consolidate his power .
 A collective leadership was formed between Georgy Malenkov who became Prime Minister, Lavrenty Beria, who was head of the secret police, and Vyacheslav Molotov, a deputy prime minister .
 Malenkov, Molotov, and Khrushchev formed an alliance to eliminate Beria in the leadership due to his power as head of the secret police . The alliance was formed in order to eliminate the power of Beria .
 Much of the blame of the Stalinist purges was attributed to Beria and he was tried and executed . A new collective was formed between Khrushchev, Molotov, and Malenkov .
 Khrushchev as leader of the party and Malenkov as head of government became the main contenders in the succession struggle . Following the elimination of Beria, Khrushchevski was the main contender for the post .
 Both men began suggesting and implementing programs in order to outmaneuver one another . Both men agreed to work together to try and get the best of each other .
 Malenkov set himself apart from Stalin’s conservatism by suggesting the Soviet Union increase investment in consumer goods . The Soviet Union would decrease investment in the armed forces and heavy industry sectors .
 Khrushchev adopted a more conservative platform that increased investment in heavy industry . He won the support of the powerful armed forces and heavy industry lobbies . The Soviet Union was founded in 1953 .
 Khrushchev took advantage of the situation by lambasting Malenkov at every opportunity . The two men were married at the end of the 1960s .
 Khrushchev still had many enemies on the Presidium including Malenkov who remained a member in spite of his resignation as premier . The Presidium was a powerful body of power in Russia .
 A campaign of de-Stalinization began in which there were attempts at returning rule of law to the country and reviving the Leninist utopian ideal . The campaign was called 'de-stalinization' after the death of Stalin .
 The speech created problems in Eastern Europe where citizens began to question Stalin’s reign as well as the viability of the socialist system . The speech was created in the wake of Stalin's death .
 Prime Minister Imre Nagy abolished one party rule essentially opening the way for multiparty elections in Hungary . The situation became volatile in Hungary when Prime Minister Nagy became prime minister . Nagy's rule essentially opened the way to multiparty politics .
 Khrushchev and other Presidium members agreed that Hungary had gone too far and responded with force to crush the revolt . The Soviet Union responded to the revolt with force, crushing it .
 The revolt in Hungary led many Presidium members to question Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization policies due to the reaction they created and the fact that the policies could expose members due to their complicity in crimes .
 Khrushchev continued to provoke the Presidium by passing reforms and reorganizing the bureaucracy in order to strengthen his position within the party . The Presidium continued to pass reforms to strengthen the party's position .
 He reformed the economic councils in order to put regional party members in charge of industry . Regional party members rather than government ministers are in charge .
 Khrushchev announced without prior approval from the Presidium that the Soviet Union would surpass the United States in per capita production of meat, milk, and butter within three years . In order to gain popular support, the announcement was made without approval .
 A majority of Presidium members were troubled by the reforms . They felt Khrushchev and the party apparatus were becoming too powerful . The party apparatus was too powerful, they felt .
 In June 1957, an anti-Khrushchev group headed by Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich held a Council of Ministers meeting in which the group criticized Khrushchev’s reforms and called for Bulganin to replace him as party leader .
 Khrushchev was familiar with the rule and he demanded delay until all Central Committee members were present due to the fact that the majority of them were his supporters . He demanded delay due to fact that majority of the members of the Central Committee were his own supporters .
 Khrushchev succeeded in calling a Central Committee plenum with the help of the KGB and the military, led by Marshal Zhukov . The meeting took place in Moscow, Russia's capital, in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev became the undisputed leader of the Soviet Union in 1958 . He assumed the position of premier after Bulganin resigned from the post .
 Khrushchev defeated the antiparty group but changed his attitude towards the party . Fellow party members noted that after the defeat of the anti-Krushchev group he changed .
 Unlike Stalin, Khrushchev never completely controlled the party even at the peak of his power . Unlike Stalin he never fully controlled the Communist Party even at peak of power .
 Stalin ruled over the party through fear, however, Khrushchev essentially had to make the party his partner . Tompson explains that Stalin ruled the Soviet Union through fear . He says the party had to be his partner in order to survive .
 Khrushchev had a difficult time controlling critics in the party who opposed many of his reforms and his all-knowing attitude . By loosening the grip of fear that Stalin had used to control the party and his rivals .
 Crankshaw indicates that the same people that brought Khrushchev to the peak of power were the . same people responsible for his ouster in 1964 .
 He continued to promote reforms that threatened party members’ positions . Party members were threatened by reforms they were against .
 In 1962 he announced his plan to split the party apparatus into two entities, an agricultural section and an industrial section . In 1962, he announced that he wanted to break up the party .
 Presidium members gave their approval; however, Taubman indicates that most members of the Presidium were appalled by his decision . Presidium member: Most members of his party are appalled by decision .
 His decision angered provincial party bosses who lost a considerable amount of authority as a result of the reform . Provincial party bosses have lost a lot of authority in the reform process .
 Khrushchev alienated party members by proposing that agriculture management be centered in Moscow instead of at the local level, further eroding the party members’ authority, he said . Khrushchen also alienated members of the Communist Party .
 In October 1964, while Khrushchev was on vacation, party members met to complete plans for his removal . Party members met in October 1964 to remove him from the Soviet Union .
 Unlike the ‘anti party group’ in 1957, the plotters involved in 1964 took steps to ensure that Khrushchev could not retain his position . Unlike the anti-Krushchev plotters in 1957 and in 1964, they took steps in order to ensure he did not
 Leonid Brezhnev and the others secured the support of the Central Committee, whose members had been most affected by Khrushchev’s reforms . The Soviet Union was one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Unlike in 1957, the KGB also supported Khrushchev’s removal and ensured that he had no advance knowledge of the plotters’ plans . The KGB also ensured that the removal of the former Soviet leader was not a secret .
 Leonid Brezhnev phoned Khrushchev to discuss his agricultural management reforms . Khruschev insisted that he come back to Moscow in order to discuss agricultural management reform .
 Presidium suggested that Khrushchev “retire’ due to his age and bad health . Presidium suggests Khrush' 'retire' due to age and health . Khrushchchev died at the age of 55 in 1959 .
 Khrushchev did not put up any resistance and agreed to retire per the Presidium’s request . The Presidium asked him to step down from his post in Moscow .
 Khrushchev also made bold moves in foreign policy, the most noteworthy was his decision to place nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Cuban missile crisis was one of the most memorable foreign policy moves .
 Khrushchev and his colleagues were unsure of Castro’s political inclinations . Initially, following the defeat of Batista's regime, the Soviet Union was unsure of the Cuban leader's political ambitions . The Cuban revolution was a major success in Cuba .
 Khrushchev demonstrated the Soviet Union’s approval by sending Warsaw Pact weapons to Cuba in 1959 . By 1959, Castro announced his support of Marxism and Khruschev demonstrated his approval .
 Khrushchev became more committed to protecting Cuba by increasing Soviet military aid . Following the botched Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 in which the U.S. sent exiled Cubans to try to topple Castro’s regime, the Soviet Union increased its military aid to Cuba .
 A vacation to Bulgaria led to the most stunning decision of Khrushchev’s career . The decision to go to Bulgaria was one of the most important decisions in Khrushchchev's career .
 Defense Minister Malinovsky indicated that U.S. missiles based in Turkey were capable of striking Moscow and Kiev . Khrushchev and Malinovski were walking along the beach .
 Khrushchev inquired into the placement of Soviet missiles off the coast of the U.S. and if they could be placed covertly . This led to the decision to place them off the United States' coast . The missiles were placed in secret .
 Malinovsky assured Khrushchev that the weapons could be deployed secretly . After much discussion and approval from all the Presidium members, the Soviet Union started shipping nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 Khrushchev immediately responded by letter to Kennedy stating the actions would violate international law . However, Soviet ships were promptly ordered to turn back . The incident occurred in the early 1960s .
 The two leaders continued to correspond to one another in an effort to end the crisis . The crisis has been dubbed a humanitarian crisis .
 Khrushchev wrote John F Kennedy a letter on October 26, which hinted at an offer to remove the missiles from Cuba . The Soviets continued to assemble the missiles on the island, but Kennedy refused to remove them .
 After the threat of an attack subsided, he wrote another letter on October 27 that talked about a settlement which involved the removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for removal of the Cuban missiles .
 Soviet forces, without authorization, shot down a U-2 over Cuba . The situation remained tense when Soviet forces shot down the U.2 without authorization .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles after Kennedy ensured him the U.S. would not invade Cuba . On October 28, the missiles were withdrawn from Cuba . Kennedy ensured that the United States would not engage in Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles from Turkey, but this was to remain secret from the public . The U.S. agreed to keep it secret, making it look like a capitulation to many, including Castro and the Chinese .
 Much of the research on Khrushchev’s role in the crisis has been focused on explaining why he made the decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev viewed placing missiles in Cuba as a cure-all that would alleviate his domestic troubles and prove to his colleagues that he was a worthy leader . Taubman indicates that placing missiles on Cuba would ease his domestic woes .
 The primary interest of this study is to determine if Khrushchev’s beliefs changed as a result of the Cuban missile crisis . The primary focus of the study will be to find out if the Cuban crisis changed Khrushchchev's beliefs .
 Hoagland used a qualitative method to examine Khrushchev’s operational code before the Berlin Crisis and between the Berlin and Cuban crises in order to determine if his instrumental beliefs changed between the two events .
 This study measures Khrushchev’s operational code using the Verb in Context System . It will determine if Khrushchev’�s beliefs changed following the Cuban missile crisis .
 This paper examines Khrushchev’s operational code to determine if his beliefs changed significantly due to the Cuban missile crisis . Method This paper examined the operational code .
 In order to measure Khrushchev’s beliefs, 15 speeches in two samples were collected before and after the crisis .
 Speeches were selected from 1958 onward because Khrushchev did not consolidate his leadership as party leader and premier until March of 1958 when Bulganin resigned . Speeches from 1958 onwards were selected for speeches from 1958 .
 The speeches were selected from the table of contents based upon their title, in order to determine if the speech pertained to Soviet foreign policy towards the United States . The speeches are selected based on the title of the speeches .
 The speeches all met the 1,000 minimum word length that the Verbs In Context System requires for coding purposes .
 Current Digest of the Soviet Press was produced by an independent nonprofit organization affiliated with the American Association for the Advancement of Slavic Studies and the American Council of Learned Societies .
 CDSP selected, translated, and abstracted articles from the press of the Soviet Union . The CDSP has translated, translated or abstracted Soviet-era press articles .
 The publication surveyed newspapers and periodicals that represented the most significant elements of the Soviet press . The survey was conducted by the publication .
 Coverage included ""condensed text” reports, which may be long or short; ellipses indicate where material has been omitted, and ""abstract" reports which summarized articles in whole or part .
 All of the Khrushchev’s speeches that were selected for this study were marked as “complete text” by the CDSP indicating that they were reprinted in their entirety .
 Sample Khrushchev’s public and prepared verbal material were used for the sample primarily due to their availability . The sample was taken from the public and verbal material used in the sample .
 There is argument among “at a distance” scholars regarding which type of public verbal material, prepared or spontaneous more accurately portrays a leader’s psychological characteristics .
 Leaders participate in the speechwriting process by providing ideas that they want to discuss, reading over the text, and making changes to the speech . Schafer notes that most leaders participate in speechwriting .
 After all the speeches were selected, they had to be transferred into the computer for analysis . Procedure was carried out using a computer to analyse the speeches .
 Each speech was scanned into the computer and an optical character recognition program was used so the computer would recognize the speeches as text .
 Profiler + contains a coding dictionary for VICS that identifies transitive verbs and places them in self or other categories based upon positive and negative valences . Profiler+ contains a code dictionary for the VICS .
 Profiler + produces numbers to self and other categories for each speech . Profiler produces numbers for self and produces other categories to self .
 Each self and other category contains a range from +3 to -3 which represent the positive or negative attributes the speaker makes to self and others . The range is used to calculate the operational code beliefs .
 An excel spreadsheet was created by Mark Schafer, one of the creators of VICS, was used to calculate each operational code belief .
 The data from Profiler + was placed into the corresponding self and other categories in the excel spreadsheet . The data was placed in the corresponding categories .
 The spreadsheet contains the formulas that are used in the VICS indices to create quantitative data for each philosophical and instrumental belief before and after the crisis . The spreadsheet is based on the data from each of the world's political and economic leaders .
 An average score for each belief was compared before and after the crisis . Khrushchev’s beliefs were calculated using the average score of each belief .
 Khrushchev’s VICS scores for his philosophical beliefs before the crisis were added together and divided by his eight speeches before and after the crisis . The scores were added to the VICS score by his seven speeches before, during and after crisis .
 His instrumental beliefs before and after crisis were added together and divided by eight speeches . His beliefs after the crisis were divided by seven speeches . He added his instrumental beliefs after crisis to seven speeches to eight speeches.
 A difference in means test was performed using SPSS software with time as the grouping variable in order to determine if learning occurred based upon statistically significant differences in beliefs before and after the crisis .
 Khrushchev’s operational code indicates simple learning which refers to changes in his instrumental beliefs . The significance differences for each belief were examined before and after the crisis by a one-tailed difference in means test .
 Khrushchev’s philosophical beliefs before and after the crisis were also examined to determine if diagnostic learning occurred at the p ≤ .05 significance level . The study was conducted to determine whether diagnostic learning was diagnostic learning .
 In order to test the hypothesis that Khrushchev learned as a result of the crisis, an independent sample difference of means 1 1 test was performed to measure the difference in n1 n 2 .
 A one-tailed test was implemented with thirteen degrees of freedom, making the t critical value 1.77 . In the study, the study was carried out with a one-tail test with a critical value of 1,77 .
 A t-score that is higher than the critical value of 1.77 for a particular belief indicates that learning occurred and is statistically significant at the p≤.05 level .
 Observing the t-scores for each belief, it is apparent that none of his philosophical beliefs differed significantly before or after the crisis .
 Khrushchev's philosophical beliefs before and after the crisis did not approach the critical t-scores of 1.77 . The t-score does not approach a critical t value of 1 .77 .
 The t-scores for his use of appeals and rewards exceed the t critical value of 1.77, which makes them statistically significant . His t-score is statistically significant, according to the study .
 The t-scores for his remaining instrumental beliefs indicate simple learning did not occur because they failed to reach the critical t value of 1.77 . His remaining beliefs did not reach that level .
 The only other index that approached significance was Khrushchev’s pursuit of goals I-2, with a t-score value of -1.67 . The other index is the goal-scoring value of the Soviet Union-era Soviet Union goals .
 None of his other beliefs come close to being statistically significant as a result of the difference of means test . None of these beliefs are statistically significant .
 Study suggests nearly all of his philosophical and instrumental beliefs remained constant from 1958-1963 . An examination of his beliefs will help to determine his general operational code in which this study suggests .
 Operational Code Mean Scores for Khrushchev Before and After the Crisis . Khushchev before and after the crisis: Before After t .
 This study seeks to determine if Khrushchev's views toward the political universe, specifically towards the United States, changed following the Cuban missile crisis . The study includes speeches made by the Soviet leader regarding foreign policy .
 Before and after the Cuban missile crisis, Khrushchev had a moderately conflictual view of the political universe represented by his scores of and respectively .
 He was moderately pessimistic about the prospects for realizing his political values with before the crisis and following the crisis, he said . He said he was "mildly pessimistic" about his political prospects .
 Khrushchev saw the political future as unpredictable and felt that he had little control over historical development before and after the crisis . He saw the future of the Soviet Union as unpredictable .
 His view of the political future as unpredictable and his belief that he had low control over historical development influenced his belief regarding the role that chance has in affecting political events . His belief that the future is unpredictable influenced his view of political future .
 Khrushchev felt that chance played a high role in the political universe with a score of before and after the crisis . The former Soviet Union leader felt chance played an important role in politics .
 Khrushchev’s instrumental belief mean scores before and after the crisis reveals his view of self in the political universe regarding his use of strategy and tactics .
 Khrushchev’s approach toward his political goals before and after the crisis indicates that he was moderately cooperative, writes Peter Bergen .
 He pursued his goals with moderately cooperative tactics of before the crisis and following the crisis, he says . He says .
 His mean score was higher following the crisis, indicating that he adopted more cooperative tactics . Although the results were not significant, his mean score increased after the crisis . This suggests that he took more cooperative measures .
 Khrushchev managed risk by employing a somewhat unpredictable repertoire of tactics before and after the crisis . The crisis in the 1960s was the first time the Soviet Union had faced a major crisis .
 He had a high propensity to shift between words and deeds with scores of before and after the crisis . He also had a tendency to shift from words to deeds and deeds .
 The utility of means indices indicate Khrushchev’s tendency to use particular cooperative and conflictual verbs, which represent the tactics he employed to exercise power . The utility indices indicate the utility of these verbs .
 The conflictual verbs are represented by threaten, punish, and oppose with threaten being the most conflictual . Threat is represented by threatening, punish and oppose .
 The cooperative verbs range from reward as the most cooperative to promise and appeal . The cooperative verb phrases range from promise to appeal to reward .
 Khrushchev preferred the use of appeals , oppose , and punish for exercising political power before the crisis . Khruschev preferred to use appeals and oppose, and punish .
 Following the crisis he relied upon reward , appeals , and oppose as his primary utility of means . After the crisis .
 Two of Khrushchev’s utility of means indices, including his use of reward and appeal exceeded the critical t value of 1.77 indicating that he experienced simple learning regarding the tactics he employed .
 Khrushchev’s use of rewards before the crisis shows an increase to after the crisis with a t-score of -2.01.01 . The use of reward rewards before and after crisis shows increased to after crisis .
 His use of appeals shows a decrease with a score of before and after with a t-score of 2.09 . His appeal score is a decrease of 0.9 per cent .
 Khrushchev’s operational code beliefs at the philosophical level did not change significantly, indicating that he did not experience diagnostic learning as a result of the missile crisis . Discussion Discussion Discussion .
 Khrushchev experienced simple learning regarding his use of rewards and appeals . However, his remaining instrumental beliefs remained constant . The former Soviet leader was never satisfied with his methods .
 A number of explanations exist to explain why the majority of Khrushchev’s beliefs remained stable following the crisis including the concept of retrospective rationality, personality rigidities, and the doctrinal nature of Bolshevik and Marxist belief systems .
 Khrushchev’s motivation for placing missiles in Cuba was a motivation for the move . The missile crisis was one of the primary questions of interest to scholars in the country .
 In all the sources researched, it is apparent that the initial decision to place missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev’s idea . The initial decision was made in Cuba in the 1960s .
 Many scholars of the crisis do not give credence to Khrushchev’s explanation and feel that he was trying to preserve his reputation . Many scholars believe he was preserving the Soviet Union's reputation following the foreign policy defeat .
 Khrushchev faced criticism for his decision from other Socialist governments . Chinese, Cubans, and fellow Soviet party colleagues felt that the missile removal made the Soviet Union look weak .
 Many dismissed the “promise” from the United States not to invade as farcical, considering it was a verbal agreement that had no legal significance in international law . Many also dismissed the "promise" from the U.S. not to invasion as a farc
 Khrushchev’s beliefs regarding the success of the missile crisis mirrors a concept in psychology known as retrospective rationality . Tetlock implemented by Tetlock in his research regarding accountability regarding accountability .
 Individuals subject to high levels of accountability after a crisis will often try to defend their behavior through creative rationalizations and public defenses . Individuals that are subject to . high . levels of . accountability after . crisis will . often try . to defend themselves through creative . rationalizations .
 Justifications for the decision are made and the individual starts believing in his own rationalizations . Justifications are made for the decisions made by the individual .
 George observes that personality rigidities can also prevent belief change . Personality rigidities prevent belief changes, he says .
 Khrushchev never questioned or admitted any type of error regarding the decision to place missiles in Cuba . It is obvious from public statements and memoirs that he never questioned the decision .
 Moscow party boss Nikolai Yeguychev reflects an interesting aspect of Khrushchev’s personality regarding his belief that his decisions were infallible, “Even when he’d knew he had made a mistake, perhaps especially then, he couldn’t bring himself
 Khrushchev started to get conceited in 1957 after defeat of 'anti party group' Taubman says he got conceited and started to believe that his own judgments were infallible .
 Marxist/Bolshevik Belief System explains why Khrushchev’s beliefs remained the same following the crisis . Alexander George introduces another explanation .
 George provides some interesting insight into the structure of the Marxist belief system .
 Khrushchev’s belief system was based upon Bolshevik and Marxist doctrines . Evidence to suggest that he was influenced by Bolshevik doctrines . There is evidence to suggest he believed in the Communist Party .
 Zubok notes that Khrushchev’s belief system still retained Bolshevik doctrines such as his belief in the aggressive nature of imperialism and the responsibility of the Soviet Union to support wars .
 There is evidence to support Zubok’s claim from the results of this study as well as comments made by Khrushchev following the crisis, says Zubok .
 Khrushchev reiterated that the Soviet Union would continue to support national liberation movements in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . In his speech on the international situation following the crisis, Khrushche said that the USSR would continue its support for national liberation .
 Khrushchev pursued national liberation wars in order to prove the Marxist/Bolshevik doctrine that socialism would prevail over capitalism . Ulam indicates that the policy was to ensure the ideology did not become an empty promise .
 Khrushchev altered his beliefs regarding the inevitability of war, George indicates . George indicates that they were modifications rather than an abandonment or transformation of his Bolshevik beliefs . George also indicates that the changes were modifications .
 Khrushchev had to adapt to the inevitability of war doctrine due to the destructive capabilities of nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union was forced to adapt its doctrine to accept the threat of war .
 Peaceful coexistence still upheld the doctrine that communism would triumph over capitalism . Success would be measured economically, rather than militarily, in communist society .
 Khrushchev’s constant reforms to the party bureaucracy as well as his promise that a communist society would be built in the Soviet Union by 1980 . Another aspect of his rule that emphasizes his unwavering belief in Marxism/Leninism was his constant reforms .
 Khrushchev realized that consumer goods and agricultural products needed to be more readily available . In order to achieve this goal, Khrrushchev wanted to make consumer goods available .
 His efforts were not successful and he began to alienate members of the party who were increasingly threatened by his reforms . His efforts began to be unsuccessful and he became increasingly isolated .
 Following the Cuban missile crisis, scholars suggested that the relationship between the two superpowers moved in a more cooperative direction . Khrushchev’s Operational Code Beliefs .
 A measurement of Khrushchev's operational code was taken before and after the crisis . It was taken to determine if this cooperation could be attributed to learning on the part of the Soviet leader .
 The results of this study indicate that Khrushchev’s view of the political universe (representing his view of others, particularly the U.S.) would be significantly different p ≤ .05 indicating that he viewed the United States in a more cooperative light following the event .
 Khrushchev’s mean scores regarding his view of the political universe indicate he maintained a moderately conflictual view before and after the crisis . However, his mean scores indicate he was a moderate conflictual leader .
 Khrushchev made the remarks in a speech in August 1963 . He continued to mistrust of the West in the 1960s .
 The Cuban missile crisis was unable to alter Khrushchev’s conflictual view of the U.S. It appears that the missile crisis failed to alter his view of U.K.
 Khrushchev’s highest mean score involves the role that chance plays in political outcomes with before and after the crisis . The score is based on the political outcomes of the crisis in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The scores from Khrushchev’s philosophical indices indicate that overall he did not have a very cooperative view of the U.S. before or after the crisis . The scores show that overall, overall, he was not cooperative with the United States .
 Zubok says Khrushchev continued to mistrust the U.S. following the Cuban missile crisis . Zubok: "The results would seem to support Zubok’s claim that Khrushchevitch continued to distrust the United States"
 He experienced a change in his instrumental belief regarding how to advance his goals . Although his philosophical beliefs which reflect his perceptions of the United States remained constant, he changed his beliefs .
 Following the crisis, Khrushchev increased his propensity to use reward as a means of exercising power, study finds .
 Khrushchev experienced simple learning regarding his use of reward as a means to exercise power, which led him to apply positive sanctions in his relationship with the U.S. The former Soviet leader says he learned from the lessons he learned about the use of rewards .
 His use of appeals decreased following the crisis . He implemented appeals as an exercise of power more frequently than oppose, threaten or punish .
 Khrushchev’s instrumental beliefs provide a portrait of his view of self in the political universe regarding his use of strategy and the tactics he implemented in pursuit of his political goals . The author of the book, "Krushchev's Theory of the Power of the State"
 Khrushchev dropped Stalin’s belief in the inevitably of war in favor of peaceful coexistence, Leites says . Khrushov's instrumental beliefs reflect the assertion made by Leites that he dropped Stalin's belief .
 Zubok's approach to political goals was moderately cooperative before and after the crisis . Zubok’s observation that the crisis reinforced his belief in peaceful coexistence. Zubok says he believes in peaceful relations between Russia and Ukraine .
 His tactics before and after the crisis also appear to be moderately cooperative . His tactics are also moderate to be cooperative .
 Khrushchev had a high propensity to shift between cooperative and conflictual tactics . This indicates that the timing of action was important in assessing the risks of political action .
 Khrushchev alternated between conflictual and cooperative tactics . It is apparent through Khrushvic’s foreign policy endeavors that he alternated . It was apparent through his foreign policy efforts that he was trying to avoid conflict .
 Zubok indicates Khrushchev was always in flux regarding his commitment to the national liberation doctrine of the Bolsheviks and peaceful coexistence policies . Zubok explains why he vacillated between conflictual and cooperative tactics .
 Khrushchev’s utility of means regarding his use of rewards and appeals provide the only significant results in this study . The study was conducted by the Office of State Department .
 The increase in Khrushchev’s propensity to use reward indicates that following the crisis, he was more willing to use positive sanctions in exercising power, says historian .
 It does appear that Khrushchev’s more cooperative exercises of power were used more frequently than his conflictual ones . It does seem; however, that it does appear, that .
 This might explain why he relied on cooperative exercises of power more frequently than conflictual ones . This might help explain why .
 Steven Hoagland did a qualitative study on Khrushchev’s operational code during the post Berlin/pre Cuban period to determine if the Berlin crisis altered his instrumental beliefs, representing actions and tactics he implemented .
 Hoagland examined Khrushchev’s written and verbal statements during his sample period . He extracted the relevant responses that corresponded to the instrumental operational code questions . He then compared his responses to his past actions to determine if his actions resembled those of his past .
 Hoagland concluded in his research that there was no significant change in Khrushchev’s instrumental beliefs in the 13 months that separated the Berlin and Cuban crises . The research was conducted by Hoaglands .
 Only two of Khrushchev’s instrumental beliefs showed significant change during the sample period 1958-1963 . According to the results of this study, only two of his instrumental beliefs were significant change .
 The stability of Khrushchev’s operational code beliefs provides support to the theory that his personality rigidities and that his belief system had doctrinal qualities due to its Marxist/Bolshevik base . The stability provides support for the theory of personality rigidity .
 Cuban missile crisis contributed to his inability to learn following the crisis . Both of these factors contributed to him not being able to learn from the Cuban crisis .
 Khrushchev’s operational code beliefs were measured to determine if the Cuban missile crisis altered his perceptions of the political universe and his political tactics in a more cooperative direction .
 The results of this study indicate that the crisis did not alter the majority of Khrushchev’s beliefs, the study says . The study was published in the New York Review of Science .
 A study of how the crisis affected Nikita Khrushchev to determine if his beliefs became more cooperative as a result of the crisis . The study will determine if Khrushchevitch's beliefs become more cooperative .
 The results reveal that the crisis did not alter Khrushchev’s beliefs in a more cooperative direction . Rather, rather, his beliefs remained stable, the author says . The results show that the . crisis did . not alter the beliefs of Khrush .
 Khrushchev’s failure to learn can be attributed to his personality rigidities . He did not allow him to question and learn from his decisions, writes David Frum .
 Khrushchev engaged in retrospective rationality, in which he defended his decision to place missiles in Cuba as a success . In order to protect himself and the image of the Soviet Union, he engaged in retrospect .
 He began to believe in his own rationalizations, which thwarted any retrospective or self-assessment that could have produced a change in his beliefs, he says .
 Khrushchev’s belief system was also mired with Marxist and Bolshevik doctrines, so much so that even an event such as the Cuban missile crisis could not alter his operational code beliefs .
 The Marxist and Bolshevik doctrine strongly influenced future Soviet leaders . Many scholars argue that Gorbachev was the first Soviet leader who began to reconsider many of the doctrine .
 This study provides valuable insight into a political leader’s beliefs and how crisis can affect beliefs . The study was conducted by the University of Cambridge University in Cambridge .
 The operational code and the Verbs in Context System provide belief system theorists with vital tools to determine if political leaders’ beliefs change as the result of a crisis . Political leaders' beliefs may change depending on what political leaders believe .
 This model can be used to study other political leaders in order to determine the affect that crisis has on their beliefs . The model can provide new insights into the perceptions and character of political leaders .
 A further application of this study would involve comparing Khrushchev’s operational code to other Soviet leaders such as Stalin and Brezhnev in order to determine how Marxist and Bolshevik doctrines affected each leader .
 Khrushchev laid the foundation for Gorbachev’s subsequent policies, scholars speculate . It would also be interesting to compare the operational code to that of the Soviet-era leader .
 Gorbachev is recognized as the first Soviet leader to abandon some of the more stringent Bolshevik doctrines . A comparison of each leader's operational code might reveal to what extent each leader’s beliefs differed .
 Applying this model to each leader of the Soviet Union would give scholars a more accurate portrayal of how Soviet policy and Bolshevik doctrines evolved and changed over the course of each leader's rule .
 Khrushchev’s private statements made to the Presidium and Central Committee members during and after the crisis could be analyzed and compared with his public statements to determine if his beliefs differed .
 A study by Marfleet examined President Kennedy’s public rhetoric during the crisis and his private rhetoric to the Executive Committee members . It found that differences existed between his public and private verbal material .
 If the Russian government ever released private conversations between Khrushchev and Presidium members during the crisis, a similar study could be conducted to determine if Khrushche's rhetoric varied between source material and material .
 Operational code analysis is a valuable tool used to assess the psychological characteristics of political leaders . Operational codes analysis is often used in assessing political leaders' psychological characteristics .
 Operational code analysis has become easier to conduct and remains an important tool in assessing the beliefs of political leaders . The Verbs in Context System and automating coding programs such as Profiler + are important tools in assessing political beliefs .
 A neglected approach to the study of political leaders and decision-making . The study of leaders and leaders is a neglected approach .
 The causal nexus between cognitive beliefs and decisionmaking behavior is the result of a causal nexus .
 The role of the Cuban missile crisis and the partial nuclear test ban treaty are key to the nuclear disarmament crisis . The Cuban Missile Crisis was a major event in the U.S. history .
 A quantitative analysis of Anwar Sadat’s operational code before and after the October War of 1973 . Sadat's operational code was used in the September 1973 conflict in Egypt .
 Profiler+ in applications of computer content analysis. Building worldviews with Profiler+. Profiler + is a form of content analysis that can be used to build worldviews .