 President John F Kennedy complained to the Soviet Union about these developments . The U.S. would not accept offensive weapons in Cuba .
 The public opinion polls showed that his own ratings had fallen to their lowest point since he became president . Republicans and conservative southern Democrats in Congress had blocked much of Kennedy's proposed legislation .
 The Republicans attempted to make Cuba the main issue in the campaign . This was probably in Kennedy's mind when he decided to restrict the flights of the U-2 planes .
 CIA agent overheard Castro's personal pilot tell another man in a bar that Cuba now has nuclear weapons . Kennedy hoped this would ensure that a U-2 plane would not be shot down .
 President Kennedy's first reaction to the information about the missiles in Cuba was to call a meeting to discuss what should be done . However, it was not until 15th October that photographs were taken that revealed that the Soviet Union was placing long range missiles in the country .
 Use nuclear weapons against Cuba and/or the Soviet Union . When discussing these strategies, consider using nuclear weapons in the future .
 President Kennedy and his advisers had to take into consideration how the Soviet Union and Cuba would react to decisions made by the U.S.
 Executive Committee of the National Security Council argued amongst themselves for the next two days . The committee was now so divided that a firm decision could not be made .
 The majority of the committee gradually began to favour a naval blockade of Cuba . Kennedy accepted their decision and instructed Theodore Sorensen to write a speech explaining why it was necessary .
 Kennedy promised to attack Cuban SAM missile sites if one of the U-2 spy planes was fired upon . Kennedy also promised his military advisers that he would attack the Cuban SAM sites .
 President Kennedy was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the U.S. ships blockading Cuba . Polls suggested that the vast majority supported Kennedy's action .
 Khrushchev wrote a letter demanding that the U.S. remove their nuclear bases in Turkey . The next day, news came through that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba .
 Kennedy refused and instead sent a letter to Khrushchev accepting the terms of his first letter . Khushchev agreed and gave orders for the missiles to be dismantled . Kennedy refused .
 The two sides established a direct communications link that became known as the Hot Line . The Hot Line was established between the two sides of the Cold War .
 The split between the Soviet Union and China became wider . The U.S. became convinced that the Soviets would not go to war over another communist country .
 In 1984 Fidel Castro was interviewed by the American journalist, Tad Szulc . In 1984, the Cuban leader was interviewed for the first time in his life .
 The journalist asked Castro why he was willing to allow Soviet missiles to be placed in Cuba . Castro made it clear to the United States that an invasion of Cuba would imply a war with the Soviet Union .
 Cuba sent Che Guevara to Moscow to request nuclear missiles with which to defend their country . The Soviet Union agreed to supply the missiles .
 Theodore Sorensen was a close friend and political adviser to President John F Kennedy . He was a friend and adviser to the Kennedy family .
 The Cuban government sent Che Guevara to Moscow to request nuclear missiles with which to defend their country . The Soviet Union agreed to supply the missiles .
 Russian reluctance to move nuclear weapons from Soviet soil, if they merely sent rockets and non-nuclear warheads . One wonders, given Russia reluctance to send nuclear weapons, if it actually sent rockets .
 If the Kremlin's purpose was essentially political, all they needed to do was give the appearance of nuclear capability . The Kremlin needed to show it had nuclear capability, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Sending atomic warheads to Cuba offered certain disadvantages . Moreover, sending atomic warheads had certain disadvantages, the author says .
 Something might go wrong such as a ship sinking or a misfire, or even the Cuban government grabbing them . The Cuban government might even grab them .
 The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba had drastically altered the balance of world power . Russia's presence of Cuban missiles in the country has drastically altered world power balance .
 President Kennedy made a speech to the nation on radio and television about the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy made the speech on October 22, 1962 .
 Below is an edited version of the speech . The speech was made by President Barack Obama .
 Each of these missiles is capable of striking Washington, D.C., Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area .
 For the first time in twenty years Americans can carry their head high because the president of the United States had stood up to the premier of Russia and made him back down . The president of Russia's Vladimir Putin is standing down .
 Mario Lazo, a Cuban lawyer, was a supporter of the Batista regime that was overthrown by Castro . Lazo was a staunch opponent of the Castro regime . He was a lawyer who fought for the Cuban government .
 The accounts of the crisis did not make clear that it was a power confrontation, that the power of the USA was incomparably superior to that of the USSR .
 Stone, a journalist, wrote an article on Kennedy after he was assassinated in 1963 . Stone wrote about Kennedy's assassination . Stone: "It's not easy to say goodbye to Kennedy"
 It would be well to think it over carefully before canonizing Kennedy as an apostle of peace . Since this is the kind of bluff that can easily be played once too often, it would be wise to think carefully .
 Ambassador Dobrynin's Cable to the Soviet Foreign Ministry . Late tonight R Kennedy invited me to come see him. R Kennedy was invited to see him . Ambassador Dobynin's cable was sent from Moscow .
 On the whole Turkey issue,""R Kennedy added, ""if Premier NS Khrushchev agrees with what I've said, we can continue to exchange opinions between him and the president, using him, R Kennedy and the Soviet ambassador" on the issue .