 Day 6 is Day 6 of the U.S. President Barack Obama's tour of the Middle East . The U.N. troops are preparing for war in Afghanistan .
 Clear and precise directives are an essential part of such adventures, especially when the troops are armed with nukes . Clear instructions are essential, especially in the face of such an adventure .
 Politics on the other hand is fraught with ambiguity and lack of clarity, especially when it involves a potential nuclear war . Politics is more ambiguous than politics, especially in the case of a nuclear war, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Yesterday, October 20th, the U.S. administration decided to impose a naval blockade on Cuba beginning tomorrow the 22nd . The blockade will be imposed by the United States .
 The Soviets were deeply mistaken in thinking that they had deterred the U.S. from decisive action on Cuba . The Soviets thought that they were deterring the United States from taking action . The United States was not deterred by their actions on Cuba, but by the Soviet Union .
 The preparations for the blockade and for a possible war are underway today, Sunday October 21st, 1962 . The preparations are underway .
 It’s virtually impossible to mobilize the armed forces of the U.S. without someone noticing . It's virtually impossible for the United States to mobilize without noticing .
 All you need are a few people in the right places, observing the movement of people and material to connect the dots . All the dots are connected by people who connect them with each other .
 The Soviets are alerted to the fact that their assessment yesterday is inaccurate . That’s exactly what happens today when the U.S. is alerted .
 The central question is how to react in case of a U.S. invasion of Cuba, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: How do you react to an American invasion? The Cuban government is prepared to prepare for a possible invasion .
 Nikita Khrushchev and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko were architects of the whole Soviet-missiles-on-Cuba plan . Marshal Matvei Zakharov argued for allowing the use of tactical nukes in a case of an American invasion .
 Deputy Chairman Mikoyan and Defense Minister Marshal Malinowsky met opposition . They met opposition from both world wars and Russian Civil War veterans .
 Malinowsky is an outstanding military leader who is in the process of turning the Red Army into one of the most fearsome fighting forces ever seen . The Red Army is one of Russia's most feared fighting forces in history .
 He is an outspoken pacifist and a believer in a conventional defense policy . But he is also a staunch supporter of the U.S. military's conventional defense .
 To him, nuclear arms should only be used strategically as a deterrent to keep the peace, never on the field, he says . He says nuclear weapons should be used as a military deterrent, not as a football field .
 Khrushchev prevails, or at least he thinks he does, in the end . In the end they can't find common ground, but Khrushvic prevails . He thinks he did, but he does .
 An order is drafted, but when it lands on Malinowsky's desk for signature, he stalls and just leaves it there unsigned . The order is not part of Zacharov's signed memorandum, so when the battle orders are formally issued it’s not included .
 The unsigned instructions have already been given orally to most of the commanders on the ground . Unfortunately, the unsigned instructions are already being given orally .
 Luna missiles can carry a nuclear warhead with an explosive yield as low as 3 kilotons and has high as 200 warheads . Luna missiles are capable of carrying a nuclear weapon with a yield of up to 3 kiloton . The Luna missiles have a range of warheads and can carry more
 The lowest yield would kill about 65,000 and injure almost 250,000 if blown up over Paris . Lowest yield would be 65,00 and injure about 250,00 if blown out over Paris.
 Russians have at least seven missiles ready to fire from land and 12 from ships at sea . An estimated additional 70 warheads are also in storage together with the strategic warheads .
 The Soviet forces have both been ordered to use and not use tactical nukes at their own discretion . So, today, today the Soviet forces are both ordered to . use and to not use these tactical . nukes .
 Soviet Forces on Cuba remain on alert with tactical nuclear readiness, in a political vacuum . For now, the Soviet forces on Cuba are on alert . The Cuban government is in a state of emergency .
 The United States armed forces find themselves in a remarkably similar situation . Meanwhile, the U.S. armed forces are in a similar situation in Afghanistan .
 President Kennedy has walked a thin line between decisive military actions and diplomatic restraint regarding Cuba for some time . As we’ve already seen, he has walked the thin line .
 Kennedy is trying his best to satisfy everyone and still stay his own preferred course by not getting involved in another embarrassing adventure on Cuba like the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The situation he has tried so hard to avoid is now facing him .
 Kennedy believes the quarantine is the compromise that will allow him to avoid a war . After all that’s been said, after all the actions that have been taken, he believes that the blockade, or quarantine as they call it, is the .
 He hopes that the Soviets will back down; he also hopes that he can reign in his own hawks who are pressing hard for an invasion or air strikes as a show of force . President Obama hopes to reign in hawks pushing hard for a Soviet invasion .
 He has set a machine into motion that is almost pre-programmed to end with war . In fact, he has set up a machine in motion that could end with a war .
 President told the Joint Chiefs to continue preparations for the exactly these things should the USSR not back down . Remember that yesterday it was decided to not go for airstrikes and to not invade Cuba .
 A total blockade on Cuba to stop any ships leaving or entering Cuban territorial waters . A total embargo on Cuba would stop ships leaving and entering Cuban territory waters .
 They can call it a quarantine as much as they want, but by international law this IS an act of war . By international law, this is not only a quarantine, but a quarantine is declared war in Syria .
 The line will initially be held by 12 destroyers, with the aircraft carrier Essex leading an anti-submarine warfare carrier group . The carrier group will be based in Bermuda and Puerto Rico .
 The naval force will be gradually increased to include the aircraft carrier group, two cruisers, 22 destroyers, two frigates carrying tactical nuclear cruise missile, and an undisclosed number of submarines .
 The quarantine announcement will be accompanied by a demand to the USSR to withdraw the missiles from Cuba . The USSR will be asked to withdraw missiles from the country .
 If they do not withdraw the missiles, the destruction of the missile sites will follow . If they don't withdraw, the missiles will be destroyed, says South Korea's president .
 Several hundred jet fighters and bombers will fly more than 1,500 sorties on the first day alone . The U.S. military says it will launch more than a dozen sorties at the start of the mission .
 The plan is to invade Cuba with an initial force of 200,000 troops . After seven to eight days of continuous air strikes, the plan will be carried out . The Cuban government is expected to launch an offensive in Cuba .
 Troops already have permission to use tactical nuclear arms to respond to any tactical nuclear strikes by the Russians . These troops have been authorized to use nuclear arms in response to any Russian strikes .
 If these actions fail to eliminate the missiles, there is a contingency plan to drop kiloton range thermonuclear charges on missile sites .
 Even by the most conservative calculation, that last action will wipe Cuba out of existence . Cuba is already in danger of being wiped out by the Cuban government .
 This is exactly what the United States military is preparing for and what some of the generals are even hoping for . Now, you might think that this is just a theoretical contingency plan .
 I just don’t see any other solution except direct military intervention right now. "I just don't see no other solution," he says of the situation .
 The military is taking a harder line in the direction of the U.S. military in Iraq, says President Obama . The U.N. has been criticized for its policy on Iraq .
 Boats full of bombs, missiles, aircraft, and troops are already at seas sailing heading for Cuba . Boats of bombs and missiles are already on the way to Cuba .
 Hundreds of fighter jets and bombers are being armed and made ready at the East Coast military airfields . Hundreds of fighters and bombers will be armed at East Coast airfields in New Jersey .
 Paratroops and infantrymen all over the US are confined to quarters . 150,000 reserves have already been called in to combat .
 The nuclear forces of the United States are preparing to go on high alert . U.S. nuclear forces are preparing for a nuclear attack .
 World in general has no idea that they are about to be shocked with Cold War steel suddenly glowing hot with the threat of radiation . So far, very few of them know why, and the world in general hasn't .
 See you tomorrow on day 6, when the Cuba Crisis grows ever hotter . Kennedy cabinet carefully weigh their words before they announce their actions to the world .
 We’re already planning out next big project, which will be covering Pearl Harbor minute by minute in ten episodes December 7th in real time . Pearl Harbor will be covered in real-time on December 7, 1941 .
 The TG Army is raising money for the next generation of television programming . We need your support at TG.tv and patreon.com . Join us and the TG Army on our next episode of the series .