 Lifestyle America had freedom and a two-party democracy . Russia had secret police and a one-party state . Lifestyle U.S. had freedom in Russia . Russia has secret police, secret police .
 Truman did not tell Stalin that he had the atomic bomb . Twenty million Russians died during the Second World War . Stalin said he wanted a buffer zone of friendly states around Russia .
 Communists from occupied countries of Eastern Europe escaped to Moscow and set up Communist governments in exile there . During the war, Communists from the occupied countries in Eastern Europe set up communist governments in Moscow .
 In the countries that the Red Army ""liberated"", communist-dominated governments took power . The Red Army's "liberation" was followed by a communist government .
 Communists made sure they controlled the army, set up a secret police force, and began to arrest their opponents . The Communists set up secret police forces to arrest opponents . Communists controlled army and set up police force to arrest oppositionists .
 Non-Communists were beaten, murdered, executed and terrified out of power . Non-communists were gradually beaten and murdered out of the power of the USSR .
 By 1949, all the governments of Eastern Europe, except Yugoslavia, were hard line Stalinist regimes . Yugoslavia was one of the last few countries in Eastern Europe to fall under Stalinist rule .
 Churchill declared that an Iron Curtain had come down across Europe, and that Soviet power was growing and had to be stopped . In 1946, in a speech at Fulton in the USA, he declared that the Soviet power in Europe was growing .
 Revision Bite: The Allies split Germany into four zones of occupation . In this Revision Bite, you will learn about these policies . The Berlin Blockade and airlift were part of the airlift .
 In 1945, Korea was split along the 38th parallel between a communist north led by Kim IL Sung, and a non-communist south led by Syngman Rhee . On 12 May 1949, Stalin abandoned the blockade of Korea .
 In 1950, a report by the American National Security Council recommended that the U.S. stop containment and start to roll back communism . Then, in 1950, the United States stopped containment and started rolling back communism, report said .
 In 1950, after getting the support of Russia and China, Kim IL Sung invaded South Korea . The war began in 1950, with the help of China and Russia .
 The war went on as border clashes until 1953 when America's new president, Eisenhower, offered peace . Eisenhower threatened to use the atomic bomb if China did not accept the offer .
 When Stalin died, it looked like a new era was beginning between East and West . Historians have shown that the Korean crisis almost led to a third world war .
 He was a jolly man who said to prevent the most destructive war in history, there needed to be ""peaceful co-existence" between the superpowers .
 He said Stalin was a terrible tyrant and wanted to ""de-Stalinise" Eastern Europe . He said he wanted to 'de-stalinise' Eastern Europe.
 The period 1953-1960 was the time of greatest danger in the Cold War . In fact, the period of 1953-60 was the greatest danger . The Cold War was the most dangerous period in history .
 Khrushchev sent in Russian troops to re-establish Soviet control of Eastern Europe . Eastern Europe led to anti-Soviet rebellions in 1956 in Poland and Hungary .
 The Americans also used U2 spy planes to spy on Russia . Hungary had been controlled by Russia since 1945 .
 The death of Stalin brought people in many Eastern European countries the hope of freedom and change . But as the 1956 uprising in Hungary proved, this was not to be the case .
 A summit was arranged in Paris to try to sort things out with Russia . But shortly before it was due to take place an American U2 spy plane was shot down over Russia . The summit collapsed after the plane was hit by a missile from Russia .
 The arms race both sides accepted the need for some kind of Nuclear Test Ban treaty . Both sides accepted a need for an arms race .
 The Cold War had just become substantially more dangerous . By the 1960s Berlin was still divided the USSR controlled the East and the USA guaranteed freedom .
 Khrushchev demanded that the US leave West Berlin within six months . At the Vienna Summit of June 1961, therefore, the US left West Berlin . The Vienna Summit was the first time the US was allowed to leave Berlin .