 A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE James Blight, Philip Brenner, Julia Sweig, Svetlana Savranskaya, Graham Allison as moderator John F Kennedy Library and Foundation October 6, 2002 . Good afternoon. Good afternoon .
 As a special incentive for having us all be inside, we've opened up the-you can see what we rarely do-— the screen .
 John Shattuck is the Chief Executive Officer of the John F Kennedy Library Foundation . He says the foundation is dedicated to the Kennedy Library .
 This is the second in our series of discussions of an event that took place 40 years ago, but is very much alive today in many, many dimensions, as you will hear .
 I want to thank the sponsors of these forums, Boston Capital and the Lowell Institute, and our media partners who will help project far beyond the walls of this forum .
 This afternoon, we will look at something that took place 40 years ago and something that historians have all agreed were 13 of the most perilous days in world history . This afternoon we will also look at the events of that day, which took place in 1968 .
 It was also the event above all that defined the nature of the Cold War and demonstrated how to survive it . The Cold War was also a success story for the U.S.
 President Kennedy's presidency was one of a thousand days in the Kennedy administration that perhaps best defined the character and the qualities of leadership of President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The background of the Missile Crisis is very simple, and you will hear much more about this from our distinguished panel of historians . The background to the crisis will be explained by historians from around the world .
 Nikita Khrushchev expected the U.S. to invade Cuba and drive Fidel Castro from office before the end of 1962 . Nikita expected the United States to invade the country and drive Castro out of office .
 Khrushchev thought he had a daring idea about how to deter the invasion . He wanted to demonstrate to the world that the Soviets could compete with the United States in missile power .
 President Kennedy decided secretly to send offensive nuclear missiles to Cuba and then to call Kennedy’s bluff when they were installed . And so, he decided secretly, he sent them to Cuba . Kennedy called it a bluff .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he is proud of his work in the U.S. Senate . He says he's proud of the work he's done in Washington, D.C. He says it's a "very complex and beautiful way" of doing so .
 Obama's leadership in that regard speaks across the decades as Americans today confront another crisis under a different President with the world again on the brink of war, apparently .
 John Sutter's seminal book by that name is still the best-selling account of the Crisis 31 years after it was first published . Sutter: "Our moderator today in many ways owns the very title, essence of decision"
 Graham Allison directs Harvard’s Center for Science and International Affairs . Professor Allison directs the center for science and international affairs at Harvard .
 He served as the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs in the first Clinton administration . Before that, he was Dean of the Kennedy School at Harvard . He was credited with building one of the country's best schools of government .
 Professor Allison Allison is a long-time Russian expert and authority on nuclear policy and weapons of mass destruction . Allison is an expert on nuclear weapons and weapons .
 In recent years, he has been instrumental in assembling teams of scholars to analyze terrorism in its multiple dimensions . He has been critical of terrorism in recent years .
 Philip Brenner's new book, Sad and Luminous Days: Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis, is on sale in our bookstore, and I will shamelessly publicize it .
 Professor Blight has published many other books on U.S.-Cuban relations, Vietnam, and other areas of international relations .
 Julia Sweig is Senior Fellow and Deputy Director of the Latin American Program at the Council on Foreign Relations . Sweig also directs a roundtable series on U.S.-Cuba relations .
 There’s another book to shamelessly promote to you, and it will be on sale afterwards, and I’m sure Dr. Martin will be promoting it to you .
 Sweig, as Phil Brenner and Professor Blight, would be willing to sign her book as well . Sweig would also sign the book with a signed copy .
 She is a professorial lecturer at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies . She is also a lecturer at Johns Hopkins University's School of International Studies.
 Phil and Jim have five minutes to talk about their new book . They will be appearing on CNN.com Live on Sunday at 9 p.m. ET .
 CNN.com will feature the other two members of the panel next week . The panelists will be interviewed on air at 8 p.m. ET .
 We'll go to the audience to answer questions from the audience . And then, after a little bit of conversation here, we’ll go to question the audience members . We'll then go back to the Q&A panel .
 "At the Library here, I particularly want to thank Kiki Helffenstein and Tom Putnam who've made coming here just a pleasure, and very easy," she says .
 The whole process of getting information about the Missile Crisis very much owes a debt to him . Other people may not tell you this, but he may not have helped .
 He was very much involved in helping to create the National Security Archive . The Archive has been very important in declassifying or getting declassified government documents .
 "We often use the cliché about understanding history so we won't make mistakes again. And we often use this cliché . We often use it as a guide to understanding history, so we can't repeat mistakes again," says CNN.com .
 History can be either misused or misused, or, in this case, I want to help us see that history can be understood very differently from different perspectives . But it’s interesting that also history can also be used as a tool to help people understand history differently .
 We know from reading Essence of Decision how important the Munich analogy was to President Kennedy . The Munich analogy is a key part of the history of the United States .
 The notion that if you give anything essential to a rapacious dictator, it won't satisfy their appetite is a myth . The notion of giving anything to the dictator won't be enough for him to satisfy his appetite is false .
 The lessons of the crisis hung over much of the decision-making in the Missile Crisis . And that lesson hung over .
 On October 28, as you know, the Missile Crisis, from our perspective, is over . The Missile Crisis was over on October 28 . The U.S. ended the missile crisis in 1968 .
 We're demanding that we be allowed to inspect inside Cuba the missiles being removed from the Soviet Union, CNN's John Defterios says .
 Secretary General -the Acting Secretary General goes to Cuba to meet with Fidel Castro . Castro is the leader of Cuba .
 The road to the last world war was the road that included the toleration of German’s annexation of Austria and its dissolution of Czechoslovakia, he said .
 He was not going to give in to this rapacious aggressor, because it was surely going to lead to war, he said . He said: "I'm not giving in, I'm going to go to war."
 "Sad and Luminous Days" is a new book by Simon Cowell . Cowell: "The whole point of our book is to try to get inside the head of the other side so that you can understand how they think"
 "Those kinds of mistakes, when you're dealing with nuclear weapons, can be devastating," he says . "It's important not to make mistakes when dealing with a nuclear weapon," he adds .
 Each of the three countries thought about the Missile Crisis differently, says President Obama .
 This was a crisis between the superpowers about the missiles in Cuba that occurred in Cuba . This was the Cuban missile crisis that occurred during the Cold War era .
 Thirteen days is the period from which Kennedy learned about it to the time that Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles . Kennedy learned of the missile threat from the time he learned of it, the period of 13 days .
 They focus on the fact that this was a superpower confrontation in the Caribbean, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Kennedy was elected on the notion that there is a missile gap in the U.S. in 1961 . He was elected President of the United States in 1961 on the idea of the gap in missile technology .
 The U.S. continues to build up a kind of threat to the Soviet Union . And then discovers that the missile gap is in the United States. And then finds out that the gap is actually in Russia .
 The generals there fear that there's going to be a first strike by the United States. The generals fear that they will be attacked by the U.S. The United States has not responded to the threat .
 The U.S. is waging a covert war against the Taliban in Afghanistan, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It’s a period when afterwards they experience a covert . war," he says .
 They're sure there will be yet another invasion, this time with U.S. troops, they say . They say they're sure the invasion will take place with United States troops .
 It’s very interesting the notion of sad and luminous days that comes out of this, it's very interesting . It's a sad but luminous day that comes from this, he says .
 Svetlana’s going to help us understand something about the Soviet perspective, let me just give you a final glimpse into the Cuban perspective . Just as S.Vladimir says, “Let me just tell you that you’re going to see something about
 "We along with the Soviets thought this was great relief, a moment when the world came to the brink and we were saved," says Putin . Putin: "We were saved. We were saved"
 Che Guevara, in a famous letter to Fidel Castro, talks about the sad and luminous days -he called it the Caribbean Crisis, actually - of the Caribbean crisis . The Caribbean Crisis was the 'Caribbean Crisis' of the 1960s and '60s .
 "From a Cuban perspective, what was luminous was that they were arm in arm," says President Obama . "They were arm-in-arm," says Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 What was said was that they'd been betrayed by their friend, their ally, the people they trusted, the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was said to have betrayed them, and they were betrayed .
 'They were prepared to put themselves on the front line for the cause of international socialism' 'They put themselves in the forefront of the struggle for international socialism,' says the Labour Party .
 "To take not only the missiles out, but every last piece of weaponry they were going to use to defend themselves from U.S. attack," says President Obama .
 I was told once by one of my professors to watch out for professors standing in back of podiums, because they will speak for at least 50 minutes . I was once told once that professors standing back from podiums should stand in front of them .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 CNN's John Sutter talks about the Missile Crisis in the wake of the Cold War . Sutter: "I want to say something about this fellow over here to my left who's now my mentor with regard to the missile crisis"
 In the 1960s, this guy got the Kennedy administration together on many occasions . He was able to put that into one of the great scholarly works of the history of American foreign policy, The Essence of Decision .
 "You’d have to read it as a new book, because so much has happened in the interim," he says . "It’s not a book. You’’t a book, it's a memoir. It's a book of sorts. You
 "I will also say that Graham and I had a lunch on the date I can't remember, somewhere in 1985 or ’86"
 Who could tell in 1985 that by the late 1980s, this country called the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev would open up? "Who could tell?"
 By January 1989, we were all together -Phil, Graham, and I - in Moscow, treated to the most amazing array of people from Andrei Gromyko and Anatoly Dobrynin to generals .
 "I'm glad that absolutely nobody has followed your advice, including yourself. And I’m glad that ... nobody, including myself, has followed you advice," she said .
 "One of the things that one has to do, I think, in regard to the Missile Crisis is kind of set aside most of what we -if you're at least my age -remember about the crisis . Remember most of the crisis or what we think we know about it,
 Instead of one side backing down, both sides backed off, they backed off . And either we won or they lost, or a more charitable and more accurate description from their point of view is that, rather than one side backed down, they did .
 This has absolutely no relationship to the ways the Cubans see the crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is absolutely no relation to the way Cubans view the crisis"
 Fidel Castro objects to the way the crisis was handled from the standpoint of the Soviet behavior . And what I would ask you to do as I give you essentially what is a composite of Fidel Castro’s objects to that . Fidel Castro .
 Just ask yourself, in anticipation of the question and answer period, whether this situation reminds you of anything going on in the world right now . The world is in a very different state of mind .
 "There's some problem because they think differently than we do about these weapons and about a lot of other things," he says . "Obviously there is some problem," he adds .
 Khrushchev refused to make a public announcement of the deployment of the missile deployment . The decision to deploy the missile was made by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 People who lie and deceive about nuclear weapons cannot be trusted, says President Obama . "This is a grave situation that has arisen. People lying and deceiving people are a grave matter," says Obama .
 "Because it's not only a secret deployment, it is a deceptive deployment. Because it is not only secret deployment," it is also a deception deployment, says CNN.com .
 The Cubans recommended, right from the very beginning, that they do it publicly. "The Cubans ... recommended," he said. "They recommended right now that they did it publicly."
 Ted Sorensen's speech would have been a lot harder for him to write if that deployment had happened publicly . Ted Sorennsen: "I think that speech would be a lot of harder for Ted to write"
 The Soviets refused properly to camouflage the sites where the missiles were to be deployed . Second, the Soviets refused proper camouflage . The missiles were deployed in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The Cuban palm trees were only roughly half to two-thirds as tall as the missiles . The trees are only about half-to-two-thirds tall as missiles . They were planted in Cuban territory .
 The Cuban government has been criticized for its treatment of the country's citizens . But it's this sort of cavalier treatment of all this stuff that bothered the Cubans, it's not surprising .
 The Soviets refused to publish what the Cubans regarded as a legal and binding treaty between the two countries that defined the terms of employment that would have justified it . The Cubans believed the treaty was a binding treaty .
 The U.S. refused on all occasions to challenge the United States at the blockade line th th which went up, the quarantine line . The quarantine line went up at 10:00m. on the 24 , Wednesday, the 24 of October .
 The Cubans really and truly were hoping that those Soviet ships would try to crash through that line . Cubans hoped that they would crash through the line .
 When those ships stopped, they seemed almost to be touching the United States ships . The pink pieces of paper representing the U.S. were representing it .
 The Cubans were furious that the Soviets didn’t try to crash through the line, because it indicated to them that they had already given up and were already going to cave in to the Americans . The Cuban government believed the Soviets were already caving in .
 The Soviets refused to consider in the resolution of the crisis any of Cuba’s interests . The Soviet Union did not consider Cuba's interests during the crisis .
 Cuba wanted guarantees that the base CIA back to bases in Central America that were being used for attacks on Cuba by Cuban exiles would be ended . Cuba wanted guarantee that the CIA back-to-base CIA back in Central American bases would end attacks .
 Six, the Soviets refused to consult with or even properly to inform the Cubans of the Soviet decision to terminate the crisis and the deployment of the Cuban troops .
 He is reported to have - depending on the orientation of who was reporting -to have gone berserk, to have thrown things . He is said to have been in a rage, according to reports .
 Russia will withdraw all missiles which the Americans say are offensive, including the Soviet troops in Cuba, the Kremlin says . And secondly, because our interests were never involved in this, what is going to happen is that the Soviets will withdraw .
 Khrushchev won't make it a condition that the Americans stand down their forces - their nuclear forces and their conventional forces - stand down . He says the U.S. won't stand down its forces -their nuclear forces -and its conventional forces .
 A puppet regime that’s probably locked up in a hotel room somewhere in Miami right now. And they’ll put in a puppet regime . The puppet regime is probably locked in a Miami hotel room .
 The Soviets refused to leave all but a faint residue of a tripwire to deter a U.S. invasion . Finally, seven years later, seven of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons were destroyed . The Soviet Union would have to leave a trace of its nuclear weapons .
 There were 43,000 Soviet fighting men on that island by late October 1962 . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The only troops that were left, once the deployment was undone, was a couple of thousand Soviet soldiers that actually wound up in a rather humiliating fashion, calling themselves ""a training brigade,"" not much of a tripwire at all .
 The Cuban government found out a lot about the Soviet Union, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "From the Cuban point of view, they found a lot of Soviet Union's secrets"
 Sad and Luminous Days contains a speech by Fidel Castro in January 1968 to the Central Committee that was kept secret until now . The book contains, chapter 2, a speech Castro made to the party's Central Committee .
 And it is the most scathing attack on the Soviet Union I have ever read . And it's the most damning attack on Soviet Union ever read, says author .
 If any of this had gotten out, the Soviets would undoubtedly have broken relations with Cuba, cut off their oil in 1968, and essentially strangled Cuba . The Soviets would have broken ties with Cuba and cut off its oil supply .
 Fidel wanted these people to know that, even though we need them, you must never ever trust them . Fidel wanted them to know even though they were needed, that they must never be trusted again .
 The complexity of the Missile Crisis continues to fascinate historians and analysts as we try to understand both what happened in that specific instance and also as we think about what the lessons may be .
 CNN.com will feature two more videos from iReport.com . Please submit your comments to CNN iReport . Please share them with us on Facebook and Twitter .
 The events of October 1962, whose 40 anniversary we're just on the edge of, are 40 years old . And then I’m going to put a question to the panel about similarities and difference between what we see in the Missile Crisis and Iraq .
 Next week will be the 40 anniversary of these famous 13 days with the most dangerous moments in recorded history . Next week marks the 40th anniversary of the 13-day events .
 President Kennedy said at the time, and afterwards reflecting on the crisis, that he thought the odds of war were somewhere between 1-3 and even in this confrontation . President Kennedy: "I thought it was between 1 and 3"
 That was dismissed by some people immediately afterwards as an exaggeration . Some people thought it was an exaggeration, but some later dismissed it as exaggerating .
 President Kennedy "did not take my advice and pursued, as we did, these postmortems," he says . "It became more evident that there were so many possibilities in the confrontation that even were not known to President Kennedy"
 For example, the extent of the deployment of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba by the Soviets . The Soviets deployed tactical nuclear arms in Cuba in the 1980s .
 Tactical nuclear weapons would have almost certainly been used against American troops who would have been invading in the aftermath of an air strike, which was a very likely outcome in the events that actually occurred .
 President Kennedy’s estimate is a quite sensible, a quite justifiable estimate . So I would say, myself, that President Kennedy's estimate is quite sensible . President Kennedy said, “I would say ... that he would be quite sensible”
 The crisis has continued to have a hold on the imagination of commentators, and historians, and analysts, and even policy-makers . And as a consequence, this crisis, I think, has continued . The crisis, as a result, continues to have an impact on the future of the
 Bush administration talks almost every week, indeed sometimes almost every day, about the Missile Crisis . Bush administration often talks about the crisis almost every single day .
 President Bush seems to keep going back to the Missile Crisis to try to locate himself, or to have some point of reference for what he sees as going on in the current Iraqi situation . Rice, has said that the President, President Bush, keeps going back .
 There followed after that a number of scholarly works trying to analyze the crisis, of which my book, Essence of Decision, was one of the earlier versions .
 The Missile Crisis is characterized as the defining event of the Cold War, the defining crisis of the cold . The standard histories of Cold War in which the missile crisis is characterized are characterized as a defining event .
 Phil and Jim are publishing a book about their efforts to tell the story behind the book . They say there were a lot of other parties who were interested, with interests at stake, but whose part of the story hasn't been told .
 This is, I think, kind of coming round in a circle here as we try to bring in yet another set of interests . So this is kind of a circle, as well as a circle of interests, I say . I think this is, for example, a circle is coming
 In the documentation, I want to call out just for special note, one very interesting fact for people who are interested in trying to learn more about this .
 In the development of the documentation, there emerged a book called The Kennedy Tapes, which were the secret tapes that Kennedy made of the deliberations during the Missile Crisis, which have now been transcribed in a book .
 The Reader’s Guide is a transcript of some of the most recent episodes of The Daily Mail's iReporters' coverage of the U.S. presidential election .
 CNN iReporters talk about making decisions that they think could lead to a nuclear war . And here to talk to you about making nuclear war decisions . CNN's John Sutter talks about the decision to take a nuclear bomb to the US .
 "This is actually a wonderful microcosm for both trying to understand a very dangerous moment of history, but also to ask what the lessons of these events are, or events like the confrontation over Iraq," she says .
 Members of the panel will be forewarned about the first question . The panel will also be asked about the future of President Obama .
 The Soviet view of the crisis will be discussed in the next round of the debate . And I hope I will be able to come to those points later in the discussion, he says .
 The first important point that I’d like to raise is what were the causes of the crisis. The first point is that we need to find out what are the causes for the crisis,’s first point .
 Several speakers before me touched upon this issue, and said that there are three very different perspectives . And several speakers before us touched upon it, and several speakers touched upon the issue .
 The source of the crisis was not the fact that missiles were in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . So for the Soviet Union, of course, the cause, was the problem, he says .
 The Soviet Union thought it was performing quite a legal act of assistance to Cuba, which was threatened by the U.S. Soviet Union deployed missiles in Cuba in an effort to protect Cuba from the United States .
 The seriousness of the threat was shown in the Bay of Pigs invasion . The threat of the Soviet Union and Cuba, of course, was shown by the invasion, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Khrushchev wanted to adjust the military balance in order to counter the strategic imbalance . Of course, another cause was another cause, says the former president .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were forced through the intelligence data to realize that there was a military build-up going on in the summer of 1962 around Cuba . Both sides, the United States .
 The Soviet intelligence was aware of U.S. contingency plans, or training exercises, which were perceived as training or preparation for an immediate invasion of Cuba .
 The act of putting the missiles in Cuba was seen as an act of legitimate assistance to an ally . Therefore, the act of . putting missiles in . Cuba was . seen as a legitimate assistance . to an . ally .
 The immediate crisis for the United States starts on October 14, when the missiles are discovered . The U.S. is expected to face a crisis in Iran .
 The missiles in Cuba were the direct equivalent to the U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy . For the Soviet Union, the missiles were the equivalent to those in Turkey, Italy .
 Soviet Union sort of felt surrounded by United States bases at the time . The Soviet Union was surrounded by U.S. bases at time .
 "Based on the reading of the newer declassified documents, I can say that it was even more dangerous than we thought. And based on the . reading of . the declassified . documents, he said, "I can say . that it is even more . dangerous"
 The U.S. did not realize that the Soviet Union actually deployed nuclear-capable bombers, cruise missiles, and shortrange launchers that could carry nuclear warheads and nuclear warheads in Cuba . The United States, at the time, did not know that the Soviets had deployed nuclear bombers,
 The standard procedure was that the commanders on the island could use both the strategic and the tactical nuclear weapons, only with authorization from the Soviet Premier .
 The U2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba without any authorization from Moscow . But we also know that the U2 plane was downed without authorization from Russia .
 Moscow was quite unhappy with that fact, but could do nothing about it . And Moscow was unhappy that that fact . But it could not do anything about it.
 The probability of use of tactical nuclear weapons in case of U.S. air strikes or land invasion of Cuba was very, very high, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There’s nothing we can learn about the Cuban missile crisis, says CNN.com's Jim Boulden . The crisis is over, he says .
 The November crisis is the November crisis, says David Cameron . Cameron: "It’s November crisis. But secondly, because I am speaking from this perspective"
 The Soviet Union intended to leave other weapons, including strategic nuclear weapons, and other weapons . What we did not know up until very recently is that the Soviet Union planned to leave .
 The expectation was in early November that Cubans were being trained to use the Soviet technology, and that the technology will be transferred to the Cubans . We know that even in . early November, the expectation was . in Cuba and the . decision was in Moscow, that . Cubans
 The Soviet Union realized that it had a real crisis on its hands, says CNN's John Sutter . "The Soviet Union had to negotiate with the Cubans and with the United States," he says .
 The crisis was not in the relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union; it was in relations with its own ally, Cuba . And the crisis was in the relationship between the United States and Cuba, which was a key ally .
 Khrushchev realized that it was easier for him to negotiate with the Americans than it was with the Cubans . The U.S. and the Cuban government have been at odds for decades .
 L-28 bombers, nuclear capable bombers, short range, dual-use launchers, and cruise missiles that could carry nuclear weapons . The final decision was made to withdraw the bombers, bombers, and the short range launchers .
 I think I was asked to participate in this panel because I’ve spent a great deal of time in Cuba, and my book is based on documents from Fidel Castro’s Presidential Archive . I've spent great time in the country, and I've written a book based on
 The book deals with the period of time in the 1950s when Castro and others in Cuba were fighting to overthrow Batista . And it’s a book that deals with time in Cuba when Castro was fighting against the Batista regime .
 The U.S. has a strong sense of who Cubans were that the Soviets were dealing with in the 1960s . And it’s given me a sense of several elements of who Cubaans were . I’ll try to share with you and try to make some
 Fidel Castro and the core people around him that took power in 1959 were of their absolute allergy to alliances with groups or individuals on whom they depended excessively for money or weapons . Fidel Castro was one of the most important things I learned about Fidel Castro, I said .
 After 1959 the local Communists came to play the kind of role that they did domestically in helping to run the economy and to serve as a liaison with the Soviets in the 1960s . And it was really only out of a necessity that after 1959 they came to .
 Castro and his core group of people that made the Revolution distrusted the Cuban Communists and saw them as highly unreliable allies . But fundamentally, Castro and the Cuban Communist Party were distrustful of each other . Castro's core group saw the Communists as unreliable allies in Cuba .
 He believed that the Soviets themselves had made a number of concessions themselves without getting anything back from the Americans . He later found out about the missiles in Turkey and Italy, and comes away incredibly dumbfounded that there’s an expectation that by the great powers that Cuba will sit back and
 Fidel Castro was a leader of Cuba in the 1950s and '60s . Fidel Castro is now a prominent figure in Latin American politics . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba in 1959 .
 Cubans could not permit Americans to fly overhead during the crisis . The Cubans were not allowed to fly over during that crisis .
 In that case it’s better to throw down your weapons and quit being a revolutionary soldier, abandon everything, he says .
 Fidel Castro must contend with the obliviousness of the Americans that he has to contend with habitually in trying to map out a relationship with the U.S.
 It's just not always clear that that’s always been a priority for Cuba . Cuba has a long history of anti-gay marriage, but it's not clear that it's a priority .
 It was politically demoralizing at home to tolerate the over flights . But clearly, it was political demoralizing to tolerate it .
 The Cuban government shot down two civilians who were making over flights into Cuban territory in 1996 . It was hard for many to believe the Cuban government would risk throwing away what seemed to be a rapprochement coming from the Clinton administration .
 The missile crisis does give us a sense of the crucial point about not being seen as making a concession . But rhetoric and how things are framed are extraordinarily important in the bilateral relationship .
 The U.S. continues to make demands of Cubans to have elections, human rights inspectors, inspections of bio-weapons facilities, or amend their constitution, or etc. etc.-all the sorts of demands .
 When those demands are made as demands that incite capitulation by the Cuban government, the wall goes up . And it’s interesting, because when those demands make it seem to be made, it goes up. And it's interesting .
 Since the collapse of the Soviet block and the ending of Soviet aid to Cuba, there has been what could be construed to be a long string of concessions from the Cuban government, though we’re not allowed to connect the dots because that would be humiliating . But if you think of
 It is a very different Cuba today than it was in 1989, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It's one that I think what we'll see is a continued obliviousness in Washington .
 CNN.com host Jim Costello asks: "What do you think of Phil or Jim? What do we think of Jim?"
 They were fearful that in Latin America they would be seen as pawns of the Soviet Union . This would undermine their standing in the non-aligned movement . They feared it would undermine them standing in Latin American .
 Castro said the danger was so great coming from the U.S. but also they had been asking from the Soviets to join the Warsaw Pact . Castro says the danger, first, was the United States, but also the Soviets, he said . Castro: "They had been asked from
 It showed that Cuba was willing to put its own self on the line, making themselves the frontier, a strategic threat to the U.S. The United States would be a first target of the United States. Cuba showed that it was willing .
 Dr. John Shattuck: "If you listen to the debate that’s now emerging about Iraq, as Dr. Shattucks did in his introduction, you can’t ignore the Iraq war."
 President Bush speaks often of the missile crisis, Rice says . Rice has said, President Bush, when he’s speaking of an example, speak often of missile crisis . Rice: President Bush often speaks of the crisis .
 Obama administration quotes from administration members on lessons on lessons . Obama administration has been criticized for lack of transparency in administration .
 Colin Powell says President Kennedy did not negotiate out of the Cuban missile crisis . Colin Powell: Kennedy and Khrushchev got along well .
 The blockade was self-defense against the Soviet Union placing additional nuclear missiles in Cuba, CNN's John Sutter says . "In my view, establishing what he called a quarantine what the world thought of as a blockade, that was certainly self-defence," he says .
 It was certainly preventive, and we were very, very close to a crisis of historic proportions, says President Obama . It was 'preventive' and 'preventionary' says Obama .
 President Obama took a pre-emptive action, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it's not "unfair or inaccurate" to say that he took action . Sutter: "I think it’s not unfair or inaccurate to say he took pre-
 In terms of similarities and differences between the missile crisis and Iraq, whatever you think are the one or two most important similarities or differences -and we’ll go down the row. So let me turn to the panel and say, in terms of . similarities and . differences, whatever
 The missile crisis has been misused and misunderstood, says CNN's John Sutter . "It's very frightening to us to see the way in which the missile crisis was misused," he says .
 "The wrong lessons have been articulated and very much based on misinformation that’s being conveyed about what the missile crisis is. Precisely the wrong lessons are being articulated," says CNN's John Sutter .
 First, we are dealing with a country that, if it’s true, has weapons of mass destruction . First, the U.S. should be aware of the possibility of using such a weapon .
 The talk in Washington is that we can manage this; we can get every last SCUD that they have, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The talk in D.C. is that [Washington] can manage [SCUD] This will be the first time
 It's so reminiscent of what we hear in the tapes, the sense of being able to control every last thing in Cuba, which we now know they had no idea what the full scale operation was. It’s so similar to what we heard in the tape .
 The simple number of 43,000 Soviet troops versus 270,000 armed Cubans is the simple number . They thought there were 100,000-armed Cubans, and in reality there were 270,00 armed Cuban citizens .
 In fact, they were pretty sure the warheads hadn’t gotten to the island . They had been pretty sure they hadn't gotten there . The warheads hadn't been spotted .
 Three things that we've come to realize that are most important, that are really misleading people. But here are the three things we’ve come to . realize that they’re most important .
 First, this sense that Kennedy was inflexible, that Kennedy had a plan and went forward with it, without any sense that there were other options . Kennedy had no sense of any other options, he says .
 John Shattuck and Graham Allison have pointed out that flexibility was very important . Well, it’s clear now, as both Shattucks and Allison have said, that flexibility is very important.
 Kennedy tried to find ways to be flexible, even to the point of giving up the missiles in Turkey so that we wouldn’t go to war . Kennedy’s efforts to find a way of being flexible, he says . Kennedy: “What Kennedy did was find ways
 President Obama's understanding of giving your opponent some way out was extraordinarily important, that this administration doesn’t seem to follow, he says .
 The third is it’s very important to talk and continue to have conversations throughout a crisis, she says .
 In November crisis with the Soviets, Kennedy was quite respectful of being able to deal with the other superpower . Kennedy was respectful of dealing with the Soviet Union, he says .
 We don't deal with the lesser power that is also our adversary - in this case Iraq or Cuba . We don’t deal with lesser power, also our adversaries . The U.S. has been involved in Iraq, Cuba and Cuba .
 There were 'severe dangers' as a result of not talking to Cuba after the missile crisis, says President Obama . "There were severe dangers," says Obama. "We need to talk to Cuba"
 I just want to … I’ll say something about the way the history’s being used here by people in the administration, he says . He says he wants to talk about how the history is being used by the administration .
 President Obama says he has a 'personal view' and should not be held to it . Obama: "What I'm going to say is my own view, and none of the distinguished people with me here should be held"
 The view that the missile crisis is an example of pre-emptive action that is somehow analogous to military attack is not only rubbish, it's perverse, it’s perverse . The view is rubbish and perverse, says David Cameron .
 President Kennedy worked very hard and ultimately successfully to avoid the option . But it's exactly the option that President Kennedy tried to avoid, he says .
 Transcript of three meetings on October 27, 1962, show a President almost uniquely trying to bring his people along toward some kind of negotiated settlement . The transcript of the three meetings shows a President trying to negotiate a settlement .
 U.S. president should call a press conference to suggest an open public trade of NATO missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba, he says .
 The trade of the missiles was kept secret, except that the trade of missiles was also kept secret . That is more or less what happened, except for the trade, he says .
 The missiles, by the middle of the spring of 1963, were destroyed . And those missiles were destroyed by the end of 1963 .
 If a preemptive strike had occurred, followed by a land and sea invasion, it would have resulted in the total demolition of the Republic of Cuba, of millions of dead Americans in the southeastern part of the United States . If escalation continued, probably the end of civilization as we know it
 I’d like to add something which does not directly relate to the question: ‘I’m here to answer it,’ he says. ‘‘I would like to say yes.’
 If we ever think about any pre-emptive action in the Cuban missile crisis, then ask this question of yourself . Ask yourself if you ever think of any such a plan? Ask this question .
 Russia today is not the Soviet Union of 1962, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I think that Russia is not Russia today, not the USSR of 1962. And the second interesting point here, I think that Russian is not a Soviet Union"
 Khrushchev deployed the missiles in Cuba, and then from the pressure from the United States, he brought them back home . The missiles and all other troops were brought back home by the U.S.
 He told his politburo comrades and the public that, ""We actually scored a victory," he said . And he told them that, "We actually score a victory. And he said that, and he told his comrades, the public, that .
 There are differences of opinion. Well, maybe it’s not a mature democracy, but there are differences in opinion, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin's political future might not be as bright as Khrushchev’s was . If Putin is seen to retreat under the United States pressure and sell out Russian - maybe not the most beloved - but sell the ally who owes Russia a lot of money, Iraq .
 Part of the reason why Khrushchev was removed was his failure to deal with the U.S. in a more successful way during the missile crisis .
 There are definite parallels between the Cuban missile crisis and the Korean missile crisis . So if we use the analogy of the Cuban crisis, yes, there is definite parallels .
 Maybe it's easier for Putin now to negotiate with the U.S. and get some mutual benefits and kind of leave Iraq aside . Maybe it is easier . Putin now, maybe it's been easier for him to negotiate .
 It would not be accepted in Russia in the same way as it was accepted after Khrushchev brought the missiles back . But it would not have been accepted in the way it was in the 1960s .
 CNN's John Sutter offers a comment on the question, "Let me offer a comment," he says . Sutter: "I'm going to go to the audience for questions that you might have, where you want to pursue any of these points"
 I’d say three points of similarity and difference, because I mainly agree with what’s been said, but I don’t like it, I like it. I think it's a good idea, but there are a few similarities and differences, he says .
 Many small state bystanders whose interests may be trampled, but who have little say in the matter, may have little influence in the process .
 Cuba in 1962 and most of the regional states today, including the Saudis, Turks, Turks and Egyptians . That was true for Cuba in 1960 and it’s true for Egypt in Egypt, the Saudis and Turks, the Turks .
 The Bush administration’s announced policy on Iraq and the beginning of the Cuban missile crisis, where one sees an initial attraction to a military first strike in order to eliminate the problem. Thirdly -and this goes to Jim's point because I think you can do this layer by layer
 He thinks he can destroy all the missiles in a first strike, but as he keeps picking at it he hears from his best advisers that they’re not sure they can get all of them . So he thinks he’s able to destroy all of the missiles .
 If President Bush were to take a page out of President Kennedy’s book, one could imagine now some flexibility, he says . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Well, he could be exiled to Egypt like Idi Amin evidently lived happily in Egypt, even though he’s also guilty of many horrible things in the past, just as one for example . He could also be exiled from the country .
 President Kennedy was working the problem, but there are probably three or four other examples . President Kennedy would have been working on the problem if he'd been working it .
 There’s a microphone there and please introduce yourself and put your question . Please introduce yourself to the audience at the end of the show .
 Jason Barlett is a graduate student at Providence College in Providence, Rhode Island . He says he wants to know more about his experiences in the U.S.
 I would like to ask the panel to comment briefly on the role of Robert Kennedy, with particular attention to back channel negotiation in dissolving this crisis, and the Russian reaction to his message .
 Bobby Kennedy was attracted to a preventive air strike, a first strike to eliminate the problem, he says . Kennedy was very attracted to that option to begin with .
 "The more he thought about that, the less attractive that seemed as an option," he said . "And the more I thought about it, the more attractive that option seemed as a possible option."
 President Kennedy was absent from a lot of the meetings and Bobby Kennedy therefore was kind of his rep at the meetings, because they found that people would talk freely when the President wasn’t there . Also, the device that they developed, this Executive Committee of the National Security Council,
 Bobby Kennedy went to see Dobrynin, who was the Soviet Ambassador in Washington . The secret proposition remained a secret for 25 years after the missile crisis until it was confirmed by six of the participants .
 First, the missiles are going to leave Cuba for sure, and if necessary, they’ll be destroyed by an attack . If necessary, an attack on Cuba will destroy the missiles, the president says .
 We need to hear from you within 24 hours whether you’re going to act, the government says . And we need to tell us if we’ll act, because early next week we're going to, it’s going to be next week .
 If the missiles are withdrawn from Cuba within six months, our U.S. equivalent missiles in Turkey will be gone . But secondly, if the missile withdrawal from Cuba is withdrawn from Turkey, the missiles will also be gone.
 Dobrynin sent a telegram to Khrushchev, and the rest of is part of the story of how the game was resolved . The game went to a standstill between the Cold War and the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 There were only seven people who knew what had been decided privately at the Ex Comm. It’s especially an interesting fact because there were about 16 or 17 people sitting around the table .
 In the circumstances, after the fact, it looks pretty good to me. And that’s an uncomfortable fact, but in the circumstances ... it looks good to him . The next step is to find out what happened .
 President Bush has a reputation of not second-guessing himself, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy and his advisers are different . Bush has reputation for not second guessing himself, Sutter says .
 "I almost get the sense he doesn’t think about things more than twice. And not only second-guessing," he says . But he says he doesn't think twice about things .
 Bush has this kind of management style that, you know, the executive makes a decision, everybody goes with it, but he's not the expert in these matters . And that in terms of the way that they deal with their advisers, it seems like Bush has .
 Condoleezza Rice was a Soviet scholar, if I remember correctly, and didn't have much experience in terms of government . So he's listening to advice from Rice, Karl Rove and others who are his political advisers, and to Rumsfeld and Cheney .
 "I don’t think much of them. Well, you can think of them however you like," he says . He says. "Well, I don't think of much of it."
 Kennedy: "You had the sense of that he was thinking about things, that he . was working it out" "I'm making the point that I’m making is that with Kennedy you had the . sense of thinking, working out, listening, and waiting"
 Bush is going around, like putting pressure on the French to go with him and putting pressure . He’s trying to get the English to agree with us, and that actually staying our hand isn’t a real possibility .
 CNN.com: "It seems to me that this is one of the major problems of what’s happening now with this incident. And it seems to be a major problem."
 President Kennedy wanted to get a vote from the OAS for a resolution that made a naval blockade a quarantine, they got the votes every way they could get them . President Kennedy and his administration during the missile crisis, he says, "I think that if you look at President Kennedy,
 They were perfectly happy to twist arms or even to pay some modest price in terms of negotiation . They were willing to do so, even if they were not the most expensive .
 When they were trying to get the Security Council to line up with them, they sent people to talk to Charles de Gaulle . When they tried to get people to speak to them, people were sent to talk with Charles De Gaulle.
 The administration was quite, I think, tough about trying to line up allies for its position and point of view . So it was not a ... not a … . So the administration was very tough about . trying to . line up ... allies .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of your favorite travel destinations .
 Graham: President Kennedy evolved during the 13 days of tension, during the missile crisis . Graham: During the crisis, Kennedy evolved, and evolved . Graham said that President Kennedy did evolve during the crisis .
 As Graham said, he didn’t think the first solution necessarily was the best solution, and he worked -everybody worked hard to preserve as much as time as possible .
 "Everybody that I ever interviewed from that group said that they were very grateful that the Bay of Pigs invasion occurred before and not after the missile crisis," CNN's John Sutter says .
 Let's not forget the humiliation to which this president was submitted by April 20, 1961 . Let’s not forget that he was submitted to the humiliation of the country by 1961 .
 Were it not for one of the most amazing press conferences ever held or televised, where Kennedy took sole responsibility for this fiasco? "The whole thing was just absolutely absurd," he says. "The greatest superpower in the history of the world had been slapped around by these bearded revolutionaries who had
 It would have been hilarious if it weren't so tragic -in terms of not only who died on the beaches and that sort of thing, but in terms of the reputation of this particular president . The president's reputation has been tarnished by the death of his predecessor, Barack Obama .
 John F Kennedy became incredibly skeptical of the advice given to him by experts, particularly intelligence experts and military experts . The outcome of that, as I have understood it, was that he became incredibly sceptical of experts .
 Allen Dulles was the only head the CIA had ever had, and he was out as was Dick Bissell who was the mastermind of the operation . Bissell and Dulles were gone when this was over .
 An important disanalogy, as we say in academia, to the present situation. Now that is a very important disAnalogy, it's important to be able to learn from this .
 President Kennedy knew one hell of a lot about foreign affairs before he became President . Kennedy knew a lot more about foreign policy before he was President .
 Dean Rusk was chosen as Secretary of State rather than a more hands-on person . It was where Rusk considered his expertise to be, and it probably had something to do with why he was chosen . Rusk is a former Air Force vice-presidential adviser .
 He really screwed up royally in ways that the current President never has, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: But he really screwed it royally, and it's not surprising that he never has .
 One wonders whether this will be, in effect, something like his Bay of Pigs, rather than, as his advisers keep telling us, his Cuban missile crisis . And one wonders whether it will be a similar to his Bay Of Pigs .
 The Kennedy administration faced a political crisis as well as a great coup for the Kennedy administration, CNN's John Sutter says . "We need to remember that this was a very political crisis," he says .
 President Kennedy was very much afraid of the political consequences of what might happen if something wasn't done, says CNN's John Sutter . Kennedy was afraid of political consequences, Sutter says .
 "Regime change" is another way of saying overthrow of a government . Kennedy would never have used a phrase like "regime change," he says .
 "That is something, it seems to me, that’s fundamentally against what the United States has stood for since its beginning," she said . "That's fundamentally against ... what we have stood for," she added .
 'That kind of euphemism is, to me, unacceptable. And why this hasn't been probed more, I can’t understand it,’s to me,' she says .
 The vast majority of Americans tend to accept it, or believe that they should accept it . And yet the vast majority believe it, and believe it .
 That’s what Bobby Kennedy saw, I think, and which you just talked about. That's what he saw, he says . Bobby Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1968, saw what he thought was a mistake, he adds .
 A country as large as the United States, with its reputation, could never do that kind of thing to Cuba . Cuba's reputation has been tarnished by the U.S. since the Cuban Revolution .
 Graham: "I think I wonder whether at the end of the day - you know, I’m not sure if it’s what you read, Graham, or another comment I read that Ms. Ms. Graham said . I think I . wonder whether Ms.
 Rice compared the blockade in Cuba to an act of war, and as Kennedy administration’s definition of preemption . Rice made the comparison in a speech she made in which she said the blockade was like a war .
 This was a president in his second year in office, just coming up to the mid-term elections . This was the president in a second year of office, coming up with midterms elections .
 President Kennedy did not choose to have a crisis in October . So just like in the same month, he did in October, he said .
 The Republicans had made Cuba the principal issue in the midterm election . Cuba was a major factor in the midterms .
 It wasn't just Keating who was, as you said rightly, making the decisions . And it wasn’t just Keated who was making the . decisions, he said .
 The Bay of Pigs was a major failure in the Cuban invasion of Cuba a year before . President Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 .
 President Kennedy felt politically quite sensitive about this, and this may actually have affected Khrushchev’s calculations about whether he would be likely to enter into a confrontation .
 'He may have been actually -this might have been timed in such a way -and certainly, he wasn’t unaware of that element. He may be actually - this might have - perhaps - timed in . Such a timing of this might be such a . way - and
 In this instance, unless some new piece of evidence comes forward, the event is forced by the U.S. hand, not by some action that Saddam has taken . The United States will have to make the decision by the end of the year .
 There was a debate during the summer as to whether or not missiles were being put in Cuba . What happened was that because of Keating and Kapart’s statements, which it seems they got from dissidents in the CIA - .
 Cuban exiles say they see 'huge things going down the road' in Cuba . Reports from Cuban ex-cuba exiles: "We see these huge things going on the road"
 The Soviets had never put missiles like this outside. And on top of that, the analysis was that, it had never been put outside . The analysis was the analysis .
 The dissidents felt they were being targeted by the White House . They leaked this information to Keating and Kapart, who then demanded that Kennedy do something about it .
 The White House has been under pressure from Congress to act on the issue of immigration reform . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his actions in the past .
 As Graham quite well said, this was precipitated by our own actions here, not by the discovery of missiles . As Graham said, ‘This was . precipitated . by our . own actions’
 I lived through both crises in the Cuban crisis, and that’s why I’m retired, I guess . I lived in both crises, he says . I'm retired, he adds, but that's why he's retired .
 I’m not sure I feel that way, and maybe you can talk a little bit about that . I'm not sure that way . Maybe you could talk to me about that. I'm here to talk to you .
 "I made the statement, so let me try to defend it, and then maybe somebody will disagree," he says . "Let me try and defend it. I made the ... statement," he adds .
 The President has said that absent something that he doesn’t think is very likely to happen, that he thinks it’s highly probable that the United States will lead military air strikes and then a military invasion to Iraq to change that regime .
 "I can imagine in the worst case - maybe not the very worst - but I can imagine some hundreds of thousands of people dying," he says . He says. "In the worst-case scenario, I can . imagine in that scenario -maybe not the worst -but I can
 The Cuban missile crisis was 'incredible as it seems, and especially as we get away from it, it just -oh well, of course there could never have been a nuclear war. Whereas in the Cuban crisis, incredible as it . seems, it seems to be that there could
 If the U.S. had had an air strike and then an invasion, maybe a hundred million people could have died in 24 or 48 hours, maybe even more, President Obama says .
 It was just in terms of the potential casualties, not the probability of it getting to a war that I was thinking, he said . "I was thinking about the potential ... casualties," he said. "I'm not going to go to war," he added .
 On October 26, the U.S. went to Defense Condition II, Def Con II, the last step before actually initiating nuclear war . The last step was to go to Defense Con II . The United States went to defense Condition II - Def Con - in October .
 One-third of your B-52 bomber force in the air at all times so it doesn’t get hit on the ground . This involves keeping one third of your bomber force . The U.S. Air Force will use the tactic to avoid hitting the ground in combat .
 It involves flying up to the -and possibly over -the border of the Soviet Union, beginning to target radar and this sort of thing . It involves . flying . up to . and possibly over the . border of . the . Soviet Union .
 Lids coming off missile silos in North Dakota for the first and only time . The lids come off the silos for the only time in the state's history .
 Strategic Air Command is taking over part of Miami International Airport . The move is part of a plan to take part of the airport into control .
 There were nuclear weapons on the island before the Soviets put them there, and they were ours . The island nation was invaded by the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 It involves taking the entire military establishment of the time -and at the time there were many times the mega-tonnage of potential destructiveness as there are now -and winding it up to the point where it is just on a hair trigger . It involves . winding up the entire
 "It's very difficult under those circumstances, I am told by people who study systems, to imagine a small event occurring once you push that button," he says .
 Of course, that knowledge that was present on both sides has got to be one of the main reasons why basically nothing happened . The knowledge of both sides was present at the start of the game .
 I don't think people are buying Campbell’s soup cans and putting them underground as they were in Detroit where I grew up during this period . I don’t think people would be buying Campbell's soup cans in Detroit . I'm not sure if people will be putting them
 The White House is looking for a way to go ahead with the president's agenda . Obama administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past .
 Soviet KGB resident in Mexico said he was prepared to a large-scale evacuation of your citizens in southern states through Mexico . The KGB resident said he spoke with the information .
 The level of danger, I think, or at least danger as it was perceived by the public, was much higher in the Cuban missile crisis . So the level of . danger, or . danger as . it was . perceived by . the public was much more at risk during the Cuban
 We'll be happy to take your questions after, if we can. I think that unfortunately, unfortunately we had told people that we had to stop by 5:30, so we’ll be . We’re happy to stop at 5.30, but we'll be
 This is an issue that deserves much more consideration, but it seems to be only fair to let President John F Kennedy have the last word .
 He says the essence of ultimate decision remains impenetrable to the observer, often indeed to the decider himself . He says, quote, "The essence of the ultimate decision is impenormetrable"
 John F Kennedy Library would like to thank them for this marvelous afternoon alternative to that beautiful sunlight out there .
 Historians have cast a light on the Cuban missile crisis, President Obama says . Obama: "I think the sunlight that has been cast on this crisis is wonderful and disturbing and chilling"
 Svetlana Savranskaya, Julia Sweig, Graham Allison, James Blight, and Phil Brenner are among those who spoke to the panel .
 Three more explorations of the Cuban missile crisis in various dimensions coming up . And let me also, in closing, direct your attention to the fliers that you have on the seats in front of you .
 Sandy Vanocur, Robert Pierpont, Marvin Kalb, and Newton Minow, former Chair of the Federal Communications Commission . The panelists discuss the importance of the FCC .