 Graham T Allison’s book, Essence of Decision, is number one on the list of Top 10 books on the subject . The “For Educators” link on the site ranks Graham T. Allison's book as one of the top 10 books .
 Essence has been one of the most widely read books about the missile crisis . The book is a political science best-seller and extraordinarily influential .
 While scholars have praised the book, an equal number have questioned its methodology and conclusions .
 Robert Kennedy’s persistent hawkishness, Bernstein noted, did not stem from the fact that he was the attorney general . That was one example of how Essence's supposedly key contribution was at odds with the facts .
 Bernstein: Allison/Zelikow’s seductive but reductive interpretation was of dubious value . Bernstein concluded that Allison and Zelikow were not helpful in understanding the positions staked out by the ExComm participants .
 Bernstein also took note of the problems attendant to issuing a revised Essence, instead of letting the badly-dated book die a natural death .
 The new edition turned out about one-quarter longer and “considerably richer” in evidence and interpretation, Bernstein found . Bernstein: "The new edition of this book is considerably richer" than its predecessor .
 The book simply flicked off thoughtful criticisms as if they were pieces of lint . But for the most part, the book flicked away thoughtful criticisms .
 Allison’s famous models remained more or less intact, even though, as Bernstein noted, “the models, despite the authors’ hedges, serve virtually as substitutes for adequate evidence in some important situations”
 It would have been appropriate to include Essence in the Top 10 ranking because of its role as a catalyst, inciting scholars to think about decision-making .
 Reviewers of The Kennedy Tapes took the assurances of these Harvard scholars—that they had personally engaged in this demanding, laborious labor—at face value . Reviewers should have taken the assurances at face value, they say .
 Historian Sheldon M Stern exposed the emperors as having no clothes . Stern wrote first in The Atlantic Monthly and subsequently in Presidential Studies Quarterly . Stern's work was published in the Atlantic Monthly .
 JFKL historian for 23 years, member of Washington Decoded’s editorial board, persuasively challenged accuracy and reliability of the HUP transcripts . Stern was the first non-member of the ExComm to listen to all the tapes .
 May and Zelikow tried to stonewall their way out of the controversy by minimizing the significance of Stern’s claims, insisting that any errors were trivial and historically insignificant . Stern's claims were published in the New York Times .
 May and Zelikow acknowledged methodological errors, such as using court reporters to produce a flawed first draft of the transcripts . The transcripts were clearly not revised with any diligence or conscientiousness .
 RFK’s book is clearly an important part of the history of the missile crisis, but it can no longer be regarded as a reliable memoir . RFK's book was clearly important but it is no longer reliable .
 It seems entirely reasonable to ask whether the Belfer Center "For Educators" link is actually focused on assisting teachers . It seems to be a matter of concern about educational parochialism and academic in-breeding .
 May and Zelikow have published four versions of “authoritative” missile crisis transcripts . Educators should be excused if they are confused, they say .
 HUP published two, a hardcover volume in 1997 and paperback in 1998 . Norton, in addition to the aforementioned hardcover, published in 2002 a still-in-print paperback that uses the HUP title .
 Amendments and corrections were incorporated in these various volumes without any notation or explanation, leaving it to scholars to sort out the muddle . It is not known how many corrections and corrections have been incorporated into these volumes .
 The updates and corrections site is still not interactive . Unfortunately, the updates are still not available .