 Kennedy's peccadillos outside the Oval Office were met by the American public with a collective blush . Kennedy was president of the White House from 1963 to 1968 .
 The tragic end to the JFK era in Dallas on November 22, 1963, ripped the heart out of American innocence . The world stunned into recognizing the cataclysmic social and political changes that were occurring in every corner of the globe .
 John was the second child of Joseph and Rose . Born in May 1917, John was born to Joseph, Rose and Joseph .
 Known in his Irish-Catholic neighborhood as ""Jack,"" he was a sickly child, having suffered from whooping cough, scarlet fever, and other maladies . He was also known in his neighborhood as "Jack"
 His family joke that if a mosquito were to bite him, it would be the insect's life in danger . After taking a turn for the better, his family could easily joke that his life would be at risk .
 Jack was part of a large household with elder brother Joseph Jr., younger sisters Rosemary, Kathleen, Eunice, and Patricia, younger brother Robert, sister Jean .
 Despite his long list of illnesses, Jack was full of life and was well liked . Despite his list of ailments, Jack died at the age of 92 .
 Jack enjoyed a number of sports and enjoyed a competitive spirit . His father had endowed him with a competitive nature, and Jack enjoyed sports .
 Kennedy tapped a promising future by attending an exclusive prep school, Choate Rosemary Hall, in Wallingford, Connecticut . Kennedy was a member of ""The Muckers,"" a select group of practical jokers .
 Jack succeeded by graduating from Harvard just as World War II broke out . Jack succeeded indeed, by graduating just as the war broke out in 1942 .
 His thesis was published in book form with the title Why England Slept . It was published by the author of the book, Why England Sledpt .
 Kennedy volunteered for PT boat duty and took his training in Rhode Island . Soon after, Kennedy volunteered to be on duty in the Navy .
 Kennedy was the commander of an 80-foot patrol torpedo boat, the PT-109, whose theater of operations was the Solomon Islands . Kennedy was named commander of the torpedo boat .
 A Japanese destroyer came out of nowhere and sliced Kennedy's boat in half . Kennedy was on night patrol in August 1943 when he was attacked by the Japanese .
 Others had leaped overboard moments before impact and made their way to a piece of flotsam . Others had tried to make contact with the flotilla before the crash .
 Kennedy managed to rescue a burned crewman . Kennedy's back was injured, but he was able to rescue the man . Kennedy was injured in the collision, but survived .
 He hauled him to the wreckage where the other crewmen were clinging for dear life . The other crewman was rescued by the rescue team .
 As dawn broke, they made their way to a small island a few miles distant . As dawn dawns, they headed for a small, remote island .
 The men were discovered by friendly natives and eventually rescued by the Navy . Subsisting on coconuts and rainwater, the men were eventually rescued from the sea .
 In June 1944, Kennedy received the Gallantry in Action medal after earlier being honored with the Purple Heart . Kennedy was awarded with the Medal of Honor in June 1944 .
 In August of that year, brother Joseph was killed when his plane exploded shortly after takeoff . He was carrying more than 21,000 pounds of explosives meant for a German V-1 rocket launching pad .
 Kennedy campaigned hard for a seat in the United States Congress . Backed by his father and ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, his maternal grandfather and ex-mayor of Boston .
 With his war heroics serving as a plus, he handily defeated his opponents . He handily beat his opponents in the first round .
 Kennedy held that seat until 1952, when he ran for the United States Senate against the popular Republican incumbent, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., who was from a family that could trace its roots to the Mayflower . Kennedy was elected to the Senate in 1952 .
 In 1953, he managed another upset by wooing and eventually marrying Jacqueline Lee Bouvier . In 1953 he managed to woo and eventually marry the beautiful Jacqueline .
 During his lengthy hospital stay and rehabilitation, he wrote Profiles in Courage, a book that analyzed the lives of eight notable U.S Senators .
 The first bump in the road of Kennedy's political career arrived as he lay in the hospital . Kennedy was hospitalized with a brain injury . The hospitalization was the first step in his career as a senator .
 The Senate censured Senator Joseph McCarthy for instigating a panic over Communists in the U.S. government . McCarthy instigated a nationwide panic over Communist Communists . McCarthy was censured by the Senate .
 Kennedy didn't cast a vote, so he was criticized for not jumping on the anti-McCarthy bandwagon . Kennedy was criticized in the 1950s for not voting on McCarthy's anti-war measures .
 McCarthy had been a guest at the Kennedy retreat in Hyannisport . Bobby Kennedy had served on McCarthy's staff . McCarthy was guest at Kennedy retreat .
 Kennedy's persona drew more attention when he began to serve on the Senate Select Committee to Investigate Improper Activities in Labor-Management Relations . Kennedy served on the committee to investigate Labor-management relations .
 Kennedy sponsored a bill to rid the unions of criminal activities . Kennedy sponsored the bill, which was passed by the House of Representatives .
 He narrowly lost the nomination for the vice-presidential spot on the Adlai E Stevenson ticket for 1956 . He was re-elected to the Senate with more than 73 percent of the vote in 1956 .
 When told by an old pol that he should easily capture the vice-presidential nomination in 1960, Kenndy replied, "I'm not running for vice-presidency anymore. I'm not going to run for the vice presidency anymore."
 After securing the Democratic nomination in a close race with Lyndon B Johnson from Texas, Kennedy named Johnson as his running mate . Kennedy was elected to the presidency in 1964 .
 A crucial factor in the election was the first televised presidential debate . The debate was a crucial factor for the election .
 Richard M Nixon refused makeup and was feeling ill, owing to a knee injury on the way to the studio . Nixon was the Republican nominee, who refused makeup .
 He expected to win voters with his foreign-policy expertise, but viewers beheld a pale, profusely sweating man with a five-o'clock shadow . His rival looked tanned and well, while his rival looked well and well .
 Later research indicated that those who had listened to the debate on radio thought Nixon had won, but the television audience gave the win to Kennedy .
 The economic issue was the Soviet Union's high economic growth rate compared to that of the U.S. The Soviet Union had the highest growth rate in the country .
 Analysis at the time, the Soviet economy was expected to overtake the American economy by 1984 . According to analysis, it was expected that Soviet economy would overtake the U.S. by 1984.
 Kennedy also claimed that the Republican administration had allowed the "missile gap" to open by not matching Soviet defense spending and allowing the U.S. military to weaken .
 The claim was made more credible by Soviet superiority in the space program, as evidenced by their successful Sputnik orbit, contrasted by numerous United States launch failures .
 The election results were so close that Nixon was urged to call for a recount in such key states as Illinois, Missouri, and New Jersey . Nixon urged to recount in key states such as Illinois .
 He publicly refused, but privately wanted 11 states included in the recount . The recount is expected to take place in 11 states, including Wisconsin .
 Legal battles stretched into the summer of 1961, long after Kennedy had been inaugurated . Legal battles between Kennedy and the White House lasted long after he was inaugurated in 1961 .
 At the age of 43, Kennedy became the second-youngest president* and first Roman Catholic ever . Kennedy won by the slimmest of margins — 115,000 votes .
 As Kennedy entered the glare of the Oval Office, he did so amidst tensions in Southeast Asia and nearby Cuba, as well as the continuing space and arms race with the Soviets . He did so in the midst of tensions in the Southeast Asia, Cuba, and continuing tensions with the Soviet Union
 He suffered a rude awakening in April 1961 when the Bay of Pigs Invasion to overthrow Cuban dictator Fidel Castro turned sour . The invasion was the first attempt to overthrow Castro's regime .
 The invasion facilitated Castro's call for more aid from the Soviet Union . Castro called for more help after the invasion .
 In June, Kennedy met with Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna for two days of meetings . Kennedy also met with the Soviet leader in Vienna in June .
 The Soviet leader carried away an impression that the U.S. president lacked resolve . He carried away the impression that President Obama lacked resolve.
 In February 1962, John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth . John Glenn was the first man in the world to orbit Earth .
 The program, which still exists, encourages Americans to give of their talents in Third-World countries . It still exists .
 Volunteers are trained for the opportunity to educate youth and elders, facilitate community improvement projects and care for the environment . Volunteers are also trained to help educate youth, elders and facilitate community improvements . Volunteers will be trained to care for youth and elderly .
 Kennedy signed three bills into law that targeted the prohibition of telephone betting, interstate transportation for the purposes of racketeering,* and commercial transportation of betting equipment . Kennedy then signed the bills .
 Following the missile crisis, Kennedy moved on to make civil rights a priority of his administration . Kennedy made it a priority for civil rights .
 On November 22, 1963, the president and first lady boarded an open-top limousine with Governor John B Connelly for a 45-minute ride to speak to a meeting of the Citizens Council .
 The president slumped forward with a mortal head wound after being shot in the head . As the vehicle approached a triple overpass, shots were heard, and the president slumped down .
 After solemn ceremonies, Kennedy's body was taken to Arlington National Cemetery . Kennedy's funeral was held in Washington, D.C.