 He had traveled throughout Europe while his father Joseph was ambassador to Britain, reporting on the political situations he observed .
 During a short stint at Stanford, he studied business, but also took courses in politics and international relations .
 Foreign policy and anti-Communism were key issues for any politician of his day . He understood that foreign policy, and especially anti-communism, was key issues of any politician .
 John Kennedy: Foreign policy today, irrespective of what we might wish, in its impact on our daily lives, overshadows everything else . In a campaign speech for a Massachusetts State Senate seat in 1951, John Kennedy said, “Foreign policy today ... overshadowed everything else
 Anti-Communism Kennedy’s political career played out through the Cold War . Kennedy's anti-Communist legacy played out in the 1950s and '60s .
 Kennedy didn’t wait long for the first confrontation of his presidency . The Bay of Pigs was the first confrontation of the president .
 Only weeks after he took office he was told of a secret CIA plan to send an army of Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro . The western hemisphere of its first Communist regime .
 On April 17, 1961, a brigade of Cuban exiles trained by the CIA landed at the Bay of Pigs in the south of Cuba . The brigade was trained by CIA and arrived in Cuba in the spring of that year .
 CIA officers in Washington listened to rebel leader over the radio . Three days later, CIA officers listened to the rebel leader's radio broadcast .
 One hundred and fourteen of the exiles had been killed and 1,198 were captured . One hundred-and-14 were killed and one hundred and 14 captured .
 President Kennedy had been in office for less than three months . President Kennedy was in office when he was assassinated . Kennedy was president of the United States from 1963 to 1963 .
 At a press conference on April 21, he accepted responsibility for the incident . At the same time, he apologized for his actions .
 As documents become declassified, historians have placed the truth somewhere between these claims . Historians believe the truth is somewhere between the claims and the truth .
 More than 16,000 American troops would arrive in Vietnam within two years . Within two years, the U.S. would be at war with Vietnam .
 U.S. involvement in Vietnam may be Kennedy’s most lasting legacy in American foreign policy . At the time, not many Americans understood the depth of involvement that lay ahead .
 Scholars debate what Kennedy’s intentions would have been had he lived . Scholars continue to debate what he intended to do with his life .
 Aides to the president have said that he felt an American withdrawal from Vietnam would tarnish him as an appeaser . But that he would have withdrawn after a re-election in 1964, they say .
 Historian Robert Dallek says, “Kennedy was really doubtful about the wisdom of escalating the war,” and was developing a plan as early as 1962 to remove all troops in stages .
 In May 1961 Kennedy met with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna . The Berlin Wall was the backdrop of a meeting between Kennedy and Khrushchchev in 1961 .
 Kennedy was hoping that he and Khrushchev could find a solution to avoid confrontation . Kennedy hoped that he could avoid confrontation with the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev moved to close off the flow of refugees from Communism in Berlin in order to stop them fleeing the city of Berlin .
 Kennedy met Khrushchev's challenge with a force of his own, increasing the size of America’s combat forces and obtaining billions of dollars for nuclear and conventional weapons .
 On October 15, American pilots photographed evidence that Soviet ballistic missiles were being installed in Cuba . Khrushchev’s personal assurances that there was no plan to arm Cuba with such weapons were untrue .
 Kennedy addressed the nation on October 22, 1962 . It was the first time the Soviets understood that they had been spotted in Cuba .
 President declared that an attack from Cuba would be understood as a Soviet attack requiring response in kind . President asked for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council . In that speech the President announced a blockade of Cuba .
 The next day at the Security Council, Adlai Stevenson offered clear photographic proof of missile installations, even as the Soviet representative denounced the charges as false . The Soviet representative denied the charges, even though the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations offered the evidence .
 World opinion began to sway toward the U.S. following Stevenson’s presentation .
 Late that night Robert Kennedy made contact with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy was in contact with the Soviet ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 Communication between the two men was understood to constitute a direct channel between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev . The two men were understood to be a direct line between Kennedy and the Soviet Union .
 The world edged closer to war as Soviet ships approached the blockade, slowed, and then turned back . The Soviet ships slowed, but turned back, leading to the end of the war .
 Days later, a U2 reconnaissance plane was shot down, inciting U.S. military officers to action . President Kennedy refused to launch an invasion; President Kennedy did not .
 Khrushchev publicly agreed to remove the missiles in return for assurances that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . The missiles were removed in exchange for assurances the United States would not go to Cuba . Khrushchev agreed on October 28 .
 Kennedy promised to remove American missiles from Turkey but refused to publicly declare a quid pro quo . Privately, Kennedy promised that he would remove missiles from the country .
 A Biography, discussed the youngest of Joe and Rose Kennedy’s children . The Kennedy family was married to Joe Kennedy Jr. The Kennedy children were born in New York City, New Jersey .
 Author Robert Dallek discusses John F Kennedy’s health, the war in Vietnam, and Americans’ enduring interest in Kennedy and his family . The Kennedys .
 Historian Michael Beschloss talks to American Experince about the Cold War, Cuba, JFK' s private life, and Robert Kennedy's role in American politics . The Kennedys .