 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev is seen walking near his villa on the Black Sea . The Soviet Union leader was photographed in 1962 .
 On the far shore is Turkey, where, months before, President Kennedy had stationed nuclear missiles . The far shore of Turkey is the site of the first nuclear missile tests .
 If you want to get your Khrushchev on, check out the link in the description .
 A time when, for thirteen days, two great powers hurtled toward a global suicide pact . A time . When, for 13 days, the two great nations hurtled . toward each other, a suicide pact. A time of thirteen days .
 Khrushchev had regularly bragged to foreign press about the Soviet missile system . Following the launch of Sputnik in 1957, the Soviet leader had regularly boasted about the system .
 In reality though, his intercontinental missiles were super inaccurate and took hours to launch . In reality, the missiles were extremely inaccurate . They were launched hours after launch .
 The U.S. had a first-strike strike against the U.K. on Tuesday night . It was the first time the Americans had struck in a major league strike .
 Khrushchev did have reliable medium and intermediate-range missiles . If he could station those in Cuba he could credibly threaten the U.S., he could threaten the United States .
 From that position of power he could probably negotiate for Berlin, or demand that Kennedy withdraw his missiles from Turkey . He could also demand that JFK withdraws his missiles .
 The United States would never again dare to invade Cuba . And, as a bonus, the U.S. would never invade Cuba again, he says .
 Khrushchev would have to sneak them in, and only unveil them once they were operational . No. No. 2 would be able to sneak in and unveil them, only once they had been operational .
 The man across from him, traveling undercover as an agricultural engineer, is the head of Soviet rocket forces . He is traveling undercover undercover as a agricultural engineer . The man also travels undercover as agricultural engineer.
 If the Yankees discover a secret deployment, they'll think that the missiles are intended for a first strike . If the missiles were deployed, they would think that they were intended for first strike.
 On August 25th in Sevastopol, a timber freighter pulls out of port, riding high on the water . The crew of the timber freighters was on board the ship .
 Only one of 85 commercial ships ferrying troops and equipment to Cuba . Cuba is only one of the world's most isolated countries .
 The luckiest of these soldiers travel on cruise ships, disguised as tourists, but the majority are crammed into sweltering freighters . The luckyiest are the ones who travel on a cruise ship disguised as a tourist .
 42,000 Soviet troops come ashore dressed in civilian clothes or Cuban army uniforms . By early September the missiles begin arriving in Cuba . The missiles begin to arrive in September .
 On October 16th at 11:50m. in the Oval Office, President Kennedy and a handful of advisers sit at the briefing table, looking at blown-up photos from a U-2 spy plane . The photos were taken in the U.S. at the time .
 Kennedy is furious at Khrushchev's betrayal . If one launches it can hit Washington in 13 minutes, it could hit the U.S. within 13 minutes . Kennedy was furious at the betrayal .
 The midterms are coming up and his political rivals have made the Soviet buildup in Cuba a campaign issue . Cuba is a key issue in the midterms .
 They accuse him of letting the Soviets install missile platforms 90 miles from Florida . They say he let them install missile bases 90 miles away .
 Khrushchev had told Kennedy that the build-up was defensive meant to avoid another American invasion and that it wouldn't include missiles . Privately, he told Kennedy the build up was defensive .
 Kennedy had drawn a red line pledging to take action if the soviet station's nuclear weapons in Cuba were to be used . Kennedy drew the line with his pledge to act if the nuclear weapons were used .
 He had made that pledge thinking that he'd never have to go through with it, he said . "I had made it thinking that I didn't have to," he said of the pledge .
 He thinks that the President should either order an airstrike or maybe an airstrike followed by an invasion . The President should order a strike or an airstrike, he says . He says that he thinks that he should either be followed by a invasion .
 At 6:30m. in the White House, gathered around in the Cabinet Room our 14 men . At 6.30m . in the . Cabinet Room in the Oval Office, gathered for the first time ever .
 It's the first meeting of what will be known, as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The committee is known as the "Executive Committee"
 Khrushchev could just send more missiles to replace the destroyed ones, and Soviet bombers in Cuba could still hit Florida . Khruschev could still send missiles into Cuba, and could still use Cuban bombers .
 Kennedy's brother, Bobby, the Attorney General, loves this plan because he hates Castro . Bobby's brother is Bobby Kennedy's attorney general, Bobby Kennedy, the son of Kennedy .
 Air strikes are never a hundred percent effective, experts say . But the others point out that air strikes are not always 100 percent effective . The U.S. military says air strikes have never been successful .
 If Soviet soldiers are manning missiles, killing them in an airstrike could lead to war . And, of course, if Soviet soldiers were manning the missiles, they could be in danger .
 If he reneges, Khrushchev might see it as weakness and start sending missiles to hot spots everywhere . But he had pledged to take action, and if he did it, it might be a weakness .
 Instituting a naval blockade to stop any more weapons from coming in and calling for the missiles removal . The blockade is called for the removal of missiles from the region .
 Publicly warn that any offensive move against the U.S. would lead to a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union . Publicly warned that any . offensive move . against the US would lead . to a . nuclear strike .
 EXCOMM debates possible outcomes, but Kennedy keeps coming back to Khrushchev's thinking . ExCOMM goes back-and-forth debating possible outcomes of the war . Kennedy: "Krushchev was right"
 40 U.S. warships plunge toward a tiny island on October 17th at 12:00m. in the Caribbean . 40 United States warships dive toward the tiny island .
 EXCOMM is still discussing whether they'll do this for real . But in Washington, EXCOMm is still debating whether it will be a real .
 On October 19th at 9:45m. in the White House the new intelligence reports are ominous . In the next week, the President will be briefed on the intelligence behind the attacks .
 In the last several days discussions in EXCOMM have increasingly turned away from the air strike invasion option . ExCOMM is increasingly turning away from air strike strikes in Syria .
 If he attacks Cuba, Khrushchev will attack Berlin and that'll leave only one alternative: A nuclear strike . If he strikes Cuba, he'll attack Berlin . If that happens, the only option would be a nuclear strike.
 Kennedy compares it to Nazi appeasement, which is a shot at Kennedy's father who once advocated negotiating with Hitler . Kennedy compares the move to Nazi appeasing .
 Kennedy knows that winning a nuclear war might still mean millions of U.S. deaths . Kennedy: "I'm not going to go to war. But I'm going to get my hands on a nuclear bomb"
 The general responds that the Air Force will be ready for an attack in two days if ordered . The general says the air force is ready for two days to defend itself .
 On October 20th at 9am in Cuba, the 79th Missile Regiment gathers around a political officer .
 He stands on a mound of dirt brought from the Soviet Union, a reminder that these men are here to defend their homeland . The mound is a reminder of the men's duty to defend the homeland .
 Kennedy is scheduled to broadcast a television address at 2:00m., Moscow time . Kennedy will be broadcast at 2.00m, Moscow time.
 The United States Embassy has told him to expect a communication an hour before . The U.S. Embassy has also told him he expects a communication from the embassy an hour earlier .
 He runs through his options, from announcing a mutual defense pact with Cuba over the radio to transferring the missiles to Cuban control and letting them defend themselves .
 One nuclear bomb carries nuclear warheads three times more powerful than all the bombs ever dropped in history . One bomb is three times the most powerful ever dropped by a nuclear warhead .