 On October 14, 1962, a U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba discovered nuclear missile sites under construction . The U.2 plane flew over Cuba and discovered the sites in Cuba .
 These missiles would have been capable of quickly reaching the U.S. These missiles could have been able to quickly reach the United States .
 President Kennedy convened a small group of senior officials to debate the crisis . President Kennedy met with a group of officials to discuss the situation .
 The group was split between those who wanted a military solution, such an invasion or air strikes, and those who sought a diplomatic solution to remove the missiles .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba and all U.S. military forces to DEFCON 3 . Eight days later, Kennedy ordered the blockade to Cuba and the United States military forces .
 ICBMs were prepared for launch, Polaris submarines were dispatched, and B-52 bombers were placed on alert . Polaris subs were dispatched to the Pentagon, and the U.S. was prepared to launch .
 The world watched as tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union increased . The Soviet Union and the United States were at the center of the Cold War .
 Reconnaissance flights by U-2s continued over Cuba, while U.S. and Soviet officials exchanged words of warning .
 Khrushchev announced that they were withdrawing the missiles from Cuba on October 28, 1962 . The missiles were withdrawn from Cuba .
 In the spring of 1963, the U.S. quietly removed the missiles from Turkey that equally threatened the Soviet Union . The missiles were removed from Turkey in the spring 1963 .
 This crisis is regarded as the closest the world has come to a nuclear exchange . The crisis is the closest to the world's closest nuclear exchange ever seen .
 The famous ""hotline" was installed between the United States and the Soviet Union to help resolve future conflicts . Soon after this incident, the famous ""Hotline"" was installed .
 It was later learned that the missiles on Cuba were operational and were armed with nuclear warheads . The missiles were later found to be operational and armed with warheads .