 This imperative applies especially to times of crisis, when deals struck at the superpowerlevel may exacerbate fears of states who see their security being bargainedaway, thus leading to dangerous reactions .
 We illustrate our argument by retelling the classic tale of the Cuban missile crisis . We illustrate this with a retelling of the story from the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Our account, however, is triangular, because in addition to American perceptions, Cubanperspective is a focus of our analysis . Our account is triangular because of the Cuban perspective .
 Finally, we derive triangular lessons of the missile crisis using the theory of mutual security . The theory of security is based on mutual security, and mutual cooperation .
 Fidel Castro; Cuban missile crisis; positive sum; theory of mutual security . Fidel Castro, Cuban president of Cuba, Cuban dictator of Cuba . Cuban President of Cuba. Fidel Castro. Cuban leader of Cuba’s armed forces. Cuban government of Cuba to blame for missile crisis. Cuban
 What we may be witnessing is not just the end of the Cold War, or the passing of a particular period of postwarhistory . But the universalization of Western liberal Democracy as the final form of human government, he says .
 Dreamingthattherewill be an end to revolutions, no matterwhat happens, is just dreaming . Dreaming that revolution will end is not just dreaming, it's just dream .
 Baker and his Soviet counterpart, Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, speak by telephone as often as a half-dozentimes per week, often to work out common strategies on tough issues . Baker and Russia's foreign minister now speak by phone and sometimes by travel
 The name of the game is ""positive sum,"" at least as far as the U.S. and Soviet Union . "positive sum" is the game in the Soviet Union and the United States .
 It was only with the advent of the first worldwide crisis of the post-Cold War order, following Iraq's August 2, 1990, invasion of Kuwait, that the new collaborative possibilities became fully apparent .
 Secretary Baker and thenForeign Minister Shevardnadze, who were fishing together in the U.S.R., immediately condemned the invasion .
 The United States and U.S.R. voted together to condemn the invasion and impose sanctions, throughto the later votes authorizinguse of force .
 Few believe the Soviets will revert to the Cold Warunilateralism of the past . Many criticize Soviet policy in the Persian Gulf war .
 Iraq's invasion of Kuwait could be a sign of desperation, author says . U.S. and U.K.R. have agreed to play by the rules of mutual security, he says .
 At the very least, the coincidence of the end of the Cold War and the Persian Gulf war illustratethat East-West collaboration,empathy,coordination, and all the other aspects of participation do not ensure peace, prosperity, or harmony in the post-Cold War world
 This brings us, finally, to our fundamentaltheoretical proposition:in the post-cold war world, a bilateralmutual security approach is not enough .
 It is imperativethatthe mutualsecuritybe made triangular, incorporating security concerns of third countries . Third countries may feel their security is threatened by the great-power collaboration .
 The answers lay in the revolutionary requirements for psychology and se730 Belkin and Blight curity produced by the end of the Cold War .
 Small countries fear two possible consequences of the end of superpower competition in their regions . Some small countries have benefited from the Cold War, but others fear consequences of its end .
 They fear being ignored, left alone to rot in regional cesspools-deemed by the great powers henceforth unworthy of concern . They are regarded as having nothing the larger countries want or need .
 Leaders of virtually all sub-Saharan African countries fear this . Leaders of several African nations fear it will be a problem .
 Former Cold War rivals may fear being singled out, manipulated, or attacked by one of the other former rivals .
 In a regional crisis, anxiety and feeling of increasing helplessness could become transformed into desperation . In some cases, the actions of those without the empathic ability to understand the desperation behind them are irrational .
 In this way, new world disorder may lead to Third World desperation, resulting in regional tension, chaos, or war . New world disorder could lead to chaos, chaos or war, says Julian Zelizer .
 The unintended consequences of the Persian Gulf war include oilwell fires, refugees and a hated dictatorship still in power . The U.S. and the Arab nations are trying to deal with the unintended consequences .
 The securityof all partiesto the dispute was compromised-security in the deeper, broadersense required by the post-ColdWarenvironment . Security is a function of the total well-being, or its lack, of the tightly integrated world system .
 During these anxiety-provokingepochs, the old order appearsto have been invalidated, while the outlines of the new ""paradigm""have yet to come clearly into focus .
 The bipolar Cold War had scarcely been declaredover when the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait occurred . Theipolar Cold War has come to a surprising, abrupt, almost total termination .
 In our view, the heart of the new ""order""is a new triangulardimension to mutualsecurityrequirements,"a dimension in part unseen by the superpowers, but nonetheless decisive . The heart of this order is a new 'order'
 The Cubanmissile crisis of 1962 is at first counterintuitive . The Cuban missile crisis was the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962 .
 U.S.-Soviet involvement;anxiety, and eventually desperation in a third party that had adverse security consequences for both the United States and the Soviet Union; and contemporary relevance; .
 The missile crisis is generally regarded as the puristsuperpowerconfrontation of all time, the nadir of the Cold War, a 13-day super-dramawith a clean-cut conclusion, and thus irrelevant .
 Scholarshave focused on the deployment, the crisis, and their withdrawal . But such a view is itself a product of Cold War,bipolarmyopia, he says .
 We are learning more than we knew before aboutCubanorigins, decision-making, and the crisis of October 1962 .
 For one brief dark moment in 1962, a ""moment"" stretching from late October to late November, the Cuban leadership felt abandonedby the Soviets, threatenedby the United States, and more desperatethan we ever knew .
 The recovery of the Cuban perspective on those events has also allowed us, quite fortuitously,to recover a previously unappreciated""tangled triangle""of just the sort that is most to be fearednow. In short, the recovery of Cuban perspective has allowed us to recover
 It turns out that we have been there before, though briefly, during that ""unipolar moment"" that took our health away in 1962 .
 In the following two sections, we provide the equivalent of a brief tourof the new informationthathas recently come to light on Cuba and itsmissile crisis .
 The story of the origins of the Soviet missile deployment in Cubais familiar to student students . The story is familiar to students of postwar U.S.-Soviet relations .
 It appearsthatKhrushchev'sfear of the nuclear imbalance, as well as his wish to protect the Cubanrevolution from Americanattack, were primarymotives for the deployment .
 National Security Council deliberated for an entire week following discovery of missile sites in Cuba . ExCOM deliberated in secret for a week after discovery .
 On October 22, President Kennedy announced his decision to quarantine Cubawith a navalblockade, preventing the delivery of additional missiles on ships which had alreadyset sail from the Soviet Union .
 Leaders in both the United States and U.S.R. began to feel they were losing control of events . During the next few days, both the leaders in both countries felt they had been losing control .
 American surface ships may have tried to force Soviet nuclearsubmarinestesto surface without permission from the president .
 Khrushchevoffered to remove the missiles in exchange for a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba . On October 26, 1962, the Soviet Union offered to remove missiles in return for a Cuban missile ban .
 Khrushchevalso insisted on the removal of Turkish-based Jupitermissiles .
 Word reached the White House that an AmericanU-2 reconnaissanceplane had been shot down near the Cuban port of Banes . EXCOM debated its response to the shooting of the plane .
 The president dispatched his brother to negotiate privately with Soviet Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin . President George W. Bush sent his brother, brother and sister to negotiate .
 The United States would agree not to invade Cuba and remove Jupitermissiles in Turkey within several months . The U.S. would agree to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey within months .
 The Soviets would agree to remove all nuclearground-toground ""offensive"" missiles from Cuba . The Soviets agreed to remove the missiles from the country .
 The resolutionof the missile crisis foreshadowed the pattern of the tangled triangular relationship between Washington, Moscow, and Havana over the next 28 years .
 The U.S. and Soviet Union entered a period of decreased tensions . On the one hand, the United States and the Soviet Union enter an era of decreased tension .
 When they mutuallycame to believe that they were uncomfortably close to annihilating each other, they reconciled their differences . They reconciled .
 Kennedy was sensitive to Khrushchev'sneed for a facesaving way to back down . Kennedy took the Soviet general secretary's interests into account . To a greater degree than at any time since World War II, the two governments cooperated .
 The improved relationspersisted after the crisis as the two sides installed the Washington-Moscow hotline . The two sides also signed the 1963 Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
 The Cubans, on the other hand, were infuriated by the terms of the resolution . The resolution was approved by the U.S. Senate on Tuesday .
 The administration was laying the groundwork for an attackeven before the discovery of the missiles, and the Cubans were aware of the preparations . Americanintentions at the time remain unclear but the administration may have been laying groundwork .
 Castro claimed to have reliable information about U.S. plans to strike Cuba . Castro said he had reliable information that the Americans were preparing to strike . Castro also claimed to be aware of the Americans' intentions .
 Our own intelligence also informed us that an invasion would probably be unavoidable unless we came to an agreement with the president quickly, the president .
 Fidel Castro "failed to understand our purpose," says Fidel Castro . Fidel failed to understand the purpose of Fidel Castro's regime, says Castro . Castro's government was overthrown by the West .
 The missiles were installed not for the purpose of attacking the United States, but to keep the U.S. from attacking Cuba, Cuban leader says .
 Many studentsof Castro'sCubacontinueto believe that if Cubahad had control of nuclear weapons in October 1962, there would have been a nuclear war . Yet many students believe there would not have been such a war in 1962 .
 Fidel Castro and other Cuban officials have begun to speak in detail about their experience of the missile crisis . Fidel Castro has spoken about their fear of abandonment by the Soviets .
 McNamara, supported by all his former colleagues from the Kennedy administration, said that however compelling the evidence may have appeared, an invasion of Cuba was out of the question .
 In his view contingency plans for a U.S. invasion of the island would never have been enacted, he says . Believing otherwise, he said, while understandable, was never thelessto fall victim to a serious misperception .
 Cuban InteriorMinistry official GeneralFabianEscalanterejectedMcNamara's ""misperception"" theory . At a subsequent triangular conference held in Antigua in January 1991, Cuban Interior Ministry official General Fabian Escalante rejected the theory .
 Cubans believed in the inevitability of a frontal assault by the U.S. forces on the island . Cubans believe in a frontalassault by the United States forces .
 U.S.-backed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 was defeated by Cuban forces . Cuban leader turned to the Soviets for assistance after defeat at Bay .
 The Soviets had never deployed such weapons anywhere outside Soviet territory . The weapons had never been deployed in Soviet territory.
 Cuba offered the ultimatedeterrent to the United States invasion was about to arrive and become operational . Nevertheless, when offered, they were gratefullyreceived by Cuba .
 Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones were sent to Moscow in late August to urge the Soviets to go public with the deployment . Yet the secret, deceptive deployment had hardly begun, when the Cubans began to suspect that the Soviet gambit was not well-thought-
 The Cubans have felt increasingly uneasy about having placed their fate in the hands of the Soviets .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove Turkish missiles in return for a public pledge from Kennedy not to invade the island . Kennedy promised to remove the missiles in exchange for a pledge from Castro not invading Cuba .
 The deal seemed to Castro to have placed Cuba in imminent danger, he was furious at the Soviets for having struck such a deal without consulting Cuba . Castro was furious in any case that he was not consulted by Cuba .
 Castro wrote to Khrushchev that the U.S. could launch its nuclear missiles at the United States if it invaded . Castro was sufficiently prepared to make a contingent contingent contingent on the threat of a Soviet invasion .
 Khrushchev was horrified by what he took to be a request for nuclearpre-emption . Khruschev agreed to Kennedy's terms, ending the intense phase of the superpower crisis .
 Soviet abandonmentof Cubaduringthe missile crisis still rankle Cubanofficials nearly 30 years later . Soviet abandonment of Cubaaduring the missile crisis, and refusal to consult with Cuba over the terms of the resolution, rankle Cuban officials .
 If Nikita's message to Kennedysaid, "We are willing to withdrawthe missiles from Cuba, providedthat Cuba's security is guaranteed,in Cuba's view" Kennedy: "We always told our Soviet friends that we disagreed with Cuba'sexclusion"
 Khrushchev's response to Kennedy's response had to be resolved in a conference where Cuba was present . Kennedy's "reaction to Kennedy" was resolved at a conference in Cuba, Cuba .
 The problems between Cuba and the U.S. that led to the crisis in the first place would also have been discussed . Had he added five more words to his message, the problems between the two countries would also be discussed .
 Mikoyan's task was to convince Castro that giving up the missiles was necessary . He was tasked with persuading Castro to give up missiles in order to keep the missiles .
 Castro's reaction, as recorded by Alekseev, shows the depth and object of Cuban concern .
 It never occurred to him that superpowers-especially superpowers in the grip of the Cold War-might act to preservetheirown securityinterest of a small ally .
 It is useful to recall why the Cubans were excluded from the resolution of the crisis . It is also useful to remember why the Cuban people were excluded .
 The U.S. must remove Soviet missiles, a pledge not to invade Cuba . The United States must remove all Soviet missiles from Cuba . A pledge by the United States should also be made to Cuba not invade .
 In the presence of nascent nuclear danger, Kennedy and Khrushchev were able to meet one another'sneeds . In the face of growing nuclear threat, they met each other's needs .
 Castro's contingent request of Khrushchev for a launch need not therefore be viewed as being crazy in the least . From the Cubanpoint of view the situation was becoming so perverseas to seem almost unavoidablycatastrophic .
 In late October 1962, a leader actually came very close to reaching the conclusion because of the unexpected rapprochement between the superpowers .
 First, when Washingtonand Moscow push around thirdparties, there may be consequences . First, Washingtonand Russia push aroundthird third, theremay be consequences.
 In response to an American invasion, the Cuban government tried to prevent it . The U.S.-Soviet deal they thought would insure it was a success .
 There are unhappy consequences in U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations even today deriving from the failure to integrate Cuba into the solution . And as a result of the failure, there are unhappy .
 With this self-asserting military force, Cubahas pursued an adventurist foreign policy . The U.S. has, since the missile crisis, called an "adventurist" foreign policy, for example .
 Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba in return for removal of missiles and bombers . Many Cubans remember feeling most at risk of American attack after Kennedy's promise .
 Cuban policy-makers in the 1990s sought mutuallysecure, triangularrelationshipsthat addressthe needs and perceptions of all sides . To the extentthat policy makers sought mutually secure, triangular relationships .
 For Cuba, which felt itself to be isolated and abandoned, the specter of annihilationwas so vivid that it didn't prevent its leaders from noticing changes in their situation caused by a bargain struck at the great-powerlevel .
 Castrowas able to thinkonly in worst-caseterms, discounting security guarantees issued in good faith . Castrow can't think only about worst-case scenarios, says Castrow .
 The three leaders seem to have been largely out of touch with one another's perceived reality . Kennedy's appreciation of Khrushchev's willingness to back down with honor .
 Castro wrongly assumed that the SovietCubanrelationship was more valued in Moscow than U.S.-Soviet relations . Castro mistakenly assumed the relationship was more important to Moscow than the United States .
 He believed he would retain some leverage over the deploymentbecause of his ability to play the superpowers off against each other .
 The sudden, traumatic discovery of this miscalculation may have contributed to his desperation . The sudden discovery of his mistake may also have contributed .
 The Kennedy administration did not understand Castro's fear . Castro feared a pattern of harassment and interference, as well as evidence of an Americanassassination conspiracy .
 Presidential advisers were shocked at their discovery of the missile deployment . The possibility had been discussed for months in Congress and in the media .
 Khrushchevdid did not appreciate Kennedy's fear of appearing weak in the face of communism, especially Cubancommunism, and thus failed to anticipate the deployment .
 He also failed to take into account Castro's dependence on the Soviets for deterring an American invasion . Castro was dependent on the Soviet Union to deter an invasion .
 Neither he nor Kennedy anticipated Castro's sense of powerlessness and fury which followed their agreement . And neither he nor . Kennedy anticipated their sense of . powerlessness, fury .
 JFK realized they would have to sacrifice secondary objectives in order to avoid war . JFK and Khrushchevcame to realize that they would sacrifice secondary goals to avoid conflict .
 The Cuban missile crisis is a case study of the Cuban Missile Crisis . While our purpose is not primarily theoretical, it may be useful to state as clearly as possible what we take to be the most important thing that follows .
 The security of both sides in such a relationship is connected, or wired together, in one single system . In other words, both sides are connected in the security of a relationship . In such a case, the security is connected by both sides .
 Both sides are in the same boat, and if the boat sinks, both sides sink . "Both sides sink. Both sides sink," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "If you're in the boat sink, you sink," he says .
 Cuban experiences during the missile crisis suggest that it may be possible to apply positive sum thinking to three-sided situations . The theory of mutual security has been applied primarily to bilateral systems .
 In the missile crisis, the U.S., Soviet Union, and Cuba belonged to a single security system . The security of all three sides was wired together . The possibility of triangular wiring is the subject of the question .
 Each country's security was connected to the fate of the entire system . The system itself was afunction of the security of each side, the author says .
 No two sides were able to advance their security at the expense of a third party . As a result of this, no two sides have advanced their security, no one has advanced security .
 This was true despite the fact that one of the countries did not possess weapons of mass destruction . And this was true this despite thefact that the country did not have such weapons .
 U.S. and Soviet policy-makers failed to appreciate Cuba's perverse fear as well as its sense that there was nothing to lose in the face of imminent attack .
 Cuban style of deterrence has had significant, negative long-term consequences for both superpowers . Cuban style deterrence, in large part, is a product of Cuban exclusion from resolution of missile crisis .
 These examples show that the three nations belonged to a single security system, and that their security was wired together . This was not obvious to policy-makersduringacetime or during the crisis .
 In the post-Cold-Warworld, Washingtonand Moscow may againparticipate inadvertently or unconsciously in an East-Westcondominium . Washington and Moscow could again participate inadvertently or even unconsciously, writes David Gergen .
 Leaders of third parties experiencing a sense of abandonmentand/or loss of control may turnto desperatemeasuresthat might seem irrational,even suicidal, to those who are ignorant of the profoundperversity which seems to the thirdparties to characterizethe situation .
 In the same way that a positive sum solution could have been found for all three sides in the missile crisis, post-Cold-Warpolicies may lead to results that satisfy all sides' concerns . However, in the case of all three countries, a solution could be found for
 Kennedy was thinking in positive sum terms despite political context which stressed unilateralgain . Kennedy decided to give Khrushcheva face-saving way out of the crisis .
 When large states develop policies toward small ones, the sense of threat may be quite low . The sense of the threat is quite low, however, according to the author of the book .
 Policy-makers in large countries may find it difficult to believe or even to imagine that their security is wired together with the security of smaller countries .
 The security of the superpowers may be wired together with the security of Third-Worldnations . This may not be apparent despite or until the outbreak of crisis .
 In 1962, the U.S. and Soviet Union did not realize that they were in a triangular security system . Their own fates were connected with the fate of Cuba . The United States and the Soviet Union didn't realize that .
 The crisis increased Castro's anxiety, anger, and, because of heavy U.S.-Soviet involvement, his ability to provoke superpowerwar . Castro was angered by the crisis, but it increased his anxiety and anger .
 The security of all three nations became intertwined during the height of the crisis . As a result, the security of the three countries became intertwined . The three nations are now beginning to appreciate the impact of the situation .
 A triangular perspective on mutual security suggests great powers may unintentionally increase their own security by decreasing the security of smaller Third-World states . Moscow and Washington may act deliberately in some cases to back desperate leaders into corers in order to force a showdown, a report says .
 The superpowers should try to develop sophisticatedangular sensibilities before crises unfold . Therefore, the superpowersshould try to . develop sophisticated .angular sensibilities, say experts .
 East and West need to be aware that joint resolutions which exclude third parties may increase the danger for all, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Several countries in the Middle East could destroy significant sources of oil in minutes . The Cubans could, if pressed sufficiently,wreakhavoc on the U.S. from Texas to Florida .
 History has indeed ""returned"" with a good deal of instability, with it, with a lot of instability . Risk involved when great powers throw their weight around .
 Psychologically speaking, the risk is related to insufficient empathy, in Ralph White's useful phrase . Psychologically, it's related to lack of empathy, he says .
 President Kennedy could draw on the empathic analyses of Llewellyn Thompson, a member of EXCOM, a nearly lifelong student of Russian culture and language, and personal friend of Khrushchev . Unfortunately, no one in that decision-makingbody knew Cubaand Cubansin ways
 Khrushchev himself had met Kennedy and others at the Vienna summit in June 1961 . United States specialists abounded in the U.S.
 This time around, in what we hope is an extended ""moment""at the end of the Cold War, we must do better at providing vehicles for the development of realistic empathy for Third World countries . This time, we hope to do better .
 We should also encourage governmentaland nongovernmentalinteractions between representatives of the United States and U.S.R.R., on the one hand and, on the other, representatives of potentially explosive Third Worldareas .
 In the canonical rationalscenario, the cost/benefit payoff of nuclear pre-emptionoutweighs the payoff ratio of other courses of action .
 It generally has been assumed that this cognitive condition could never materialize- that a leader could never rationally arrive at a decision to begin, say, an all-out a nuclear war . But it generally has never materialized .
 The missile crisis is often taken as proof that leaders will never choose nuclear war . It was often seen as a sign that leaders would never choose to go to nuclear war.
 We contend that in the worse case of a nuclearwar in 1962 arriving out of the unacknowledgedtriangularity, the cause would have been neither rationalitynor irrationality, but ignorance . We contend .
 This mindset may include a sense of martyrdom,standing for the ""have-nots,"" and ""gong down fighting"" because there is no other choice . This mindset includes a sense for the "have nots"
 The answers remain elusive because, in our bilateralEast-West elation over the demise of the Cold War, we have yet to address them seriously . The answers are elusive because of the relationship between Russia and the West, Russia .
 At its moment of supremedangerand resolution, there was no Cold War . That brief moment also bore witness to precisely the kind of third country feelings of helplessness, anxiety, abandonment, and anger . And this, finally, is why we believe the missile crisis mattersurgently
 In 1962, tiny Cuba, the repository of Soviet weapons of mass destruction, acquired the capacity to raise the odds of their use . The missile crisis matters because in 1962, Cuba acquired the ability to raise its chances of using the weapons .
 The greatpowers are well advised to avoid the triangularignorance of yesteryear if, sorting though the ruins of some present or future triangular crisis, they are not to find themselves pining away pitifully for the good old days of the Cold War .
 Remarksto Anastas Mikoyan, recorded by AleksandrAlekseev, recorded November 3, 1962 . Remarks were made by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Soviet Foreign Ministry archives show up in Moscow . Photographs taken from archives of the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Speech to the Fifth Congress of the Federation of CubanWomen, March 7, 1990 . Speech to Cuban Women's Congress .
 Superpowers and regional conflict in SouthernAfrica and the Caribbeanbasin . Superpowers clash in a Southern Africa and Caribbean region .
 Cuba betweententhe superpowers,unpublishedtranscriptof a conference in Antigua, January3-7 . Cuba betwentent to the superpowers . Cuba .
 Remarkststo a symposiumon ""Counterfactualsin Nuclear History"", American Academy of Arts and Sciences, May 11 . Remarks were made at the symposium on nuclear history at the U.S. Academy of Art and Sciences .