 Before joining Stanford, he taught at MIT and was on the research staff at IBM’s Watson Research Center . He was also on IBM's Watson Research Team .
 Hellman is best known for his invention, joint with Diffie and Merkle, of public key cryptography . Hellman invented the technology that provides secure communications over the Internet over the years .
 His many honors include induction into the National Academy of Engineering and the National Inventor’s Hall of Fame .
 His current project involves the application of risk analysis to a potential failure of nuclear deterrence . The risk analysis is based on risk analysis of a failure of a nuclear deterrent .
 He is an Associate of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation . He is a founder of NAPF’s Silicon Valley Chapter, and serves on the Federation of American Scientists’ Nuclear Security Advisory Board .
 Charles Ferguson, president of the Federation of American Scientists, Dr. Charles Ferguson and Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the U.S. Scientists . Dr. Ferguson: "It's time for science fiction to be a science fiction story. We need to find out more about
 David Krieger, president of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, for their support, encouragement, and advice during the writing of this paper .
 Non-profit organization provides rigorous status to the United Nations Economic and objective, evidence-based analysis and Social Council . Recognized by the UN as practical policy recommendations on national a Peace Messenger Organization .
 Founded in 1982, the Foundation is comprised of individuals and organizations worldwide . FAS educates policymakers, the public and the next generation of Nuclear Age. scientists, engineers, and global leaders .
 Founded in 1945 by many of the scientists who built the first atomic bombs . FAS is devoted to MISSION the belief that scientists and engineers have the . To educate and advocate for peace and to . ensure that the fruits of free of nuclear weapons and to empower peace their intellect and
 This paper shows that society’s complacency is ill-founded, and that we are still bluffing in a deadly game of nuclear poker . We are bluffing, says the paper .
 The paper’s next section, Current Risks and Actions for Reducing them, identifies eleven current events with the potential to produce a comparable crisis today and provides suggestions for reducing each such risk .
 "Ameliorative steps are all actions on which we can take the lead. Because this paper is written for an American audience, it's written for a U.S. audience .
 Take our missiles off hair-trigger alert, and de-emphasize the role that first use of nuclear weapons currently plays in our warfighting plans . First use of nukes is currently a key part of our war plans .
 Reduce the number of nuclear weapons and the amount of fissile material that is . vulnerable to theft by terrorists . Reduce the . number of . nuclear weapons . that is vulnerable to . theft .
 Recognize that any war with Russia runs an unacceptable risk of going nuclear . Start acting accordingly, and start acting accordingly. Recognize the risk of a nuclear war .
 Russia is not the target of the attack, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia has not been hit by any of the attacks, says Putin .
 This paper places more emphasis on the potential for a modern-day Russian-American crisis, mistake, or accident . Terrorists, North Korea, and Iran dominate American thinking about nuclear threats .
 Russia and America possess 95% of the world’s nuclear weapons, creating unique potential for destroying civilization . One reason for that emphasis is that they are both nuclear weapons .
 Web links in that section are ‘clickable’ in this paper’s PDF at www.wagingpeace.org/nuclear-poker.org .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev created the conditions for the 1962 Cuban crisis by bluffing at nuclear poker . Kennedy's bluff led to the Cuban crisis in 1962, says JFK .
 In today’s less polarized world, the cards may be dealt, but if we keep playing this risky game, it is only a matter of time bluff at nuclear before a crisis arises, neither side is willing to fold .
 If we continue to bluff at nuclear poker, we automatically subject each new generation to a round of nuclear roulette . If we do so, we will be subject to the next generation to the same round of roulette.
 After fifty years, it is high time we stopped playing those deadly games and start creating true national security . After fifty . years, . it's high time . time to stop playing deadly . games and national security games .
 A needless risk persisted for months afterward, and is still present today . However, as will be shown below, considerable, needless risk persists for months .
 American destroyers unknowingly attacked Soviet submarines armed with nuclear torpedoes . U.S. destroyers unwittingly attacked Soviet subs armed with nukes .
 American destroyers intercepted a Soviet submarine near the quarantine line and forced it to surface by dropping depth charges . On October 27, at the height of the crisis, U.S. destroyers intercepted a Soviet sub near quarantine line .
 Only forty years later did we learn that the sub carried a nuclear torpedo . Only 40 years later we learned of the sub's nuclear submarine's presence .
 American decision makers who favored invading Cuba did not know that the Soviets had deployed battlefield nuclear weapons . U.S. decision makers in Cuba were not aware of the weapons deployment .
 President Kennedy initially favored airstrikes to destroy the missiles, likely to be followed by an invasion to solve the problem once and for all . President Kennedy eventually decided on a naval blockade .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted to invade even after Khrushchev had backed down . They did not trust the Soviet promise to remove the missiles .
 None of those counseling an invasion – indeed, none of the American decision makers – knew that the Soviets had placed battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuban soil to deter, and if need be repel, such an assault .
 General Wade gave this assessment after General Power had died . Not surprisingly, General Wade had given this assessment shortly after his son's death .
 At the height of the crisis, an American U-2 strayed into Soviet airspace, creating a risk that nuclear air-to-air missiles would be used . The incident occurred during the Cold War between Russia and the Soviet Union .
 On October 27, a U-2, on an intelligence mission over the Arctic, became lost and accidentally flew into Soviet airspace . The U.2 was on a mission to gather information about the Soviet Union .
 MiG fighters scrambled to shoot it down, while F-102 interceptors from Alaska were sent to escort it home . MiG fighter jets were scrambled to intercept it down and shoot it back .
 Due to the crisis, the F-102s’ conventional air-to-air missiles had been replaced with nuclear warheads . The F.102s were replaced by nuclear warheads in the 1980s .
 As noted by Stanford Professor Scott Sagan, “the only nuclear weapons control mechanism remaining was the discipline of the individual pilots in the single seat interceptors.”
 We have been concerned about Russian leaders having their fingers on the button while under the influence, but the problem is far more general and included President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 JFK received massive doses of amphetamines from Dr. Dr. John Sutter . JFK and other celebrities were given the drug by Dr. Sutter at the time .
 Possible side effects of amphetamine use include euphoria, anxiety, aggression, grandiosity, and paranoia . Side effects may include anxiety and aggression . Dr. Feelgood uses amphetamine for treatment .
 In chronic or high doses, amphetamine psychosis is also possible, such as high doses of amphetamine .
 In 1969, a Jacobson patient died of “acute and chronic intravenous amphetamine poisoning,” the medical examiner says . Jacobson patients have been known to suffer from “intoxication” Jacobson’s death has been linked to amphetamine .
 A new medical doctor brought in to treat the president was aghast at the amphetamine treatments . He reportedly warned Kennedy two months after the crisis, “that if I ever heard he took 3 another shot, I’d make sure it was known .
 The goal of a two-week-long American military exercise involving tens of thousands of military personnel was to execute an amphibious assault on a Puerto Rican island . The fictitious dictator was named “Ortsac” – “Castro” spelled backwards .
 In the months before the missiles were discovered, congressmen, senators and the American media excoriated Kennedy for allowing the conventional Soviet military buildup in Cuba, many demanding an invasion .
 Knowing of Soviet battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba, he also believed that an all-out nuclear war would follow . Knowing of the Soviet battlefield . weapons on Cuban island, he believed that all out nuclear war . would follow.
 He pleaded with Khrushchev to launch the nuclear-armed Cuban missiles in a preemptive strike on the American mainland, so that the U.S. would suffer as much as possible . The United States would suffer, he said .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff suggested blowing up an American ship in Guantanamo Bay and blaming Cuba . To create support for an invasion, the Joint Chiefs' plan was to blow up a ship and blame Cuba .
 Seven months before the crisis started, the JCS sent Defense Secretary Robert McNamara a list of proposals known as Operation Northwoods . The list outlined ways to generate public support for a Cuban invasion .
 When Khrushchev backed down, Kennedy became emboldened by his success in bluffing at nuclear poker . Kennedy seized on wording ambiguity to expand his list of demands far beyond removal of Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy also added risk by questioning whether our pledge not to invade Cuba was still effective, even though that commitment was comparable in importance to the Soviets’ promise to remove their missiles . When a more minor part of the deal fell apart, Kennedy also questioned whether that pledge was effective .
 17.17 American invasion plans peaked on November 15, three weeks after the public thought the crisis had ended . CIA-sponsored attacks in Cuba and assassination attempts on Castro’s life continued until at least 1963 .
 The President warned the Soviets that “the gravest issues would arise” if they introduced “offensive ground-to-ground missiles” into Cuba . Under pressure from Congress and the press over the issue, the President said the missiles could be used in Cuba .
 Moscow drew its own line in the sand when it warned that “one cannot now attack Cuba and expect the aggressor will be free from punishment.” On September 11, Moscow warned that one cannot attack Cuba .
 Khrushchev wanted to base similar Soviet weapons in Cuba . In the spring of 1962, nuclear-armed American missiles became operational in Turkey . The idea was put in the mind of Khrushchevitch’s mind .
 A risk of that nature had been foreseen several years earlier by President Eisenhower, when the Turkish deployment was first considered . President Eisenhower had been concerned about a Turkish troop deployment in Turkey .
 President Kennedy approved deployment of our Turkish missiles the year before the crisis broke . Related concerns occurred to President Kennedy, but he approved the deployment of Turkish missiles .
 During the crisis, Kennedy forgot that we had similar missiles in Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter . Kennedy forgot about the missile crisis, says Sutter. "He forgot that . During this crisis, he forgot that [Kennedy] forgot that similar missiles were in Turkey"
 JFK expressed shock at Khrushchev’s recklessness in deploying nuclear-armed missiles so close to our shores . On the first day of the crisis, October 16, JFK said he was shocked by the move .
 JFK said he had deployed similar missiles in Turkey . JFK said it was just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs in Turkey.
 Kennedy’s National Security Adviser, McGeorge Bundy, was forced to remind him that we had done exactly that . Kennedy's national security adviser was forced by reminding him that .
 Kennedy and his advisers used tortured logic to portray the Soviet’s Cuban missile deployment as fundamentally different from ours in Turkey . Then, instead of seeing Khrushchev's move in a new light, Kennedy used tortured reasoning to portray it differently .
 China, India, Pakistan, Israel, and North Korea have joined the ranks . Iran may be knocking at the door, and Iran may also join in .
 The firestorms created as their megacities burned would send dust and smoke into the stratosphere, where it would choke off sunlight, devastate agriculture, and lead to global famine . The firestorm would send smoke and dust into space, choking off sunlight and choking off agriculture .
 India and Pakistan’s war-fighting plans increase the likelihood that a conventional war between them would escalate to the use of nuclear weapons . India and the Pakistan are planning to use nuclear weapons against each other .
 Do not allow lesser considerations to reduce the priority given to nuclear nonproproliferation, says President Obama . The U.S. should not be allowed to allow greater consideration of nuclear non-prosproprosion .
 Nuclear nonproliferation is often said to be a top U.S. priority . History shows that much lesser concerns can trump nuclear nonpro-iferation . The United States has a long history of dealing with nuclear proliferation .
 Stop inadvertently giving incentives to would-be nuclear proliferators . Stop incentives to encourage nuclear proliferation in the U.S.
 North Korea's and Iran’s nuclear ambitions derive largely from perceived threats to their existence . North Korea and Iran's nuclear ambitions have largely been seen as threats to its existence .
 Reducing threats would reduce motivation for proliferation, but we have inadvertently done the opposite . Reducing such threats would have reduced motivation for proliferators, experts say . The U.S. has inadvertently done it, they say .
 While there may be situations where we need to use force even if it encourages nuclear proliferation, that should be a conscious decision . Unlike our attack on Libya, where the issue of nuclear proliferation was absent from the debate .
 A nuclear terrorist attack runs the risk of being mistaken for a Russian attack, which then could catalyze a full-scale nuclear war . In addition to possibly losing an American city and causing a financial panic, a terrorist attack could also be mistaken for an attack on Russia .
 The risk is increased if the terrorists disguise their attack, either in the hope that Russia and America will destroy one another, or because they have an apocalyptic bent . The risk of a terrorist attack is increased by disguising the attack, or by hiding it .
 Negotiate large reductions in the number of nuclear weapons that might be stolen by terrorists, says U.S. President Barack Obama . The U.N. should negotiate large reductions of nuclear arms, he says .
 The United States and Russia currently have thousands of nuclear weapons,33,39 making it hard to keep track of them all . The risk of theft or illicit sale to terrorists is increasing .
 In 2007, the U.S. Air Force lost six nuclear weapons for over a day, during which time they were not properly guarded . In fact, in 2007, in fact, the United States .
 A B-52 was supposed to carry cruise missiles with dummy warheads on a flight from North Dakota to Louisiana . But instead, it accidentally was loaded with six nuclear warheads .
 Each bomb had a destructive force roughly 10 times greater than the Hiroshima bomb . Each bomb was 10 times larger than the bomb that hit Hiroshima .
 It took 36 hours for the Air Force to become aware of this error and correct it .
 This might be an acceptable risk if 8,000 warheads were needed to ensure U.S. national security . But a number of former military leaders have argued that deep cuts are both possible and desirable .
 General Cartwright is well versed in nuclear strategy – from 2004-2007, he commanded the United States Strategic Command . Cartwright commanded the U.S. Strategic Command from 2004 to 2007 .
 HEU and plutonium can be used as the fuel for an atomic bomb . HEU is more dangerous because it is much easier to fashion into a bomb . As little as 25 kg are needed to create a nuclear weapon .
 The “gun assembly” used for an HEU weapon is so simple and reliable that the Manhattan Project scientists did not even test it before using it on Hiroshima . The weapon was so simple it was so reliable it was not tested before being used in Hiroshima .
 The more complex plutonium-fueled “implosion’s” design used on Nagasaki required a test shot in the New Mexico desert before there was adequate confidence it would work . In contrast, the more complex .
 North Korea's first plutonium-fueled nuclear test was somewhat of a fizzle . Such problems persist today, with North Korea’s first plutonium fueled nuclear test being somewhat of an fizzle.
 Reduce the amount of fissile material that can be stolen by terrorists by terrorists . The U.S. government says terrorists should not be able to steal any of the material .
 Progress is being made on reducing the risk posed by this huge stockpile that can be made into nuclear weapons . Efforts should be accelerated and greater concern paid to security .
 South Africa's supposedly secure Pelindaba nuclear facility provides a good example of the danger . South Africa’s supposedly secure nuclear facility .
 South Africa secretly developed nuclear weapons during the apartheid era, but dismantled them during the transition to majority rule . The country stored their HEU fuel at Pelindaba .
 In 2007, two groups of armed men simultaneously broke into the facility and shot one of the operators who resisted . The facility was shot by armed men in 2007 .
 Breach of security is a warning sign with implications that should not be ignored . Even though these attackers did not steal any HEU, this breach of security was not stolen . The attack is not the first time this has happened in the world .
 The huge stockpiles created by commercial nuclear power reactors warrant greater attention as well . Although plutonium is more difficult to fabricate into a bomb than HEU, commercial nuclear stockpiles warrant more attention as also .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union had roughly 3,000 nuclear weapons, whereas today Russia has 10,000 . The Soviet Union has around 3,500 nuclear weapons .
 Stop pretending that very large nuclear arsenals are needed for deterrence . Instead, focus should be on nuclear disarmament, author says .
 President Kennedy and his advisers were deterred from attacking the Soviets’ Cuban missiles out of fear that even one might be fired in retaliation and destroy an American city . This provided some of the motivation for the massive Soviet arms buildup which followed .
 Reductions in the numbers of nuclear weapons to more reasonable levels will not occur so long as we pretend that thousands of thousands are needed for deterrence . The U.S. should reduce the number of nukes to a more reasonable level, he says .
 As noted above, former USSTRATCOM Commander General Cartwright has argued that a 90% reduction in our arsenal would enhance our national security .
 Russian war-fighting plans depend heavily on nuclear weapons . Due to American conventional military superiority, Russian war plans rely heavily on nukes .
 Our military spending is about ten times larger than Russia’s, giving us unquestioned conventional military superiority . Russia's military spending has been ten times bigger than any other nation's .
 Russian war-fighting plans to be heavily reliant on the use of nuclear weapons if our nations come into conflict over Georgia or some other hot spot . This causes Russian war plans to rely heavily on nuclear weapons . This means Russian war planning is heavily dependent on the nuclear arms .
 We have been called the world’s sole remaining superpower so often that we have come to believe it, even though Russia still can destroy us in under an hour . We have come out as a superpower, but we still have to believe that Russia can kill us in an hour,
 We neglect Russia's vital interests at our peril, but have done so a number of times, most notably with respect to NATO expansion44 and missile defense . We therefore neglect Russia’s vital interests, we should not neglect it at all, but do so, says Putin .
 We should not let Russia dictate our behavior, but neither can we afford to dismiss its concerns out of hand . Russia is right to be concerned, but we should not dismiss it as out-of-hand . We need to be careful of its concerns, but not dismiss them out of
 "Operating on the mistaken assumption that our military power allows us to overrule all Russian objections puts our homeland at needless risk," says President Barack Obama .
 In 1962, most nuclear weapons were carried on bombers which took hours to reach their targets . Most nuclear weapons carried out in 1962 were carried out on bombers that could take hours .
 Primary nuclear delivery vehicles are ICBMs with 30minute flight times and submarine-launched ballistic missiles which can reach their targets in under 10 minutes . Today's primary nuclear delivery vehicle is ICBM with 30 minutes flight times .
 Given how long it takes to detect and verify a launch and then pass the word to military decision makers, it's questionable whether any warning time remains .
 Many former U.S. political and military leaders have made this recommendation, but it has not yet been implemented .
 De-emphasize the role that first use of nuclear weapons plays in our national security strategy . First use of nukes is a key part of national security policy .
 Many Americans believe that our nuclear weapons are intended solely to deter a nuclear attack on our own nation or one of our allies . That is not and never has been our nuclear war-fighting strategy .
 President Obama’s 2010 Nuclear Posture Review even held open the possibility of preemptively using our nuclear weapons against Iran, currently a non-nuclear nation . The U.S. has a history of using nuclear weapons preemptively against Iran .
 China and India are the only two nations with a stated ‘no first use” policy . The U.S. has repeatedly resisted joining them with a similar policy . We have repeatedly resisted .
 Questions have been raised about the strength of such pledges . But they remove one level of bluffing at nuclear poker .
 Create greater awareness of needless threats which increase the nuclear risk . Create more awareness of the need to avoid needless threats .
 Even though our national security requires that we stop needlessly threatening Russia, most Americans have no way of learning of these provocations . Most Americans don't know about the provocations, they say they are provocations.
 I read three newspapers every day, but only learned of McCain’s threats and Fox News’ substitution through the Moscow News and the Russian news agency Ria Novosti . I read 3 newspapers a day but learned of the threats and substitution through news agencies .
 McCain's "Dear Vlad" tweet first-hand. I then checked them out, even joining Twitter to see McCain’s “Dear Vlad” tweet .
 Fox News’ substitution of Athens’ riots for Moscow's much tamer election protests was believable to most Americans because our media have given the impression that Putin is an unpopular dictator .
 While many Russians resent Putin’s authoritarian rule, others see it as a welcome change from the chaos of the Yeltsin years . Many Russians see Putin's authoritarian rule as an alternative to the chaos Yeltsina years .
 Independent polls predicted Putin would win last March’s presidential elections with 66% of the vote – a margin of victory unheard of in recent U.S. elections . Putin garnered 64% which he garnered in the election, according to polls .
 There are voting irregularities in Russian elections, but the same has been true for a number of our allies, and even within our own nation . There are also irregularities in other nations' elections, including Russia, according to CNN.com .
 Even if Russia’s voting irregularities were unique, we need to consider to what extent our objections will correct the problem . We should consider whether the irregularities threaten our national security .
 Most American media coverage of the 2008 Russo-Georgian War gives the impression that Russia is guilty of totally unprovoked aggression,54 even though an EU commission determined that Georgia bears some of the blame and fired the first shots .
 Obama as president could make it more dangerous since his political opponents – unlike Bush’s in 2008 – would be unlikely to remain quiet in the face of inaction . A second round in that war is possible,59 and a second round is possible .
 Sarah Palin said in September 2008 that we would be expected to go to war with Russia if such a rematch occurred . Palin was a vice presidential candidate for Sarah Palin in 2008 . Palin said we would expect to go on to war against Russia in a rematch .
 The root causes of the war have not been resolved, increasing the likelihood of a second round . The root cause of that war has not yet been resolved .
 Most Americans see any Russian military intervention as unwarranted, but all of our own as justified . Most Americans think any Russian intervention is unwarranted .
 Many of the mujahideen “freedom fighters” we armed in the 1980’s are now our Taliban and al Qaeda enemies . In the case of Afghanistan, this double standard has even been applied to the same country and some of the same adversaries .
 Even if Russia’s military actions were uniquely heinous, we need to consider to what extent our actions will correct the problem, and what extent they threaten our national security . We need to also consider what will help the U.S. solve the problem .
 Some alliances enhance our national security, but others can threaten our very existence . Some alliances can enhance national security but others threaten our existence . The U.S. needs to rely on allies in order to survive .
 NATO’s security guarantees do not apply in such cases. We also need to warn any of our allies who jeopardize our national security by needlessly poking the Russian bear . NATO's security guarantees don't apply in those cases.
 U.S. missile defense system is directed solely against “rogue nations” such as Iran, says President Obama . We reject as paranoid Russian objections that it threatens their nuclear deterrent .
 Eastern European nations that will host parts of the system justify it primarily as protection against Russia . Yet they say it will protect themselves from the threat of Russia . Eastern European countries will host the system in a bid to counter Russia .
 Russia’s fears are exacerbated by articles claiming that missile defense will give us the capability to destroy Russia and China while suffering only limited damage ourselves . Russia's fears have been exacerbated by the articles in Foreign Affairs .
 While such claims are highly questionable, they create fear, therefore risk . The claims create fear and therefore risk, according to CNN.com .
 The dispute over our missile defense plans came close to causing a “Cuban Bomber Crisis” in July 2008 . Khrushchev’s decision to base Soviet missiles in Cuba in 1962 played a key role in the decision to do so .
 The Russian Defense Ministry claimed the original story was a false rumor . Fortunately, the mini-crisis was defused .
 This incident ended less than two weeks before the outbreak of the August 2008 Russo-Georgian War .
 If it had overlapped or occurred in the highly charged environment which followed, the risk of a full-blown crisis would have been increased . If it overlapped, or occurred, it would have led to a crisis in the country .
 Russia is not a target for the UK, it has said in the past . Russia has been accused of being a target of the Russian government .
 Congress limited President Obama’s ability to share data with the Russians to allay such concerns . While we have repeatedly rejected Russian objections that our missile 9 defense system threatens them, Congress limited Obama's ability to do so .
 If the system is directed at Russia, then our government needs to publicly admit that, he says . The American public can assess the system in that light, he adds .
 If the system is not aimed at Russia, then we need to make sure our deeds match our words . And if, as we currently maintain, it is not intended to target Russia, it needs to be made clear .
 A Russian-American conflict therefore has unique potential for destroying civilization . A clash between Russia and the U.S. could destroy civilization, the author says .
 Resolving Russian-American disputes is therefore the low-hanging fruit, and should be addressed before considering more entrenched conflicts . Resolving Russia-U.S. disputes should be the focus of the U.S.-Russian relations .
 Bush would make it easier to settle those more entrenched conflicts, including dealing with Iran’s nuclear program . Bush would also make it much easier to deal with the nuclear program with Iran .
 These need to be brought to the public’s attention so pressure can be brought on to stop this needless, risky behavior . These needs to be . brought to . the public's attention . The public should be aware of this needless and dangerous behavior .
 Although the Cold War is over, many Cold War attitudes persist, many of its basic attitudes persist . This limits cooperation on nonproliferation and counter-terrorism – the two greatest threats to both Russia and U.S. security .
 These counter-productive attitudes also make the risk of a major Russian-American crisis much higher than most people realize . The risk of such a crisis is high, especially in Russia and the U.S.
 To reduce the risk of major international standoffs comparable to the 1962 Cuban crisis, we need to adopt a more rational approach to national security . The U.S. should adopt a rational approach, says President Obama .
 Russian bombers on Cuba would be a dangerous provocation, but they would have concerned, we no real impact on our national security . Considering the July 2008 Cuban Bomber Mini-Crisis described above, while survival is survival is Russian bombers would be dangerous provocation .
 American missiles in Poland cannot afford to are a dangerous provocation, but have no real impact on Russia’s national security . Similarly, U.S. missile strikes in Poland would have no impact on Russian national security, let emotional security .
 Each nation needs to be more sensitive to how its actions will be perceived . But gut-level each nation must be more aware of how its reactions will be viewed .
 That would avoid needless provocations that increase the risk of a nuclear disaster . The U.S. should not engage in unnecessary provocations, experts say .
 Where human survival is concerned, we cannot afford to let emotional, gut-level reactions prevail . We need to be careful not to let emotions prevail, says CNN's John Defterios .
 National Research Council should assess level of risk posed by current nuclear strategies . Nuclear weapons are essential for preserving the peace or will inevitably destroy civilization, author says .
 If the risk is found to be unacceptable, the analysis should also identify the most likely failure mechanisms, so that ameliorative efforts can be applied where they are most effective .
 The National Research Council stands ready to undertake such a study, but needs authorization and budgeting from Congress . Congress is needed to authorize the study, which would require authorization .
 It is only a matter of time before our bluff is called and we have to choose between the humiliation of a great nation backing down versus unleashing the horror of a nuclear holocaust . Otherwise, it is only the matter of . time before the bluff is . called . Otherwise it is
 A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought, says President Kennedy . The weapons of war must be abolished before they abolish us, he says .
 The only value in our two nations possessing nuclear weapons is to make sure they will never be used, says President Barack Obama . The U.S. and South Korea have nuclear weapons .
 President Ronald Reagan says nuclear weapons are useless . Reagan: "Would it not be better to do away with them entirely?” - President Reagan .
 Former Secretary of State and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, 2010 . “Once nuclear weapons are used we will be driven to take global measures to prevent it. Why not continue on – why not get rid of them altogether” - General Colin Powell .
 Soviet Submarines in the Caribbean Crisis of 1962,” Military Parade, 2002 . “Soviet Submarine’s” in Caribbean crisis of 1962 .
 Sheldon Stern was the Historian at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library from 1977 to 1999 . Stern is recognized as one of the world's leading experts on deciphering the low-quality audio tapes which JFK secretly made of many meetings during his presidency .
 This book is derived from those tapes, and is firsthand source material . The book is based on those tapes and interviews .
 Air Staff officers outside SAC struck as dim-witted and insensitive to the dilemmas that the bomb raised . Power was a brutal, easily angered man who struck Air Staff .
 Even Kahn was outraged, and sternly lectured Power that he should not discuss human life so cavalierly . Power was outraged by the comments .
 Kaplan told me that he obtained this information from direct interviews with Herman Kahn and William Kaufman . Kaplan said he obtained the information from interviews with Kahn and Kaufman .
 Jacobson made occasional professional visits to the White House . Through much of 1962, Jacobson was a professional golfer .
 Inconclusive lab tests allowed Jacobson to continue treating Kennedy through at least the fall of 1962 . Jacobson was the last doctor to treat Kennedy in the hospital .
 The 1998 edition of this book is published in 1998 . It is the first time this book has been published in this format . The author of this edition of the book has published more than 20 years .
 After being deposed, Khrushchev put his memoirs on tape and smuggled them out of the Soviet Union . After he was deposed he put them on tape to smuggle them out to Russia .
 Khrushchev’s son Sergei vouched for their authenticity . Their authenticity was initially questioned, but after censorship was lifted, the authenticity was questioned .
 Cuba's ambassador in Cuba said Castro told him he had reliable information that the Americans were preparing to strike Cuba . The U.S. Embassy in Havana received a telegram from the Cuban ambassador . The ambassador said Castro had informed him of the information .
 He concluded that an attack was unavoidable and that this attack had to be preempted . The president concluded that he had to preempt the attack .
 "In other words, we needed to immediately deliver a nuclear missile strike against the United States," he said . "We needed to deliver a missile strike," he added .
 Fidel totally failed to understand our purpose, says Fidel Castro . "When we read this I, and all the others, looked at each other, and it became clear to us that Fidel failed to . He says. When we read it, we looked back and said, "It became
 Castro, whom I respect for his honesty and directness, had failed to understand us correctly . Only then did I realize that our friend Castro, who I respect, had not understood us correctly, I said .
 We had installed missiles not for the purpose of attacking the United States, but to keep U.S. from attacking Cuba, he says .
 Lemnitzer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, clearly shows the authenticity of these otherwise hard-to-believe facts . CNN's John Sutter interviewed Lemnitz, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, to show that .
 Castro was livid at not having been consulted in the decision to remove the missiles, and who viewed American promises as worthless . Castro refused to cooperate in any of the external inspection and verification measures .
 The Kennedy administration withheld its quid pro quo and refused to issue the promised assurances that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . As a result of the Kennedy administration withholding its . quiq pro quo, the Kennedy . administration withheld .
 We All Lost the Cold War, 25. Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, 25, co-starred in the documentary . The documentary is based on the book "We All Lost The Cold War"
 Richard K Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 1987, page 112. Betts: "Nuclear Blackmail" is a form of nuclear blackmail . Betts' book, "Nuke Blackmail," is published by the Brookings
 Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 425, footnote 43. Stein: The Cold War was over and out of control . Stein: "We All Lost Cold War is over and over again"
 In a matter of six or seven minutes missiles launched from that base could devastate major centres in the Ukraine and southern Russia . Russia and Ukraine are at risk of being hit by a missile strike .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski: "Reflections on Soviet intervention in Afghanistan,” memo to President Carter, December 26, 1979 . Brzezzinski: “Reflections are on Soviet involvement in Afghanistan”
 The latter link is to a large collection of documents, but searching on cannot be dictated will take you to the memo in question .
 Hecker is a former Director of Los Alamos National Laboratory . Hecker has visited North Korea seven times since 2004 on “track 2” diplomatic missions .
 George W Bush, “Libya Pledges to Dismantle WMD Programs,” speech in the James S Brady Briefing Room, December 19, 2003 . Bush: Libyans pledged to dismantle WMD programs .
 DPRK Information Center, “DPRK Foreign Ministry Spokesman Denounces United States Military Attack on Libya,” March 22, 2011. Pyongyang Information Center: “The United States military attack on Libya”
 Walter Pincus, “4 Colonels lose Their Air Force Commands,” The Washington Post, October 20, 2007. Walter Pinchus,  “Four Colonels lost their Air Force commands.”
 Micah Zenko, “A Nuclear Site is Breached,” The Washington Post, Dec. 20, 2007 .
 Joint Chiefs argued that if the U.S. threatens the Soviet Union, Khrushchev will have no option but to back down . The Joint Chiefs, and especially . Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay, argued that .
 While not explicitly basing their argument on our numerical superiority, that would seem to be the primary logical basis for their belief that, in such a stand-off, Khrushchev would be more deterred than we .
 Jon Kyl, “What’s at Stake in the Missile-Defense Debate?”, The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2012. Jon Kyl: “The missile-defense debate is not overblown”
 2010 U.S. and Russian military spending to be $698 billion and $58. billion respectively respectively . 2010 United States and Russia military spending was $698. billion . Russia and the United States spent $58 billion in 2010 .
 Viktor Surikov, Director, Institute of Defense Studies, September 10, 1996 . “One of the reasons for Russia's increased emphasis on nuclear weapons ... has clearly been NATO's expansion," he said .
 The roughly 30minute flight times of ICBM’s and . 10-minute flight . of SLBM's require such rapid decision making on indication of launch that the question appears to be one of definition .
 Unless a decision can be made and ICBM’s launched in a matter of minutes, they are vulnerable to a first-strike attack and lose much of their value as a deterrent . The ICBM's can be launched in just minutes, say experts . They are vulnerable .
 If the U.S. de-alerting of its strategic offensive forces would cause Russia to follow suit, it would buy a large margin of safety against accidental or mistaken launch of Russian missiles aimed at the United States .
 In a December 2003 column, former Minuteman launch control officer and now president of the World Security Institute Dr. Dr. Peter Bergen wrote about the dangers of the U.S. launch launch control . Dr. Bergen was a launch officer for the CIA .
 The risks of a false alarm on the Russian side have grown since the end of the Cold War due to the steady deterioration of its early warning and command system . Ironically, the U.S. hair-trigger posture forces Russia into an identical stance .
 By acting as though Russia may intentionally attack, the U.S. is exposing itself to a real threat of unintentional Russian attack . The United States is exposed to the risk of unintentional attacks by Russia .
 The U.S. nuclear command system would collapse under the weight of a Soviet first strike, a senior general says . They knew full well that such a first strike would be catastrophic, he says .
 Modernizing U.S. Nuclear Strategy, Force Structure and Posture,’s May 2012. Modernizing United States Nuclear Strategy .
 Nuclear weapons will only be used in situations involving great peril to us or our allies, the U.S. says . Those conditions are never defined .
 JFK’s statement that, “Last month I should have said we don’t care,” is but one piece of evidence that the crisis was over appearances, pride and domestic politics, not a grave threat to our national security . JFK said last month he should
 The media picked up on the threat to use our nuclear weapons against North Korea and Iran, as did the leaders of those nations . President Obama has threatened to use the threat against Iran and North Korea in the past .
 Note 46 above is also relevant, showing that the purpose of our arsenal is not to retaliate for a nuclear attack . The purpose of this is to protect ourselves from a nuclear strike .
 A false alarm could trigger an accidental nuclear war, especially if it occurs during a time of heightened world tensions . As noted there, we do not intend to “ride out” a nuclear attack and then retaliate .
 The “tweet” in which Senator McCain threatened Putin is no longer accessible on Twitter’s web site, but I confirmed the wording given in the Moscow News while it was still accessible . The ‘tweets’ are no longer available on Twitter .
 Both U.S. politicians mentioned as threatening Russia are Republicans . The problem is, unfortunately, bipartisan, according to the paper .
 NATO expansion into the former Warsaw Pact started under President Clinton . Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic were included in NATO expansion . NATO expansion started under Clinton .
 Obama administration has reiterated President Bush’s promise of NATO membership for Georgia . President Bush has also reiterated his promise of membership in NATO .
 Levada Center, which performed the poll, is an independent, nongovernmental, Russian research organization . Levada is based in Moscow and based in Russia .
 Russian strategic bombers and jet fighter planes pounded targets in many parts of Georgia on Saturday, hitting apartment buildings and economic installations . The escalating war is killing more and more civilians and confounding international efforts to secure a cease-fire . The Russian military says it has been conducting operations in Georgia since April
 Russia continued to pour troops and tanks into South Ossetia, the breakaway region of Georgia that triggered the conflict . Russian forces are attempting to reclaim the region . Georgian forces are trying to reclaim it, but Russia says it is not interested .
 Georgia used heavy artillery on the civilian population of South Ossetia’s capital . While the article may be factually correct, it gives the impression of naked Russian aggression .
 It also failed to mention Georgian actions which played a role in starting the war . Georgian actions also played a part in the conflict .
 Unpublished documents produced by the European Union commission that investigated the conflict between Georgia and Moscow assign much of the blame to Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili .
 Russian President Mikhail Saakashvili started the war by attacking South Ossetia on August 7, 2008 . But the Kremlin and Ossetian militias are also partly responsible for the war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The facts assembled on Tagliavini's desk refute Saakashvili's claim that his country became the innocent victim of “Russian aggression” on that day . The facts show that the facts on the facts refute his claim that he was innocent victim .
 "The path of freedom you have chosen is not easy but you will not travel it alone," says the author . "You will not walk it alone. You will not go to it alone" says the queen .
 President Barack Obama has pledged to build a free and democratic Georgia . Obama: "The American people will stand with you. And as you build a democratic Georgia, the U.S. will support you"
 The USS McFaul is a huge guided missile destroyer that was pressed into service on a humanitarian aid mission delivering supplies to the Republic of Georgia . The ship was deployed to deliver supplies to Georgia .
 USS McFaul pulled into the port of Batumi, Georgia, to deliver humanitarian relief supplies . The U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Dallas and USS Mount Whitney also on-loaded humanitarian supplies .
 U.S. and Russian warships take up positions in the Black Sea today in a risky war of nerves on opposing sides of the Georgia conflict . Russia and the United States are involved in the conflict in Georgia .
 In August, the Georgian navy seized a Turkish tanker carrying fuel to Abkhazia, Georgia’s former province . President Mikheil Saakashvili launched and lost a war for South Ossetia in 48 hours in August 2008 .
 He seems intent on provoking a new crisis to force NATO to stand with him and bring the U.S. in on his side – against Russia . The Russian leader seems intent to provoke a new conflict .
 NATO allies will be expected to be called upon to help if another country is attacked, he says . "That is the agreement when you are a NATO ally, is that you're expected to help," he adds .
 President Medvedev gave a speech in which he said he saw our current approach to missile defense as a grave danger . The Russian president said in a speech that he saw the current approach as a danger .
 First, I am instructing the Defence Ministry to immediately put the missile attack early warning radar station in Kaliningrad on combat alert . First, he said, 'I am immediately putting the missile early warning early warning radio station in Russia on combat .
 For the first time in almost 50 years, the United States stands on the verge of attaining nuclear primacy . The U.S. is now poised to become the first country to have nuclear power .
 It will probably soon be possible for the U.S. to destroy the long-range nuclear arsenals of Russia or China with a first strike . Russia and China's nuclear arsenal could be destroyed with a strike .
 The Izvestia article is only available in Russian, but with the help of Dr. Dr. Vladimir Kostev, it was only available to the Russian media .
 Inna Sayfer, I was able to confirm the accuracy of the English language reports concerning it concerning it . She said: "I'm happy to be able to talk to Inna in English."
 Section 1227 of the defense law prohibits spending any funds that would be used to give Russian officials access to sensitive missile-defense technology . Congress must first send Congress a report identifying the specific secrets and how they would be protected .
 This paper makes a detailed argument for a National Academies study of the risk that nuclear deterrence could fail . The paper makes an argument for the study of nuclear deterrence .