 Analyzing the Sources Directions:​ Read the following sources pertaining to the Cold War . Analyzing a Cold War source: The Cold War was the first two decades of Cold War.
 Highlight any key details or important quotes that emphasize the messages of the sources . Use these photos to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Share your thoughts in the comments below .
 The roots of the crisis ran back to Krushchev’s ICBM-orientated foreign policies after 1957 and his intense concern with removing NATO power from West Berlin . The crisis began in 1957 when the Soviet Union began to push for NATO power .
 By 1962 these policies were related, for the Soviets needed credible strategic force if they hoped to neutralize Western power in Germany . By 1962, the Soviets were trying to neutralise Western power .
 By the spring of 1962, U.S. high officials had publicly expressed skepticism of Soviet missile credibility .
 President Kennedy observed in a widely publicized interview that under some circumstances the United States would strike first . President Kennedy further observed in an interview that the U.S. would strike in some circumstances . Kennedy also said that under certain circumstances, the United . States will strike first, he said .
 Defense Secretary McNamara insisted in June that American missiles could spare cities and hit only military installations in a nuclear war . In June McNamara said American missiles were so potent and precise that in a nuke war they could only hit military installations .
 Krushchev's gamble in Cuba was actually aimed at West Berlin, there is little evidence of that on the Soviet side . Despite the firm belief of an entire generation of U.S. policy-makers, some prominent historians say it was aimed at East Berlin .
 What pushed Krushchev into his worst avantyura was not the pragmatic search for the well being of the Soviet empire, it was his search for a better future, he says .
 What mattered for Krushchev was to preserve the impression of communism on the march, he says . The impression was critical to dismantling the Cold War on Soviet terms, he adds .
 "Only a fool would think that we wanted to invade the American continent from Cuba," says President Obama . Obama said the U.S. would not want to invade Cuba .
 We sent the Americans a letter asking the president to promise there would not be an invasion of Cuba, Cuba . We sent it to the Americans asking them to promise not to invade Cuba, the president said .
 It was a great victory for us, though, a triumph of Soviet foreign policy, says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin . It was also a triumph for the Soviet Union, he says .
 Cartoon shows Khrushchev and Kennedy engaged in a trial of strength over the Cuban missile issue . Cartoon shows the two leaders engaged in an argument over the issue .
 Nikita Khrushchev to the Supreme Soviet, 14 January 1960 . Speech was a speech by the then-Krushchev's speech in Moscow .
 There exist two camps in the world today, each with a different social system . Each camp has different social systems, including a social network .
 The countries in these camps form their policies on entirely different lines. The countries are different from each other's .
 In these circumstances the problem of peaceful coexistence that is, of safeguarding the world against the disaster of a military conflict between these two essentially hostile systems, is of supreme importance .
 Each side will demonstrate its advantages to the best of its ability, but war as a means of settling this dispute must be rejected . War is not a solution to the problems of the Syrian conflict, but a solution is needed to be found .
 Since Brezhnev came to power, the Soviet revisionist clique has intensified its suppression of the Soviet people and increased the restoration of capitalism . The Soviet people have been deprived of the power of capitalism in the Soviet Union .
 Externally it has stepped up its collusion with US imperialism and its suppression of the revolutionary struggles of the people of various countries . It has also increased its threat of aggression against China, and increased its threats of aggression .
 Russia's decision to send troops to occupy Czechoslovakia and its armed provocation against China on our territory are unacceptable acts carried out recently by Soviet revisionism . Russia's actions against China are unacceptable and unacceptable .
 The age of America's nearly total dominance of the world stage was drawing to a close . America's almost total dominance in the world had been drawing to an end .
 America's nuclear superiority was eroding and its economic supremacy was being challenged by the dynamic growth of Europe and Japan . America had been restored by American resources and sheltered by American security guarantees . America's nukes were eroding .
 Vietnam finally signalled that it was high time to reassess America's role in the developing world . Vietnam is trying to find some sustainable ground between abdication and over-extension .
 New opportunities for American diplomacy were presenting themselves as serious cracks opened up in the Cold War . The Cold War had been viewed as the communist monolith . The U.S. had been seen as the "communist monolith" in North Korea .
 Khrushchev's revelations in 1956 of the brutalities of Stalin's rule and the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, had weakened the ideological appeal of communism for the rest of the world .
 The split between China and the Soviet Union undermined Moscow's pretence to be the leader of a united communist movement . Even more important, the split from China and Russia undermined the Communist Party's claim to be a united party .
 All of these developments suggested that there was scope for a new diplomatic flexibility, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Understanding the Messages Directions: Answer the following Question 9a's and 9b’s . Understanding the messages is the key to understanding the messages .
 Directions​: Answer the following Question 10s. The Values and Limitations Directions​ .
 Remember to use the proper language and include at l​ east​ one of every category . Remember to include at least one category at a time .
 Answer the following Question 11s. Comparing and Contrasting Directions . Compare and Contrasts Directions: Comparing, Contrasting, Comparing or Contrasting directions .
 Remember to use the proper language and include at l​ east​ two comparisons and two contrasts for each question . Remember to include at least two comparisons, two contrasts, two questions and two answers .
 Try to cover the major events highlighted in her scrapbook as well as major events you know you know . Try to include major events in your scrapbook .