 Give Now Thank You Gifts Membership Underwriting Vehicle Donation Gifts Of Stock Or Securities Our Underwriters Give Now. Give Now .
 Kennedy enacted the blockade in response to the deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba . The blockade was imposed in Cuba after the Soviet Union deployed nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 The small town of Bejucal, 20 miles south of Havana, looks much as it did in October 1962 . The town is now a tourist hotspot .
 Horse carts carry passengers and fresh-cut green bananas through narrow streets lined with pastel-colored homes . Horse carts are used to transport passengers and bananas through the streets .
 The sleepy town doesn't seem like the kind of place to put an arsenal of nuclear weapons . The town is a sleepy town of sleepy people .
 A military bunker was the biggest storage depot on the island for the Soviet nuclear weapons 50 years ago . It was the largest storage depot in the Soviet Union for the nuclear weapons . The island is now uninhabited .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had secretly put dozens of intermediate and short-range nuclear-armed missiles on the island . Some of the rockets were camouflaged as palm trees .
 President Kennedy was told the Soviet Union had installed nuclear weapons in Cuba on October 16, 1962 . The tense 13 days that followed brought the world as close as it's ever been to nuclear war .
 Cuba's leader Fidel Castro lined Havana's seafront boulevard with anti-aircraft battalions . Fidel Castro told Cubans to brace for an imminent U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Carlos Alzugaray, a university student and defense analyst at the Cuba's Foreign Ministry in 1962, remembers coming back to the ministry late at night exhausted after spending the day digging trenches . He remembers getting questions from his colleagues about the United States Army nuclear warfare manual he'd been reading .
 They wanted to know what happened would happen if there was a nuclear war . The children wanted to see what happened if there were to be nuclear war. They asked for help in the aftermath of the war .
 Castro insists it was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by U.S.-backed Cuban exiles in April 1961 that led directly to the missile crisis . Like Fidel Castro, he insists it led to the Cuban missile crisis in 1961 .
 Now 86-years-old, the ailing revolutionary hasn't been seen in public since March . Now 86, he hasn't appeared in public for months .
 His brother Raul now runs Cuba but doesn't have the same affection for re-hashing the glory days with old foes . Raul's brother now runs the country .
 In 2002, Fidel Castro hosted a gathering that brought together aging Soviet commanders with former Kennedy advisers like Robert McNamara and Arthur Schlesinger Jr. The gathering was held in Castro's honor .
 A Low-Key Commemoration will be far more low-key this year's commemoration . This year's commemoration will be more low key than usual .
 Cuban scholar Esteban Morales was there 10 years ago . He and other Castro supporters have come to see the episode just as many of their American adversaries do .
 "You have to have something to negotiate with. Because what we've learned over the years about the U.S. is that you have to negotiate," she says . "We've learned that the United States is ... a very difficult place to negotiate"
 Kennedy gave Khrushchev his word that the United States would not invade Cuba . Morales says the missiles could have been bargaining chips to end the U.S. trade embargo .
 By late November 1962, the Soviets removed them anyway, wary of the hot-tempered young Castro Castro . The Soviets removed the Soviets from Cuba in November 1962 . Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Castro leveraged that perceived betrayal to secure other military hardware and the generous Soviet aid that ensured his survival . Over the years, Castro used the perceived betrayal of the Soviet Union to secure military hardware .