 Japan had collapsed after World War Two and so the USSR decided to take advantage of their weakness . The USSR invaded Korea in 1945, starting from the North .
 Truman became worried that they would lose the entirety of Korea to communism . Truman requested that the USSR stop upon reaching the 38th parallel which Stalin agreed to . Stalin agreed .
 There was a communist party established in North Korea under Kim il Sung . The communist party was established under Kim Il Sung .
 Truman, under the Truman Doctrine, ensured that communism wouldn't spread any further . Truman's 'Truman Doctrine' ensures that communism won't spread further .
 In 1947, the UN gave Korea official independence and organised a commission to oversee elections for a ruler . But Stalin refused to allow the commission into North Korea so the election was only held in the South .
 In 1948, the United States began to withdraw from South Korea and the USSR began to do the same in North Korea . The U.S. and the Soviet Union withdrew from North Korea in 1948 .
 Elections took place in the middle of widespread violent outbreaks . But then the elections took place during widespread violence in the country .
 Syngman Rhee gained the majority for South Korea and was recognised the leader in the UN's eyes . But they did not recognise North Korea's equivalent, Kim il Sung, who was also known as the premier .
 In 1949 China became Communist which was a huge victory for the USSR but a failure for Truman's policy of containment . Then in 1949 China was Communist . In 1949 the USSR became Communist .
 In 1950 the United States soldiers began to adopt a more ruthless policy than containment . They wanted to reclaim areas that had fallen to communism . The U.S. soldiers were ruthless and ruthless .
 The USSR made a mistake of omitting Korea from their conversation in the field of strategic defence, which led the USSR to believe that they wouldn't take action in Korea if they did invade . The USSR believed that they would not take action if they invaded .
 Propaganda from the North suggested that they were merely retaliating to an attack from the South . But there was no proof of this . Propaganda suggested that the North was merely responding to a South attack .
 Truman refused to appease Stalin like they once did with Hitler in the 1930s and so under the UN, he intervened . The UN intervened under the rule of state of state .
 The North Korean army pushed into the South and captured the capital of Seoul in three days . North Korea captured the city in Seoul in just three days, capturing the capital in Seoul .
 By early September, South Korea had been forced into the very corner of the country at Pusan . South Korea was losing the war before the United States stepped in .
 He decided to sever communications with the North Korean army and cut them in two . He decided that the best option would be to sever communication with North Korea's army .
 He forced the North to retreat from Pusan which led the South to re-establishing democratic government in South Korea and recapture Seoul . The South was able to reclaim Seoul from the North which led to a democratic government .
 The North Korean army retreated and by the 1st of October, the U.S. and UN troops were back at the 38th Parallel . The North Korea army retreated .
 Either stick to just containing the areas that had not yet fallen to communism, or choose to roll-back and try to invade the rest of North Korea .
 Truman stated that he would not invade China for rollback but they didn't believe him because they dispatched troops to the North Korean border in protest at how close the U.S. were . Truman said he wouldn't invade China but they did not believe him .
 200,000 Chinese communistic party volunteers crossed the Yalu River and attacked the United States and UN forced forced . The attack occurred on the 14th of October in China .
 The United States was now in a state of emergency, they didn't want to declare war with China but they couldn't abandon South Korea either . The U.S. couldn't decide whether to go to war with South Korea .
 MacArthur sent a letter to Beijing threatening to use the bomb . However, MacArthur didn't listen and sent a threatening letter to the Chinese government .
 Truman knew this would have led to world war three and so he fired MacArthur immediately . MacArthur was fired immediately after the war broke out .
 They were delayed twice due to riots and violence and questions about what to do with the prisoners of war and where the division would be . The division was delayed twice because of violence and riots .
 U.S. managed to gain most of the control of the air in 1952 . He bombed hydroelectric plants and military targets in the Northern capital Pyongyang .
 Kim il Sung announced that 6000 civilians had died which made Americans look harsh . Kim Il Sung announced the death of 6000 civilians in Korea .
 Truman stepped down for re-election, only for Eisenhower to take over and also Stalin died . Stalin died in Stalin's second assassination in 1953 . Truman took over from Stalin .
 South Korea wouldn't sign the armistice but they had to accept it regardless . South Korea would have to accept the end of the war .
 The Korean War cost $30 billion in 1953 which is the equivalent to $341 billion today . U.S. military spending was high prior to the war due to the Cold War .
 Cuba Cuba was a small island approximately 90 miles off the coast of Florida . Cuba Cuba is located 90 miles from the Florida coast .
 It had always been a US ally and had United States military bases located there . U.S. military bases are located in the region .
 Many U.S. corporations were there and the US supported the dictator leader Batista . Many United States corporations were involved in the coup .
 He overthrew the government and established his own communist government and took over all the U.S. co-operations . The United States government was overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 1400 anti-Cuban exiles attempted to overthrow Castro but the Cuban public were more supportive of Castro than the U.S. had expected . This was a massive failure as 1400 exiles tried to overthrow the Castro regime .
 This was mainly because Castro was meeting the primary needs of the Cubans . Castro was also meeting the needs of Cubans, according to CNN.com .
 Cuba was a new Communist state and it was also very close to United States which was necessary for the USSR to plant a launch base for Russian missiles . The United States had planted their missiles in Turkey similar to how the United States did in Turkey .
 Cuba would produce these missiles in less than a week and so the U.S. knew they had to act fast . The United States knew it would have to act quickly to get the missiles .
 On the 20th of October 1962, John F Kennedy decided that blockading Cuba would be the best response . The Cuban Islands were the subject of the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 .
 He asked Khrushchev to remove missiles and call of the delivery of even more weapons . But he refused to acknowledge the existence of the missiles . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev ordered to stop work on the missile if the U.S. removed their blockade and stopped threatening to invade Cuba . The missile would have been built if the United States removed the blockade and threatened to invade .
 He also added that he also wanted the United States to remove their missile base in Turkey .
 JFK agreed to the first two terms after the U2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba . JFK also agreed to a U2 plane being shot down by U2 during the war .
 He would take a longer time to remove the U.S. missile in Cuba than remove it from Cuba .
 While Cuba remained communist and heavily armed, there were many impacts of the Cuban War on American foreign policy . The Cuban War was the result of the war in Cuba .
 The United States and USSR established a test ban treaty between them . The treaty was the first being established between the two countries .
 There was a permanent hotline set up between the White House and the Kremlin in case of further disputes . A permanent hotline was set up to prevent further disputes between the two countries .