 Robert McNamara was born in San Francisco, California . McNamara is best known for his work on television and radio .
 In 1946, Tex Thornton, a colonel under whom McNamara had served, put together a group of former officers from the Office of Statistical Control to go into business together . Ford Motor Company .
 President-elect John F Kennedy first offered the post of Secretary of Defense to Robert A Lovett, who had already served in that position in the Truman administration . Lovett declined but recommended McNamara for the position .
 McNamara took over the Pentagon in 1961 . The United States relied on an all-out nuclear strike to respond to a Soviet attack of any kind .
 McNamara took other steps to increase U.S. deterrence posture and military capabilities . McNamara also took steps to strengthen the U.N. defense system .
 McNamara's staff stressed systems analysis as an aid in decision making on weapon development and many other budget issues . McNamara: Systems analysis is an aid to decision making .
 McNamara believed redundancy created waste and unnecessary spending . Program consolidation was a hallmark of McNamara's cost reductions .
 In 1965, in response to stepped-up military activity by the VC, the U.S. began bombing North Vietnam, deployed large military forces and entered into combat .
 Up to November 1965, McNamara, who been a supporter of the war, first started to have doubts about the war . Said at a press conference that ""it will be a long war"", which completely contradicted his previous optimistic statements that the war would be brought to a close soon
 McNamara issued Directive 5120.36 on July 26, 1963 . Truman signed order to end segregation in the military .
 In July 1961, McNamara was informed by the British Defense Minister, Peter Thorneycroft, that the financial burden of trying to maintain British forces around the world was too much . The British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan was considering a withdrawal of all British forces ""East of Suez
 McNamara wrote of his close personal friendship with Jackie Kennedy and how she demanded that he stop the killing in Vietnam . McNamara was a close personal friend of Jackie Kennedy .
 McNamara visited Jakarta, Indonesia during his tenure as World Bank President in 1968 . McNamara was President of the World Bank from 1968 to 1968 .
 In his 13 years at the Bank, he introduced key changes, most notably shifting the Bank's economic development policies toward targeted poverty reduction . He introduced key policy shifts, including shifting economic development policy to targeted poverty .
 McNamara married Margaret Craig, his teenage sweetheart, on August 13, 1940 .
 McNamara lived in Ann Arbor, Michigan, rather than the usual auto executive domains of Grosse Pointe, Birmingham, and Bloomfield Hills . At FordEdit When working at Ford Motor Company, McNamara resided in Ann Ann Arbor .
 After his wife's death, McNamara dated Katharine Graham, with whom he had been friends since the early 1960s .