 President Kennedy observed that both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had made serious miscalculations in the Cuban affair . An analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior by Arnold L Horelick I N .
 In the months that have elapsed since the first post-crisis flurry of speculation and analysis, a great deal of valuable new information has come to light, particularly in testimony before Congressional committees by high Administration officials .
 In mid-December 1962, Khrushchev broke the silence he had maintained for some six weeks and presented before the USSR Supreme Soviet the first in a series of detailed explanations of his actions .
 American and Soviet materials bear only indirectly on the questions posed above . But they provide an improved basis for attempting to answer them .
 The views or conclusions contained in this article are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official opinion or policy of the United States Air Force .
 Though these questions cannot now be resolved definitively, we must arrive at some provisional answers that can be tested against Soviet behavior in the coming months and years .
 If we fail to do this, we reduce the momentous U.S.-Soviet Caribbean confrontation of October 1962 to mere episodic proportions . The United States and the Soviet Union have been at odds for more than a decade .
 The Soviet Union, directly or indirectly, had achieved much of what it intended, critics say .
 Those who criticized the Administration for reacting too cautiously tended to regard the outcome of the crisis as coinciding less with specific Soviet intentions than with general Soviet interests .
 He forced them to retract the move, and for a brief while aired their malice before the world . It was the first time they had been forced to retract .
 The outcome of the Cuban missile crisis is not coinciding in any substantial way with Soviet intentions or interests . But it is to mistake skillful salvage of a shipwreck for brilliant navigation, he says .
 The success achieved by the U.S. in October 1962 proved to be more limited in scope than many believed it would be or had to be . The outcome hardly constituted a net gain for the Soviet Union .
 Even if they had been fully achieved, these objectives would have been blatantly disproportionate to the means expended, and to the costs and risks incurred by the Soviet Union in the undertaking . Even if . they had . been fully . achieved, they would have had to be blatantly disproportionate .
 The Chinese and Albanian Communists, and Castro, too, have correctly — from the Communist point of view — have correctly drawn attention to the emptiness of mere verbal pledges by the enemy . The Chinese, Albanians and Castro have correctly .
 Khrushchev has publicly treated the President's conditional pledge as if it were in full force because he has little else to show for his efforts . The President has little more than he has to show to his efforts to secure a deal with the Soviet Union .
 As to any credit Khrushchev may have gained for saving the peace, it is doubtful whether his ""reasonableness"" persuaded many observers of his dedication to peace who were not so persuaded before the crisis .
 The ranks of those, both in the Communist camp and outside of it, who regard Khrushchev as an ""adventurer"" or ""capitulator"" have certainly been augmented .
 The growth of such beliefs about Khrushchev is not likely to enhance his future political effectiveness . The former Soviet leader's future political success is unlikely to be enhanced by such beliefs .
 Soviet leaders need not have invested so heavily or risked so much in the crisis, the author says . To achieve the limited political objectives imputed to them by those who contend that the outcome of the crisis was the one intended by the USSR, the Soviet leaders should have avoided risking so much
 At least 42 IL-28 bombers and an equal number of strategic missiles were brought into Cuba by Soviet ships . Nine missile sites were established, six of them with four launchers each for the MRBM's, and three of them, fixed sites for the IRBM's .
 A few conspicuously deployed MRBM's would have provoked a U.S. demand that the Soviet Union remove them from Cuba . Yet a token force of a few . would alone . doubtless have sufficed .
 The magnitude and character of the Soviet strategic weapon deployment in Cuba cast doubt also on a related hypothesis — namely, that the Soviet Union sought merely to compel the United States to withdraw its missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 The costly and essentially unsalvageable fixed sites that were being prepared to receive IRBM's with a 2,200-mile range were altogether superfluous to any intended Cuba-Turkey missile-base exchange . The U.S. had no equivalent missiles in Turkey, or anywhere
 Khrushchev proposed withdrawal of missiles from Cuba and Turkey in letter to Kennedy . Mutual withdrawal of missile missiles was explicitly proposed by Khrushchchev in letter .
 Khrushchev proposed such an exchange at one point during the crisis, after the U.S. had demanded the withdrawal of Soviet strategic weapons . The Chinese Communists have accused him of being both .
 The withdrawal of U.S. strategic weapons from Turkey, under apparent Soviet duress, would have given Khrushchev a more tangible return for his trouble than a conditional verbal pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba .
 It is one thing for the United States and allied host country to decide jointly to substitute for some bases other means of defense, such as Polaris submarines in adjacent waters . It is quite another for the U.S. to withdraw from its bases, regardless of the wishes of its allies .
 It seems questionable, however, that the Soviets would accept the costs and risks of deploying missiles in Cuba merely in order to remove them in return for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey . The U.S. missiles were deployed in Cuba in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The phasing out of U.S. missiles deployed overseas, without a Soviet quid pro quo, was already known to have been under consideration long before the October 1962 crisis .
 A strategic missile base in Cuba was a far more valuable military asset to the Soviet Union than a comparable base in Turkey to the United States . The U.S. advantage in intercontinental nuclear delivery capabilities led to Cuba's strategic missile bases .
 It is more likely that the base-exchange proposal was an improvised or perhaps even a prepared fall-back position to cover unfavorable contingencies . It is not the Soviet-preferred culmination of the Cuban venture, but not the Soviets' preferred culmination .
 Khrushchev's official rationale is that Soviet strategic weapons were deployed in Cuba solely to defend the island against United States attack . Had the United States accepted the Soviet base-exchange proposal of October 27, the U.S. would also have received such a United States pledge .
 Khrushchev also acknowledged that he took the decision to withdraw missiles was not a needless concession . He said he took that decisive step only when urgent word reached him that a U.S. attack on Cuba appeared imminent .
 The discovery of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba provoked a United States naval quarantine, a rapid build-up of U.S. Army and Tactical Air Forces in southeastern part of the country, and a world-wide alert .
 We regarded the telegrams received as a signal of utmost alarm, and this alarm was justified . We regarded it as the 'signal of the utmost alarm', says the PM .
 It must have appeared to Khrushchev that the U.S. had not only been prepared to attack Cuba despite the presence of Soviet weapons, but precisely because the weapons had been brought in . Only by agreeing to withdraw them did he think he could secure assurances that the United States would
 Presidential statements that the U.S. did not intend to invade if offensive weapons were not deployed in Cuba had apparently not been deemed sufficient . Only when such an assurance was made conditional on the removal of Soviet strategic weapons from Cuba, with appropriate international verification, did it become acceptable .
 The strange logic of Khrushchev's face-saving explanation of Soviet motives and behavior does not disprove his contention that Soviet missiles were deployed in Cuba solely to deter a United States attack; it does not in itself disprove the claim he made .
 Khrushchev's account of Soviet objectives is disputed . But there are other reasons for doubting his account of the Soviet objectives .
 The U.S. is considering the appropriateness of the weapons selected to be deployed in Cuba for the ostensible purpose of deterring a United States attack on that country . The weapons are supposed to be used in Cuba to deter an attack .
 A threat to destroy several southeastern U.S. cities, or even Miami alone, would have been adequate to deter such an attack . Surely a threat of destruction to several southeastern United States cities would not have been credible .
 For this, tactical missiles with a range of several hundred miles would have sufficed . The U.S. should have been armed with a long range of tactical missiles .
 It could have been claimed that such weapons were designed to strike at airfields and marshaling points in the Florida area from which a U.S. invasion might be mounted .
 IRBM's that were deployed could have been used to strike close-in targets, but such long-range missiles are not designed for that purpose . Perhaps by employing a high lofting technique, the MRBM's were deployed and the . were being prepared, but the . IRBM
 Whatever marginal incremental value for local deterrence might have been obtained by deploying missiles with ranges in excess of several hundred miles was more than outweighed by the added provocation they offered .
 Castro had gained a reputation for impulsive, irresponsible behavior in the United States . Castro was known for his impulsive and irresponsible behavior .
 Once an operational missile capability was established in Cuba, such beliefs on the part of Americans might have lent substantial deterrent value to the missiles .
 Cuba-based missiles would have been essential to Soviet interests in confrontations with the U.S. On the other hand, the missiles were at the disposal of the Soviet leaders in Berlin .
 The Soviet leaders probably would have preferred to keep the question of control in an ambiguous state . Until such time as the Soviet Union might wish to bring the missiles so to bear, however, the Soviet leaders would probably prefer to keep it ambiguous .
 Vague statements, such as characterize most Soviet strategic threats, might have been employed . Vague, generalized statements, like those of most Soviet military threats, may have been used .
 Khrushchev may have been forced to accept political liabilities, regardless of whether he claimed that the Soviet Union retained control over the missiles or not . A premature explicit announcement on control would have obliged him to accept certain political liabilities . A consideration of probably lesser importance .
 Khrushchev acknowledged that Soviet ballistic missiles had been furnished to Cuba, but were completely controlled by Soviet officers . According to Knox, the missiles were furnished but controlled by officers .
 Whatever value the Soviet weapons may have been intended to have as a deterrent of a local U.S. attack on Cuba was seriously diminished by this reassurance . The value of the weapons was diminished by the reassurance, the author says .
 It is questionable whether deterrence of a local U.S. attack on Cuba was ever regarded by the Soviet leaders as more than a subsidiary and derivative effect of a venture intended primarily to serve other ends .
 The size and character of the intended deployment indicate that it was meant to achieve some broader purpose . The size of the deployment indicates that the deployment was intended to achieve a broader purpose.
 T h e implication is that if the weapons had been under Cuban control, the possibility that they might be ""accidentally used"" could not be excluded .
 "It was not in order to assure our own defense, but first of all to reinforce socialism on the international scale," he said . "We were not going to defend ourselves, but to strengthen socialism," he added .
 Deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba would have strengthened the Soviet position in its confrontation with the U.S. It would also have added credibility to Soviet strategic threats, including the threat to defend Cuba against United States attack . The deployment of Cuban missiles would have also been a boost to Soviet
 These bases could have been covered by IRBM's . 23 he Monde, March 22, 1963, published the day after the events .
 TASS version of Castro's denial omitted both of the statements quoted above . March 22 version of TASS's version of the statement omitted both quotes above . T h e March 22 Tass version of this article omitted both statements above .
 After this article was written, Castro was questioned by two other journalists regarding the origination of the plan to deploy Soviet missiles in Cuba . Castro has been questioned by reporters about the origin of the Soviet missile deployment .
 Cuban leaders interpreted Khrushchev's words as if they represented a firm, though tacit, commitment . Cuban leaders, however, consistently interpreted the words as though they were sincere .
 Castro in effect volunteered Cuba for membership in the ""socialist camp"" in 1961 . Castro was presumably to secure such a commitment, which was evidently reluctant to give .
 Castro might well have preferred the stationing of Soviet strategic weapons on Cuban soil, on the other, under certain circumstances . As between an explicit and unequivocal Soviet guarantee, the one hand, and the stationed of Soviet weapons on Cuba soil, the other .
 The forces which protected Cuba n o w exist a n d are growing in strength every day . But the forces which protect Cuba from terrorism are growing every day, they say .
 It does n o t matter where the rockets are located, in Cuba, or elsewhere . It does not matter where they are located .
 Cuban President may have agreed to the Soviet proposal because of his dependence on the Soviet Union . If the Soviet leaders believed their position vis-a-vis the United States was such that it required reinforcement by drastic means, the reliability of Soviet pledges to defend Cuba with Soviet-based weapons must
 From the start, the bulk of the USSR's strategic nuclear capability has been effective only out to ranges of about 2,000-2,500 miles . The bulk of Russia's nuclear capability is effective out to about two,000 to 2,500 mile range .
 The Soviet heavy bomber and ICBM forces did not reach strength levels that Western observers anticipated they would reach in the 1960's . But they did not attain the strength levels Western observers thought they would .
 Inflated beliefs in the West, actively promoted by misleading and deceptive Soviet claims, that the Soviet Union was rapidly acquiring a large intercontinental strike force tended to deprive continued and even growing United States strategic superiority of much of its political value .
 Soviet leaders offered increasingly strong pledges to defend Cuba . Cuban leaders ignored them and vowed to resist any U.S. attack with their own resources .
 Cuban leaders began to welcome Soviet pledges with great public enthusiasm . Later, however, as Soviet-Cuban relations recovered from the estrangement of the fall of 1962 .
 The Alternatives to Total War,""Saturday Evening Post,"" Saturday Evening Post, December I, 1962, 18.18. 1962, was published in the New York Times .
 The deployment of strategic weapons in Cuba may have recommended itself to the Soviet leaders as a ""quick fix" measure to achieve a substantial, though far from optimal, improvement in Soviet strike capabilities against the United States .
 A large increase in the programmed Soviet-based ICBM force would have provided the Soviet leaders with a military capability far more effective (certainly for second-strike purposes) than could be achieved by the emplacement of highly vulnerable MRBM's, IRBM's and light bombers in
 ICBM (and missile-launching nuclear submarine) force could be achieved only gradually and at far greater cost . But such an expansion of the ICBM force could only be achieved slowly and at much greater cost. Such an expansion could not be achieved at all the time .
 Cuban deployment may not have been undertaken as a substitute for such a build-up, but as a stopgap measure, pending its completion . The Cuban deployment is not a substitute, but a temporary stopgap .
 The deployment of limited numbers of MRBM's and IRBM's in Cuba would not have solved the Soviet Union's strategic problem . The Soviet Union would have had to rely heavily on its military assets .
 The evident deficiencies of such a force have led some observers to conclude that military considerations were of little importance in the Soviet decision to emplace strategic weapons .
 It is true that the missile sites were soft, very close to the United States, and, after detection, under close and constant surveillance, they were under constant surveillance . It was true that they were soft and very close .
 As a Soviet first-strike force, the Cuba-based force deployed or being readied in October 1962 was in itself too small to destroy the United States strategic nuclear strike force .
 Even together with the larger long-range strategic force based in the USSR, it seems most unlikely that the force would have been adequate in the fall of 1962 . There would be a problem, though perhaps not insurmountable one, of coordinating salvoes .
 The installation of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba would have complicated a U.S. first strike, but also improved Soviet capabilities to launch a preemptive attack . By the same token, however, the installation of Cuban strategic missiles could have complicated the United States first strike in Cuba .
 As to the first-strike potential of Cuba-based Soviet missiles, they could have brought a substantial portion of U.S. nuclear weapons . Soviet strategic pronouncements after the fall of 1961 shifted from claims of superiority to efforts to deprive American claims to superiority of political value .
 The emphasis in claims regarding the USSR's strike capability against the U.S. shifted from the high level of destruction that could be inflicted to the certainty that some unspecified level of retaliation would occur .
 The additional capabilities with which Cuba-based missiles would have provided the Soviet leaders were not insignificant . Whatever their strategic shortcomings, the additional capabilities would have been not insignificant.
 It is difficult to conceive of any other measure that promised to produce so large an improvement in the Soviet strategic position as quickly or as cheaply as cheaply . The Soviet Union's strategic position will be improved quickly or cheaply .
 The Cuban missile deployment would not in itself have provided the Soviet Union with a retaliationproof first-strike capability against the United States . That is hardly a reason for dismissing it as of limited strategic importance, as some observers have done .
 As the President subsequently said, the Soviet leaders tried materially to change the balance of power. As the . President subsequently . said, ‘The Soviet leaders . tried to . change the . balance of . power .
 It had become evident, since at least the second half of 1961, that the forward momentum of the Soviet Union in international affairs had largely exhausted itself without yielding the gains which the Soviet leaders had anticipated and the West had feared since mid-i95o's .
 These expectations had been fed by mounting evidence of the growing military, scientific, technological, technological and economic power of the Soviet Union vis-a-vis the West .
 Some of this evidence was real enough, but much of it, particularly in the realm of strategic power, was illusory . Some of the evidence is real enough but some of it is not, especially in the realms of power, as well .
 The effects of other striking achievements, as, for example, in space exploration, were amplified, sometimes out of all proportion to their intrinsic political and military worth, by their presumed bearing on the strategic balance .
 With the discovery that the ""missile gap"" had failed to materialize, or had actually materialized in reverse, there was a perceptible change in the world political climate .
 Western self-confidence was restored and Soviet anxieties must have grown . Western confidence was restored in the 1980s, but Soviet anxiety grew . Western anxieties have grown since then .
 Western European prosperity had reached a new peak, and despite de Gaulle's intransigence the prospects for growing European economic and political unity must have looked distressingly good to Moscow .
 At the same time, the unity of the Communist camp was being shattered by the escalating conflict between its two most powerful members . At the time, Russia was in the grip of a crisis in the Soviet Union .
 The Chinese Communist attack on Khrushchev centered precisely on the unfavorable trend in the cold war which the Chinese attributed to his faulty and overcautious leadership . Indeed, the Chinese Communist attacked on Khruschev centered .
 Berlin is still unresolved, still unresolved problem of Berlin . Berlin is a long-smoldering city of Germany .
 After almost four years of threats and retreats, Khrushchev had still not succeeded in compelling the West to accept a Berlin settlement on Soviet terms . The West refused to accept the West's insistence on a Berlin-bound Berlin settlement .
 Khrushchev may have sought some quick and dramatic means for achieving a breakthrough that would strengthen the USSR's position on a whole range of outstanding issues, and particularly on Berlin .
 It is most unlikely that the Soviet leaders drew up a precise blueprint or detailed timetable for exploitation of the improved military-political position they would have attained had the Cuban venture been successful .
 The U.S. placed strategic missiles in Cuba and accepted by the United States would contribute in some degree to the solution of a whole range of military-political problems confronting the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union probably anticipated that the emplacement of strategic missiles would contribute to a range of
 Khrushchev may have hoped to discourage any new U.S. action in regard to Cuba until after the elections . He offered, in return, to desist from fomenting a new crisis in Berlin, and then, after establishing a strategic base in Cuba, to use this
 Khrushchev's bold move in Cuba was doomed to failure from the start, many Western observers have concluded . With the benefit of hindsight, many have concluded that Khrushchev's move was doomed from the beginning .
 Khrushchev never intended to leave the missiles in Cuba, but wanted political concessions from the U.S. in return for their withdrawal . This in turn has led to the conjecture that he intended to exact political concessions with the United States in return .
 Khrushchev's Cuban gamble explodes one of the articles of faith of Kremlinologists about Bolshevik behavior . The tenet that holds that good Bolsheviks will not engage in adventurism is defined as taking of even small risks of large catastrophes .
 The risk of an immediate U.S. thermonuclear response against the Soviet Union was almost certainly not one of them . But while the Soviet leaders did accept some unusually high military and political risks in embarking on the Cuban venture, the risk was not one .
 Whatever errors they may have made in anticipating the character and intensity of the U.S. response, they were doubtless correct in excluding that one . Moreover, whatever errors they might have made they were right in excluding one .
 This established a very crucial upper limit on the risks they did willingly accept . This established the limits on how much they would willingly accept from the public .
 This was true when the strategic balance was far more unfavorable to the Soviet Union than it was in October 1962 . The strategic balance in the U.S. was more favorable to the Soviets than it had been in 1962, the author says .
 In part this confidence has been based on the powerful indirect deterrent threat of Soviet military power, at first only conventional, and then nuclear, poised to strike Western Europe, the hostage .
 The threat of even a quantitatively modest intercontinental strike force was reinforced by growing U.S. uncertainty regarding the size of that force and the possible upper limits of damage it could inflict upon the United States .
 Even when the United States enjoyed decisive strategic superiority, its leaders showed themselves to be strongly disinclined to initiate general war so long as the Soviet Union avoided extreme measures of provocation that could not be dealt with by other means .
 Increasingly it must have appeared to the Soviet leaders that nothing short of the actual application of violence against the United States or an important United States ally would risk a U.S. nuclear attack on the Soviet Union .
 The history of the cold war demonstrates that the Soviet leaders have sufficient reason for such an estimate . Russia's leaders have enough reason to estimate the threat of a nuclear war, says Vladimir Putin .
 This estimate is crucial for assessing Soviet risk calculations in Cuba . It is crucial to assess the risk of the Soviet Union in Cuba, experts say .
 If one excludes from Soviet precrisis calculations serious concern that the United States, even if it detected the missile build-up before completion, would launch a thermonuclear attack against the Soviet Union . The venture no longer appears to have been a reckless long-shot gamble, but a more
 This does not mean that as the crisis unfolded the Soviet leaders did not become concerned that a real danger of nuclear war might be created . The Soviet leaders didn't become concerned about the danger of a nuclear war, it says .
 The quick withdrawal of missiles may be interpreted as a decision to end the crisis quickly before it became necessary to accept even greater losses which could be avoided, if at all, only at the cost of facing serious risk of nuclear war . In fact, the withdrawal of their missiles, as we
 The Soviet leaders' understanding (or misunderstanding) of U.S. Cuban policy was a major factor in their decision .
 The illfated Bay of Pigs invasion attempt may have shown U.S. reluctance to engage its own forces directly in military action against Cuba . Even the emplacement of Soviet strategic weapons on the island would be tolerated, or at least resisted by means short of the direct use of
 The U.S. had tried to overthrow Castro, but failed to do so . Castro's desire for Soviet military assistance made it seem legitimate to many third countries . The United States had tried ineffectively, but ineffectually, through the use of Cuban exile proxies, to overthrow
 The Soviet arms build-up in Cuba was conducted in fairly distinct phases, beginning with the delivery of basic conventional weapons, then working up to more sophisticated weapon systems . SA-2 surface-to-air missiles had been at least partially deployed before strategic missiles were introduced into the island in
 U.S. reaction to the arrival of each new type of weapon was closely observed in Moscow .
 If so, the Soviet leaders evidently resolved these uncertainties in favor of assuming U.S. toleration . The Soviet leaders must have assumed United States toleration, the author says .
 The President's warnings may have raised anxiety in Moscow, but they clearly did not deter the Soviet leaders . President's warning raised anxiety, but it clearly didn't deter the Soviets .
 They may also have relied on their ability to achieve an operational capability with the missiles quickly enough to ensure the success of the venture .
 T h e missile sites would still have been highly vulnerable to attack a n d d . Soviet reluctance to initiate a U.S.-Soviet nuclear exchange would have been enough to make the threat of a United States attack on Cuban bases highly credible .
 Doubts might have arisen on the United States side so as to cause a different U.S. policy to be adopted for dealing with the crisis . However, sufficient doubt may have arisen to cause the U.K. to adopt a different policy .
 Allegations that Soviet strategic missiles were present in Cuba had been publicized in the U.S. even before the first shipment of these weapons arrived in Cuba .
 From the Soviet point of view, the airing of these charges may not have been harmful, says historian . The airing of such charges may have been beneficial to the Soviet Union, he says .
 Soviet leaders may also have believed that the Administration would be reluctant to expose the Soviet Union publicly on the eve of national elections out of concern for unfavorable domestic political repercussions .
 In general, the Soviet leaders believed that time worked in their favor and that it was therefore necessary to utilize deception and diplomacy to gain it .
 They could hardly have expected to be able to maintain their deception indefinitely . Indeed, the objectives they pursued required some point that the new Soviet military capabilities be discovered or revealed .
 In the event of premature detection, Soviet leaders may have relied on diplomacy to take over from deception .
 The Organization of American States is opposed to any U.S. proposals for immediate joint action requiring the use of military forces . They may also have expected that there would be some significant opposition in the OAS .
 In short, the Soviet leaders probably estimated that the likelihood of prompt unilateral action by the United States was small .
 The collapse of confidence which evidently caused Khrushchev to send off to President Kennedy a private communication may have been the culminating point of a whole series of disappointed expectations . President Kennedy's private communication indicated that he was prepared to yield .
 Because expectations were not realized, however, does not necessarily mean they were without reasonable bases . It does not mean that expectations were met with reasonable bases, however .
 One other consideration that may have weighed heavily in Soviet planning must be mentioned here—Berlin, Germany .
 There was no lack of evidence available to Soviet leaders to make it appear plausible that U.S. policy on Cuba might be influenced . The Soviet leaders were concerned about the threat to West Berlin, but there was no evidence .
 But, again, their expectations were not entirely without foundation, says the BBC .
 Some reasons have been adduced in the preceding discussion of probable Soviet pre-crisis miscalculations . Implicitly, some reasons were used in the discussion of possible miscalculation .
 The President instituted quarantine and demanded withdrawal of Soviet strategic weapons . As it turned out, however, the Soviet deployment was not yet completed when the quarantine was instituted .
 The U.S. imposed a quarantine on strategic arms shipments to Cuba as the first in a series of measures designed not only to prevent a further build-up, but to secure the removal of weapons already on the island . Other measures remained deliberately unspecified .
 As an initial response the quarantine was considerably less than a direct application of violence, but considerably more than a mere protest or verbal threat . The quarantine was less than an application of violent force, but rather than a protest .
 The United States Navy placed itself physically between Cuba and Soviet ships bound for Cuban ports . The U.S. Navy was stationed in Cuba in the early 1950s .
 The U.S. might still have to fire the first shot had Khrushchev chosen to defy the quarantine . Other means of preventing Soviet penetration might have been employed .
 They could submit to the quarantine by permitting their vessels to be stopped, searched, and, if they carried contraband, to be seized . They could avoid a showdown by keeping their ships out of the quarantine area . Or they could precipitate the use of violence by attempting to violate the
 Soviet prospects for success in such an undertaking were very poor . The outlook could not have appeared any brighter to them at any of the successively higher levels of violence that could be contemplated .
 The U.S. success in securing prompt and unanimous support for the quarantine in the OAS made the Soviet leaders pessimistic about the chances of bringing diplomatic pressure to bear on the United States to lift the quarantine .
 It removed the ground from under any Soviet effort to involve the United States in negotiations with the Cuban Government . The Soviet leaders subsequently attempted unsuccessfully to do in connection with the IL-28 bombers .
 Diplomatically and morally, the U.S. decision to confront the Soviet Union directly made it possible to separate the issue of the menacing Soviet weapon deployment in Cuba from the broad and controversial issue of US.-Cuban relations . The United States faced the threat of Soviet weapons deployed in Cuba
 Sixteen out of 18 Soviet dry-cargo ships en route to Cuba reversed course and returned to the Soviet Union . This refers to the prompt and successful implementation of the quarantine .
 Khrushchev said in 1962 that he withdrew Soviet missiles from Cuba after receiving urgent word that a U.S. attack was imminent . There is no doubt that these preparations were carefully noted by Moscow, says historian .
 His preparations must have persuaded him that he had to act quickly in order to limit his losses . These preparations convinced him to take action quickly, he said .
 Whether it was mainly conventional U.S. military superiority in the Caribbean area or overall United States strategic nuclear superiority that won the day is debated question .
 The immediate military threat confronting Soviet leaders was, of course, that posed locally to Soviet forces in Cuba and to the Castro regime . The immediate threat was, for instance, that .
 Strategic Air Command dispersal of B-47's to auxiliary civilian airfields underscored this determination . Extraordinary alert measures taken by the Strategic . Air Command .
 United States strategic superiority rendered Soviet strategic deterrence of a local U.S. attack on Cuba inoperable . Manifest United States superiority rendered .
 The U.S. strategic superiority also made it too risky for the Soviet Union to play the Berlin trump card . The Soviet Union was too scared to play or, under the circumstances, even threaten to do so .
 Some Western observers feared that the Soviet Union might try to dissuade the U.S. from calling the Soviet hand in Cuba by threatening to retaliate in Berlin . But the Soviet leaders apparently feared that a threatening Soviet move in Berlin would be dangerously provocative .
 The role played by Berlin in the Cuban crisis during the fall of 1962 dramatizes the curious role that threats, expectations, fears, and hopes regarding that city have played in the cold war . Khrushchev in November 1958 opened the long second round of the East-West struggle over
 Many regarded the Cuban missile deployment as designed chiefly to improve the Soviet bargaining position in the renewed crisis that was expected to be raised by the Russians after the U.S. elections in 1962 .
 The Soviets appeared to be so intent on securing better leverage in Berlin, it would seem that they regarded it as too risky to proceed there without such leverage .
 Many believed that Berlin was the real objective of the Soviet missile deployment . Yet many believed there was great danger that the Soviet leaders would retaliate in retaliation .
 U.S. strategic superiority and allies' determination to preserve their rights in West Berlin made it too risky for the Soviets to employ their local military superiority in order to impose a settlement . Yet the West must proceed with great caution elsewhere lest it provide the Soviet Union with a pretext for imposing
 Soviet leaders have never needed pretexts for plucking ripe fruits from the vine . However, Soviet leaders never need pretexts to pluck ripe fruits out of the vine, they say .
 The foreseeable consequences of a Western defeat in Berlin provide more than enough incentive for the Soviet leaders to administer it . If they think they can do so safely, they will have to deal with the consequences of that defeat .
 The four preceding years of bluster and retreat in Berlin had certainly been ""humiliating"" enough . The four previous years of bluster and retreats in Berlin were enough to be 'humiliated' enough .
 The Soviet threat to strike Western Europe in the event of a U.S. attack on the Soviet Union is highly credible . The ultimate catastrophe to the USSR would have already occurred when the threat would have to be executed . But to retaliate in West Berlin for some lesser Western ""provocation
 If U.S. nuclear power served no function other than neutralizing that of the Soviet Union, it would be difficult to understand why the USSR didn't prevail in Berlin . The United States' nuclear power neutralized Soviet conventional military power .