 The guides are created and maintained by the Museum’s librarian/archivist . They are carefully selected to help users, unfamiliar with the collections, begin finding information about topics such as Dealey Plaza Eyewitnesses, Conspiracy Theories and Cuba .
 For broader historical context, the U-2 spy mission is provided . Information about the history of Cuba, the Cold War, the Bay of Pigs invasion and the U.S. spy mission are provided .
 Resources shed light on how Americans dealt with the fear of imminent war and the legacy of the crisis . Resources also shed light . on the fear and fear of war .
 The selections below detail the Cold War politics that led to the confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union over offensive missiles in Cuba . The selections are selected from the selections below .
 The relationship between the assassination of President Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald’s desire to join the communist movement and the subsequent conspiracy theories involving Cuba that arose are also explored . Furthermore, the relationship between President Kennedy . and Lee . Harvey Oswald's desire to . join the . communist movement is
 Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War | August 2018 . Resource Guide to Cuba and Communism .
 Several selections examine conspiracy theories which posit theories linking Cuba to the assassination of President Kennedy . Several selections examined conspiracy theories linked Cuba to JFK assassination .
 The Museum’s collection provides access to a variety of primary resources . Visit our online collections database for more information . Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War .
 For research assistance, please contact the Reading Room at readingroom@jfk.org or 214389.389.3070 .
 This selection of artifacts highlights Cold War propaganda, U.S. government civil defense materials and Lee Harvey Oswald’s association with Cuba . Artifacts, documents, newspapers and magazines from the Museum's permanent collection . This selection includes Cold War documents, papers and magazines .
 At Last The Truth About the Bay of Pigs booklet, September 1964 “Decision for Disaster: At Last . The Bay of . Pigs” by Mario Lazo .
 Lazo argues that the Bay of Pigs invasion failed because of changes to the military plan made by the White House . In the article, Lazo writes that the invasion failed due to the changes made to the plan . Lazo also argues that changes to military plan were made by White House
 Also discusses the John Birch Society and a “campaign of hatred” for communists in the U.S. Also discusses John Birch society and a campaign of hatred for the communists .
 Letter discusses a Cuban citizen’s fears of invasion, a desire for liberation, the decision of whether or not to go to the U.S. if nothing changes for its citizens, Fidel Castro, and revolutionary work against the communist government . Letter discusses the decision to leave Cuba if
 Letter discusses the fears and frustrations of Cuban citizens . Cuban citizens feel stuck in the middle between two governments . Letter discusses fears and frustration of citizens .
 The author refers to Castro as ‘the tyrant’ and speaks of fighting for freedom for Cuba from communism . The author also speaks of the struggle for freedom from communism in Cuba .
 The letter mentions Russian ships bringing arms and ammunition to Cuba . The author talks about quietly trying to get a visa to leave the country and go to the United States .
 The article titled “LBJ hinted at Cuban link to JFK death” begins on the front page and continues on page 5 of the section . Page 4 of 9 1996.006.0442 – Dallas Times Herald .
 ABC News commentator Howard K Smith claims President Johnson implied to him in a private conversation that Cuba was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy . The article reports on claims made by ABC News .
 There are black-and-white photographs of men who participated in the invasion of Vietnam .
 The tin is gold in color with writing on one end denoting its contents and weight 2000.033.03.0001 – “Fallout Shelter” sign .
 These signs were used as demarcation for the location of fallout shelters for the U.S. public . They were used in the United States public .
 Pins of this nature were distributed during the 1950s and 1960s in response to the Cold War and communism . Pins were distributed as part of a response to Cold War .
 Included are materials reading, “Hands Off Cuba!” cameras, photographs, film, papers, binoculars and other unidentified objects .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was confronted by three anti-Castro Cuban exiles led by Carlos Bringuier . Martin traveled to New Orleans and witnessed an altercation on Canal Street . Oswald was handing out pro- Castro literature .
 One of the men sitting is named Rolanda Cubela, who claimed that he was a part of a plan with the CIA to assassinate Castro .
 This is part of the HSCA investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald’s connections to Cuban and Soviet governments during his visit to Mexico . This is the latest in a series of investigations into Oswald's connections to Cuba and the USSR .
 The letter written by President Kennedy to American citizens discusses what to do in case of a nuclear attack . President Kennedy's letter was written to citizens of the U.S.
 What to Know and Do about Nuclear Attack” is the title of a 1961 pamphlet put out by the Department of Defense . The pamphlet was put out in 1961 .
 The pamphlet uses “the best consensus of the scientific community” to explain the dangers of a thermonuclear attack . The pamphlet also aims to provide an in-depth description of the national civil defense program .
 These letters, originally written by Oswald 06/10/1962 09/01/1963, were collectively considered Exhibit #56 in the Warren Commission’s investigation . Oswald's letters were likely copied for the Warren . Commission in 1964 .
 Poster uses sarcastic motifs and red-and-yellow caricature drawings to poke fun at Soviet ideology and political figures involved in the Cold War . Poster is reminiscent of travel advertisements used by the airline industry .
 Poster depicts the Soviet communist symbol of the hammer and sickle in yellow against a maroon-colored background . Poster was created by the Communist Party of Soviet Union .
 Was given to a family who were living at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in 1962 . Given to the family who lived at the base in 1962.
 When they arrived in Norfolk, VA, an enterprising person offered to make them an ashtray with the official evacuation orders on it as a souvenir .
 The audio-visual Oral History Collection offers personal insights into the history and culture of the 1960s . Resource Guide | Cuba, Communism, and the Cold War .
 To listen to oral history interviews and request research assistance, contact the Reading Room at readingroom@jfk.org or 214.389.3070 .
 Oral history interviews may be recorded by appointment at The Sixth Floor Museum or elsewhere in the Dallas-Fort Worth area or by telephone for participants who live outside of north Texas .
 The Museum’s Oral History Collection includes a wide variety of childhood recollections from the early 1960s . The Museum's oral history collection is available at the Museum of Children's Museum .
 Most interview subjects are asked to briefly reflect on their memories of the Cold War . They include participation in duck-and-cover drills in school and any conversations with family members about what to do in case of a nuclear attack .
 The 2018 oral history with Raymond Sinibaldi is one example of this type of childhood recollection . Raymond's childhood memory is one of many of his childhood memories .
 The curated selection below also offers personal recollections from Cuban nationals who fled Cuba and the Castro regime and participated in the Bay of Pigs invasion . The selection includes personal memories of Cuban citizens who fled the country during the invasion .
 Cuban nationals Estaban Caras, Rene Gonzalez, Felix Rodriguez and Juan Perez Franco served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force . Assault Brigade 2506 Cuban nationals served in the force .
 Eileen Albert visited the Capitol Rotunda on the weekend of the assassination to pay her respects to President Kennedy . Albert was a home economics teacher in 1963 . Albert's visit to the Capitol was to pay respects to the slain president .
 Ruben Esquivel was an ex-Cuban who fled his homeland when Fidel Castro came to power . He is an ex officio member of the Dallas County Historical Foundation’s board of directors .
 Richard J Kervin obtained one of President Kennedy’s last autographs, signed less than two hours before the assassination . Rick Kervins attended the breakfast at the Hotel Texas on November 22, 1963, and obtained the autograph .
 Previously, at the height of the Cold War in 1962, Kervin’s family built a bomb shelter in their backyard in case of a nuclear attack . Previously, the family had a nuclear bomb shelter built in the back yard .
 A Cuban native now living in Dallas, Delia Reyes fled her homeland when Fidel Castro came to power . She fled the country when Castro took power .
 Raymond Sinibaldi’s late grandfather, William Kelly, became friends with John F Kennedy in 1935 and worked on his 1946 congressional and 1952 senatorial campaigns . William Kelly was friends with Kennedy and worked with him on three campaigns .
 Maury Seitz was co-pilot on numerous chartered flights that backed up Air Force One during the Kennedy presidency . He later served as a longtime captain for American Airlines . Seitz is a former Air Force captain .
 This symposium was moderated by Jim Riddlesperger, TCU Presidential Scholar, and panelists included John Hernandez, President of the Fort Worth Hispanic Chamber of Commerce; Carlos Fonts, native Cuban and Bay of Pigs veteran; Dr. Dr. Juan Fernandez .
 David LaFevor, UTA Assistant Professor of Latin American History and Digital Humanities, talks with Juan Hernandez, former advisor to Mexican President Vicente Fox . Juan Hernandez is a member of the Advisory Board at the UTA . Hernandez was an advisor to Mexico's former President Vic
 The discussion includes Kennedy’s position on immigration and examines how the topic continues to affect the Cuban community . The discussion also includes Kennedy's position on the issue of immigration and how it affects Cuba .
 Duck and Cover was produced in 1951 by the U.S. federal government’s Civil Defense branch . The film was produced shortly after the Soviet Union began nuclear testing .
 It was shown in schools as the cornerstone of the government’s ‘duck and cover’ public awareness campaign .
 The movie states that nuclear war could happen at any time without warning . United States citizens should keep this constantly in mind and be ever ready .
 Access to the historical archives is also available in the Museum’s Reading Room . The Museum's historical archives are also available .
 JFK Presidential Library & Museum also offers Curricular Resources, educational resources and lesson plans sorted by grade level . The JFK Presidential Museum & Museum is located in New York City .
 Covers basic concepts of capitalism, socialism, communism, containment, containment and mutual armed destruction . Covers concepts of communism, capitalism, communism and the Monroe Doctrine .
 By 1962, Lee Harvey Oswald had left Russia and was back in the U.S. and working in downtown Dallas . Oswald had been working for the Communist Party in Russia .
 The Marxist Internet Archive provides online access to the March 11, 1963 issue of The Militant . Oswald's copy of the issue was found among Oswald’s possessions .
 National Archives DocsTeach – Photographs and Pamphlet about Nuclear Fallout . Civil defense procedures were developed during the Cold War between the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 Shielding barriers such as “fallout shelters” and “duck and cover” drills became a part of life’s routine in the 1950s and early 1960s .
 John Dickerson, co-host of CBS This Morning, takes an informative and fresh look at President Kennedy’s ‘bumbling’ of the Bay of Pigs invasion and relationship with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . In this three-part podcast series, John Dick