 The Cold War was a political struggle between the United States and NATO allies and the Eastern Bloc, organized by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its allies . The Western world was represented by the U.S. and NATO and its NATO allies .
 Initially, the superpowers focused on post-World War II Europe as they tried to win over states to their sides . Now, they are trying to convince states to join them .
 As the Cold War progressed and dividing lines in Europe were consolidated, the superpowers focused on the developing world in South America, Asia, and Africa .
 John F Kennedy was President of the United States, having been elected in 1960 . He was elected to be President in 1961 .
 Nikita Khrushchev assumed control of the Soviet Union in 1953 following the death of the previous leader Joseph Stalin . He was the first Soviet leader to take over from Stalin .
 The book The Kennedy Tapes, edited by Ernest May and Philip Zelikow, provides a transcript of the group’s deliberations . The book is published in the spring of 2013 .
 Fidel Castro was a revolutionary who in 1959 overthrew the government of Cuba, 90 miles away from the U.S., and became its new leader . Castro was the leader of the island state 90 miles from the United States .
 Castro first began his revolutionary struggle in 1953; after an initial defeat, he regrouped and launched a successful insurgency that caused President Fulgencio Batista to flee and allowed Castro to seize power . Castro was born in 1961 .
 The Cuban government was initially neutral to the superpower competition . Cuban government initially supported the U.S. in the 1980s .
 The Soviet Union initially was initially uninterested in Cuba, and Castro toured the United States in 1959 . Castro even toured the U.S. in 1959.
 Castro frayed the relationship with America when he threatened, and ultimately undertook, reforms that would harm American-owned property in the U.S. He threatened to harm property in Cuba, but ultimately undertook reforms . Castro's reforms ultimately led to the collapse of the Castro regime .
 The increasingly hostile relationship with the U.S. provided an opening for the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union became an increasingly hostile ally of the United States .
 Castro formed trade ties with Moscow and as Cuba grew closer to the USSR, relations with Washington deteriorated further . Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union deteriorated further in the 1960s .
 The United States revoked its diplomatic recognition of Cuba at the beginning of 1961 . The U.S. revoked its recognition of the Cuban government in 1961 .
 The alliance aimed to deter a Soviet invasion of Western Europe . Founded in 1949, the alliance was aimed at detering a Soviet attack on Europe .
 The alliance provided for collective defense, meaning that an attack against one member state was an attack on all members of the alliance . The alliance was designed to protect all of the countries involved .
 NATO still exists and has added many ex-Communist countries in Europe as part of the alliance . NATO has added ex-communist countries to the alliance in recent years .
 The alliance was formed to deter a Western invasion of the member states that were part of the USSR’s sphere of influence . It was formed in response to the threat posed posed by the West .
 It was founded in 1955, in part due to West Germany’s accession to NATO, and was sometimes referred to as the Eastern Bloc . It was sometimes known as the "Eastern Bloc"
 The decline and fall of the Soviet Union led to the Warsaw Pact’s dissolution in 1991 . The Warsaw Pact was formed by the Warsaw Warsaw Pact in 1968 .
 The Western allies established a democratic, capitalist government in their portion of the Soviet-controlled territory . The Soviets put in place a communist government in the territory they controlled . The West and the Soviets established their own democratic governments .
 Berlin, situated in East Germany, had also been divided into Western and Eastern zones . The former capital city of Berlin was also divided into Eastern and Western zones .
 Due to the Western occupation of half of Berlin, a West German exclave of West Germany was surrounded by East Germany . The West was occupied by the West and East Germany during the Second World War .
 In 1948, the Soviet Union tried to force the Western powers out of Berlin by blockading all land routes to West Berlin until full control of the city was handed over to the Soviets . In Berlin, West Berlin was ruled by the West until the end of the war .
 The Western powers overcame this by airlifting supplies to Berlin, until the Soviets ended the blockade in 1949 . Western powers airlift supplies from Berlin to Berlin until the Soviet blockade ended in 1949.
 In 1958, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev issued an ultimatum to NATO demanding that it relinquish West Berlin to East Germany . NATO demanded that West Berlin be relinquished to East Berlin .
 Khrushchev originally gave a six-month deadline, but this was continually pushed back until the crisis escalated in 1961 . The deadline was originally set to be six months, but it was repeatedly pushed back .
 During the summer of 1961, Khrushchev met Kennedy in Vienna and demanded NATO hand over control of West Berlin to East Germany . Kennedy met with the Soviet leader in Vienna to demand NATO handed over control to East Berlin .
 This summit preceded the Soviet/East German decision to seal off West Berlin by building the Berlin Wall . The summit was held in 1961 in Berlin .
 Beginning on August 13, the Soviets and East Germans built a wall that bisected the city . It prevented free passage between the Western and Eastern zones . The wall was built in the Soviet-East Berlin wall .
 Beginning on October 27, American and Soviet forces faced off at “Checkpoint Charlie’s” access point . The access point controlling passage across the wall was an access point controlled by the Soviets .
 The Berlin Crisis was eventually resolved when the U.S. acquiesced to the wall’s construction in November 1961 . The Berlin crisis was resolved in the fall of 1961 .
 Khrushchev had not yet achieved his objective of establishing East German control over West Berlin . However, he had not succeeded in achieving his goal of establishing Berlin .
 Khrushchev believed that the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba could be used as leverage in negotiations over Berlin . The installation of Cuban missiles could have been used in negotiations with Berlin .
 Khrushchev thought that Washington might trade the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba missiles for NATO’s retreat from West Berlin . The deal was struck between the Soviet Union and the U.S. in Cuba .
 Additional reasons included defending Cuba from U.S. invasion and bolstering Soviet prestige . Additional reasons were to defend Cuba from American invasion .
 The United States had prepared for a possible war in Europe by placing nuclear weapons in allied countries . The U.S. had placed nuclear weapons on allied countries in Europe .
 Bombers and ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons were intended as a deterrent against a Soviet invasion of Germany and other NATO countries . They were intended to be a deterrent to a Soviet attack .
 Nuclear missiles were placed in Turkey, a NATO member that shared a border with two Soviet republics, because of its proximity to the Soviet Union . Turkey is a member of NATO, but it has a close relationship with Russia .
 Many members of EXCOMM argued in favor of a military strike to destroy the nuclear missiles in Cuba before they became operational . Many of the ex-EXCOMM members argued against a strike .
 President Kennedy did not want to escalate to war so quickly . President Kennedy, however, did want to avoid escalating to war .
 President Nixon decided to blockade Cuba to prevent the installation of additional Soviet nuclear missiles . Instead, he decided to block Cuba in order to prevent additional Soviet missiles .
 While this step did not defuse the crisis, it bought the President time and avoided a direct attack against Cuba . The President did not take action against Cuba, but it bought time to avoid an attack .
 The Soviets installed 36 to 42 medium SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 Six of the missiles were decoy versions to deceive a potential U.S. attack or for use in training . The missiles are decoyed versions of missiles used in training or to deceive an American attack . Six decoy missiles were used in a simulated attack .
 Soviet commanders were initially authorized to use these weapons with no further input from Moscow . Soviet commanders initially authorized the weapons . The weapons were initially used by Soviet commanders .
 The Soviet government instructed them not to be fired without authorization from Moscow . That changed on October 27, when they were ordered not to fire .
 The Soviets also had 80 Sopka-variant cruise missiles in four missile batteries arrayed along the Cuban coast . The Soviet Union also had a total of 80 missiles in Cuba .
 Many of the warheads for these missiles were delivered to Cuba by the beginning of the Missile Crisis on October 14, 1962 . Many, if not all, of these warheads were delivered by the start of the crisis .
 There were six nuclear bombs in Cuba capable of being carried by the IL-28s, each with a 12 kiloton yield . Six nuclear bombs were capable of carrying six nuclear warheads .
 Intermediate-range ballistic missiles were also intended to be installed in Cuba . Yes. intermediate-range . ballistic missiles also were intended for the island nation .
 These missiles could have hit as far away as Chicago, Boston, and even Newfoundland .
 The United States blockade prevented these from being delivered to Cuba . U.S. blockade prevented them from delivering them to the island .
 Yes. warheads suitable for use on the 36 MRBMs arrived on October 4, 1962 . No. warheads were found to be suitable for the 36 .
 Just before the blockade took effect on October 21, 24 warheads for the IRBMs had arrived . However, the missiles to carry those warheads were never delivered because of the blockade .
 Had the Americans discovered the missile sites two weeks later, the MRBMs would have been armed and ready for launch against the United States . Had the U.S. had not discovered the sites, they would have had the weapons ready for use .
 Had IL-28s successfully penetrated America’s air defenses in the southeast, they could have hit American cities . Had they successfully penetrated the air defenses, they would have hit U.S. cities .
 If the United States had invaded Cuba, the local commander had been authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons in defense of the island . If the U.S. had invaded, the commander would have been able to use the weapons .
 If tactical nuclear weapons had been used against U.S. forces, escalation to full nuclear war would have been very likely . If tactical nukes were used against US forces, it would have escalated to full nuke war .
 At the time, according to Robert McNamara, the Americans did not believe there were nuclear warheads in Cuba . The U.S. didn't think there were any nuclear warheads .
 There were only 10,000 Soviet soldiers in Cuba, not the 40,000 that were actually there . They only estimated that there were 10,500 Soviet soldiers .
 President Kennedy dispatched his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy to make an offer to the Soviet ambassador to the U.S. in the hope of defusing the crisis . On October 27, President Kennedy made the offer to Anatoly Dobrynin, an ambassador for the Soviet Union .
 The United States refused to publically admit to removing the Turkish missiles because it did not want to appear weak . The U.S. refused to remove the missiles from the base because it wanted to be seen as weak .
 The reasons why Khrushchev withdrew missiles from Cuba are still somewhat uncertain . The reasons behind the decision to withdraw are still uncertain .
 Khrushchev knew that war over Cuba could quickly escalate into nuclear war that would destroy both superpowers . He won what he considered significant concessions from the U.S. The Soviet government agreed to remove American missiles from Turkey .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson attended almost all of the key White House meetings . Vice President Johnson attended nearly all the key meetings .
 UN ambassador and former presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson traveled to Washington and joined a few of the White House sessions . Former Secretary of Defense Robert Lovett attended the sessions .