 The events brought to a head the ongoing attempts by the U.S. rulers to overthrow the Cuban revolutionary government . The Cuban revolution was overthrown by the United States .
 Cuban author Tomás Diez Acosta tells the story of what really happened in Cuba . The ‘Missile’ Crisis as Seen from Cuba, by Cuban author, tells the truth .
 Diez Acosta details how the Kennedy administration put in place a series of covert operations aimed at invading the island in November 1961 .
 Cuban people undertook huge efforts to develop their country despite campaign of subversion . New plans for aggression were being drawn up in the United States . Click here for Background to 1962 ‘missile’ crisis in Cuba *****
 A debate was under way in Washington over the most effective method of directing, applying, and controlling the many resources devoted to overthrowing the Cuban revolutionary government .
 Just as in their earlier analysis of the Bay of Pigs operation, failures were ascribed to operational problems . Just as as in the earlier analysis, they also ascribed failures to operational failures .
 Once again Washington underestimated the capacity of the Cuban people and their revolutionary leadership to successfully confront the challenges that such a hostile policy posed for their country . The Cuban people will continue to fight back against the U.S. policy .
 In practice, this meant the preparation of a new covert operation, not merely by the CIA but by the entire U.S. government . The CIA was preparing to launch a covert operation in Afghanistan .
 The president asked Assistant Special Counsel Richard N Goodwin for his opinion . Goodwin is the president's assistant special counsel for the White House . Goodwin: "The president asked for Goodwin's opinion. He asked him to give it to him"
 Goodwin, who also headed the Interagency Task Force, replied in a memorandum . Goodwin: "The beauty of such an operation over the next few months is that we cannot lose" Goodwin also said that the beauty of the operation was that it would be 'beautiful'
 Kennedy authorized the development of a new program, much more sinister than its predecessors, designed to destroy the Cuban Revolution . Operation Mongoose took shape in November 1961 .
 Documents were prepared laying out the government’s existing action plans and its options against Cuba . As a first step, several documents were prepared .
 Among the scenarios foreseen in this paper was that a general uprising would occur in Cuba as the result of a power struggle and massive reprisals against political opponents of the regime .
 In that situation, a devious plan would be implemented to prepare the ideological and political conditions for military intervention . In that scenario, the plan would prepare the . ideological . conditions for . military intervention would be prepared .
 An invasion of Cuba would be accepted by the U.S. government, the document said . American investments will suffer less in the long run than they would if Castro-Communism continued and spread throughout the hemisphere, it said .
 The Alliance for Progress program will not encounter serious obstacles as a result of this action . The Alliance For Progress program is not likely to encounter serious problems, says spokesman .
 Analyzing the repercussions that such action might have in Latin America, the document stated, "Widespread organized Communist disturbances will occur immediately" The more quickly the Castro regime is crushed the greater the difficulty the Communists will encounter in maintaining existing disturbances and in mounting further disturbances .
 President Kennedy called the incoming CIA director, John A McCone, to inform him that a new program of action against Cuba was being studied . Kennedy called McCone in 1961 to tell him a new plan of action was being considered .
 Edward Lansdale, an expert on guerrilla and antisubversive operations, would be in charge of designing the project . The project would be under the direct supervision of the attorney general .
 The president told McCone that he and his brother Robert wanted the plan to be ready in two weeks . The president wants the plan ready for two weeks, McCone said .
 The Kennedys proposed this committee be able to ""cut across" the command structure of other agencies . So obsessed with the problem of Cuba, the committee was able to 'cut across' the command structures of the U.S.
 McCone opposed this course, explaining the difficulties that it might pose once the operation was under way . McCone: "It might pose ... difficulties that might pose" McCone .
 President Kennedy officially communicated the key decisions made concerning the new operation in a presidential memorandum . Ten days later, on November 30, 1961, President Kennedy made the key decision .
 The memorandum ordered the use of all ""our available assets to... overthrow the communist regime" General Lansdale was chief of operations, with the responsibility to lead the project .
 Kennedy also directed the secretaries of state and defense and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency to appoint "senior officers of their department as personal representatives" to assist the Chief of Operations .
 This document can be considered the first draft of the Cuba Project aimed at overthrowing the revolution . This document was published by the Cuban government in 1959 .
 Lansdale openly spelled out the tasks of different agencies involved in the project . Lansdale said tasks had already been undertaken covertly but had not been put in writing in documents such as this .
 The CIA proposed a proposal that the CIA undertake ""bold new actions"" and that it utilize the ""potential of the underworld" to the Mafia in Cuba . These included a proposal for the CIA to use the "potential" of the "underworld" and the FBI to assist
 This draft of Operation Mongoose was discussed and approved by Group 5412 without changing or amending any of the projected tasks . This draft was approved by the group of 5412 and approved without changing any of its tasks .
 Lansdale and his operational group conducted studies and coordinated with the departments and agencies involved to finalize their project of secret war against Cuba .
 Operation Mongoose envisioned thirty-two tasks to be carried out by departments and agencies participating in the operation . The mission was created by the U.S. State Department of Homeland Security .
 The program included a variety of political, diplomatic, economic, psychological, propaganda, and espionage actions . The program was intended to encourage and support to armed counterrevolutionary bands .
 The operation was aimed at provoking a ""revolt"" of the Cuban people, which once begun would lay the basis for direct military intervention by the U.S. and its Latin American allies . In short, the operation was intended to provoke a "revolt" of the Cuba people
 CNN's John Sutter reports on the CIA, CIA and the White House . The CIA and White House have been involved in this week's CIA operation .
 Also present were Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Assistant Defense Secretary Paul Nitze, and Gen. Gen. John McNamara . Also present: Defense Secretary Bob McNamara and Secretary of State Robert McNamamara .
 Today this group is known as the 40 Committee, and its membership has been expanded to include the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 During 1962 another NSC subcommittee was established to oversee covert operations in Cuba . During 1962, a subcommittee of the NSC was set up to oversee the covert operations .
 Cuba's revolutionary militias and armed forces crushed a U.S.-organized mercenary invasion at the Bay of Pigs . In April 1961, Cuba’s revolutionary militias  crushed a . U.N.-organized . mercenary invasion of Cuba .
 The Cuban government signed a mutual defense pact with the Soviet Union in 1962 . In the spring and summer of that year, Washington was preparing for a full-scale invasion of Cuba .
 In October United States president John Kennedy demanded removal of Soviet nuclear missiles installed on the island . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 Washington imposed a naval blockade of Cuba, stepped up preparations for an armed assault, and placed its armed forces on nuclear alert . The U.S. imposed a blockade of Cuban ports and imposed a nuclear embargo on the island .
 The U.S. government backed off its invasion plans . In face of the mobilization of Cuban workers and farmers to defend their national sovereignty, the United States backed off .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, without consulting Cuba, announced his decision to remove the missiles on October 28 . Following an exchange of communications between Washington and Moscow, Soviet premier announced the decision .