 The shows the site at its maximum readiness on October 27, 1962, according to the U.S. Department of Defense .
 This paper explores the Cuban missile crisis in the context of the evolution of strategic stability in relations between Russia and the U.S. from the 1960s to the present . Unlike other Russian publications on this topic, this paper focuses on the Soviet missile crisis .
 Author pays attention to lessons that can be drawn from the Cuban crisis for the effective management of international crises . Among other things, the author pays attention .
 The author discloses a number of little-known but important details about the behavior of the Soviet Union and the United States, including specific details that he learned through personal communication with individuals who were actively involved in resolving the crisis .
 This paper is intended for use by institutions of higher education, as well as for anyone interested in the political-military and military-strategic aspects of international politics .
 This topic has been the subject of many historical and political-science studies, both in Russia and other countries, but especially in the U.S. This topic of Russia and others has been subject to many studies, including Russia .
 The two superpowers came to the brink of a large-scale nuclear war in October 1962 . In October 1962, North Korea and the Soviet Union faced off nuclear war .
 Harvard professor Graham Allison estimates casualties from such a war would have totaled a hundred million Americans and more than a 100 million Russians . Allison estimates that casualties would have been more than 100 million Americans .
 The Soviet and American people learned about the October 1962 crisis in different ways . The two countries learned about each other during the crisis in 1962 .
 Given the nature of the U.S. political system, information about the crisis became quickly available to the mass media . The crisis is not the first time the crisis has occurred in America .
 Evidence suggests some Americans panicked over the real possibility that a nuclear war would erupt . Evidence suggests that the news caused some Americans to panic over the possibility of nuclear war .
 At the time, my father was an Air Force engineer serving in the central staff of the Soviet Ministry of Defense with the rank of lieutenant colonel . He was a lieutenant colonel in the Soviet Air Force .
 He came home late on one of those days in October 1962, took his field uniform with the shoulder strap and holster for the pistol, and went back to his unit to work a night shift .
 Before leaving, he told his mother that if he didn't come home or call the following day, she should urgently buy train tickets and take her and her younger sister to his parents in a village located in the Arkhangelsk region . Before leaving she told her mother that she should
 My mother was born into the family of a Soviet army officer and worked as an English language teacher at military organizations . Her mother was also a teacher and mother-of-two was a Russian army officer .
 She asked no questions, knowing that her father had no right to answer them . Therefore she asked no . Therefore therefore she asked . She knew that she had no . right to . answer them, knowing . that my father had . no right . to answer questions .
 The armed forces of both parties achieved a high state of combat readiness in the course of the crisis, officials say . Armed forces achieved a state of high combat readiness during the crisis .
 It should be noted that such a measure was justified from a military point of view, and served to apply political pressure on the opponent . It was justified in the military, and applied political pressure to the opponent, according to the author .
 This measure could increase the probability of accidental or unauthorized use of weapons, including nuclear weapons . However, this measure could also increase the risk of accidental use of such weapons, such as nuclear weapons, experts say .
 It is worth noting that the Soviet and American sides had yet to work out a common understanding of what constituted strategic stability . The Soviet and U.S. sides had not yet worked out what constituted stability .
 This important concept did not yet exist, emerging considerably later . Moreover, this important concept was not yet existing, emerging later .
 The military doctrines of both sides emphasized the requirement for victory in a war featuring all our armaments, including nuclear weapons . Both sides insisted victory in the war was possible, including the nuclear arms .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union were actively conducting research and development to create strategic missile defenses . Both the U.S. and Soviet Union was actively developing missile defenses in the 1980s .
 There were great hopes on both sides that an antimissile shield could be created to defend the entire country from a massive nuclear missile attack .
 No comprehensive studies were conducted at the time to discern what catastrophic medical, biological, and ecological consequences a nuclear war would entail . No studies have been conducted to determine what would happen if a war broke out .
 Soviet and American leaders were gradually edging toward a realization of the consequences of a nuclear war . However, even in the absence of such studies, some members of the military establishment were still edging towards a realization .
 It goes without saying that Soviet and American scientists who had sufficient knowledge of these issues understood these consequences . Scientists who had knowledge of the consequences of such things understood the consequences .
 A brigade of Cuban exiles who had been trained and armed by the U.S. landed at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961 . They were trained by the United States and armed with Cuban exilees .
 Tensions around Cuba continued to run high even after the botched CIA operation of April 1961 . Tensions continued to rise after the CIA operation in 1961 .
 Both Havana and Moscow knew that Cuba was the intended target of U.S. naval, air, and marine forces . Cuba was known to be a target of the United States .
 U.S. forces conducted large-scale exercises that were explicitly anti-Cuban in Cuba . American forces conducted exercises in Cuba that were openly anti-Cuba .
 The Soviet leadership had ample reason to worry about the future of the Cuban revolution, the fate of the friendly regime, and of the government that was dedicated to Soviet-style socialism . The Cuban revolution was a major source of concern for the Soviet leadership .
 The fact that such a government existed and that the USSR had acquired a new ally in the Western hemisphere, constituted a bold challenge to Washington . The fact . such a . government exists and that such . a government exists, the fact that . such an . government existed .
 Cuba emerged as one of the most important elements in the two superpowers’ global standoff, which had ideological, political, socioeconomic, and military-strategic dimensions . Despite its small size, Cuba emerged in the global standoff .
 Many Russian experts believe that it was the Berlin issue that played a central role at the time . The Cuban issue was a very important factor in Soviet-American relations .
 In the 1950s and early 1960s, the U.S. reinforced these deployments with the construction of missile bases, some of which were located in Turkey . Some of the missile bases were built in Turkey, some in the 1960s .
 The deployment of mediumand intermediaterange missiles in Cuba was quite justifiable as long as these missiles were deployed in large quantities . Given that the USSR was only beginning to station ICBMs on its territory, the deployment was justifiable .
 At the time, the Soviet Union lagged behind the U.S. in developing technology for the naval deployment of strategic nuclear forces . One should note that at the . time, at the time of the . Soviet Union .
 It was the manner in which the Soviet Union addressed this imbalance that raised questions . The Soviet Union was the only country to have a surplus of Soviet Union members .
 Almost no political-diplomatic preparations were made for the deployment of the Soviet missiles to Cuba, with the exception of communications within the framework of Soviet-Cuban relations . The missiles were deployed in Cuba in the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Both political and military elements of the deployment were implemented in total secrecy . The deployment was followed by a total military and political process .
 Moscow and Havana concluded a secret treaty on the stationing of Soviet armed forces on Cuban territory . The treaty was based on a secret agreement signed by the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 The General Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces as a whole, and its Main Operational Directorate in particular, played a major role in preparing this treaty . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union in 1994 .
 Evidence suggests Khrushchev planned to announce the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in November 1962 . Evidence suggests he planned to do so during his visit to the island .
 Khrushchev had also planned to notify the American side by visiting the United States during his trip to the U.S. during that trip . Khrushchev had planned to also notify the United .
 U.S. air reconnaissance could expose the secret missile launch sites once under construction . We can only wonder why neither the political leaders nor the military commanders of the USSR had foreseen the possibility .
 The answer to this question remains one of the unsolved puzzles of the crisis . The answers to the question remain a mystery, but remain unsolved .
 U.S. nuclear supremacy did not guarantee that a preemptive strike would destroy all of the Soviet nuclear weapons capable of reaching United States territory . However, calculations done by military experts and given to McNamara showed that this was not guaranteed .
 One should also factor in that the Soviet Union had a formidable array of nuclear missiles and aircraft capable of striking the territory of U.S. allies, as well as United States troops .
 All other measures of camouflage used during the deployment of Soviet troops and hardware were quite effective, experts say .
 In accordance with the treaty, a forty-thousand-strong assembly of Soviet forces in Cuba was formed under the command of Colonel General Issa Pliyev . The assembly was formed in accordance with a treaty signed by the Soviet Union .
 A division of the Strategic Missile Forces armed with forty nuclear-armed variants of mediumand intermediate-range R-12 missiles and R-14 missiles (NATO designation SS-5) formed the nucleus of the Soviet presence .
 The range of the R12 missiles was 2,200 km while the R-14 missiles were 4,500 km . The range was the same distance of the missiles used by the U.S. to launch missiles .
 R-14s could carry either a lightweight or heavy warhead with a yield of 2.3 megatons . They could be used to carry a lightweight warhead or a heavy weapon with a megaton .
 Cuba also planned to host IL-28 bombers that were capable of carrying nuclear weapons . Luna tactical missiles with nuclear warheads . Sopka coastal-defense missile systems that were also nuclear armed also planned .
 These units could provide cover for RVSN missile regiments and technical units . The units could be used to provide support for the RVSN missiles .
 They would assist the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba against enemy forces and counterrevolutionary groups in case of an air or sea invasion . They would also assist the Cuban Armed Forces against enemy .
 Luna missiles were to be used in conjunction with motorized infantry regiments . Batteries of Luna missiles would be used to shoot Luna missiles . The missiles were intended to be attached to motorized troops .
 These missiles were operationally subordinated to the commanders of the infantry regiments . These missiles would be operationally subordinate to the commander of the troops . The missiles were used in support of the British Army .
 Their mission was to help destroy enemy forces and strike the U.S. military base at Guantanamo Bay . They were sent to Cuba in the event the Americans attempted an air or sea landing in Cuba .
 The Soviet leadership made continued attempts to convince the U.S. that the USSR was deploying only “defensive weapons” in Cuba . Washington, using data collected in the course of air reconnaissance, could demonstrate that offensive nuclear-missile and aviation systems were being deployed in Cuba
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko asserted that there were only defensive Soviet weapons in Cuba during his visit to Washington on October 18, 1962 . The Soviet foreign minister claimed that only defensive weapons were in Cuba .
 The operation was camouflaged as a strategic exercise that featured deployment of troops and military hardware by sea to various regions of the Soviet Union . The operation featured deployments of troops, military hardware and equipment by sea .
 For the operation to succeed, unprecedented secrecy measures were taken . Unprecedented secrecy measures have been taken .
 Cuba-bound military personnel were issued civilian IDs and ordered to change from uniforms into civilian clothes . The Cuban military was issued with a civilian ID and changed from uniforms to uniforms .
 Even the commander of the Soviet forces in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, had to give up his military uniform and leave his military ID at the General Staff in Cuba .
 He was issued a civilian Soviet passport in the name of Ivan Aleksandrovich Pivnov . He was given a civilian passport instead of a military passport .
 Russian prezidentakh SShA (1962– 1986, gg.) , 63. Posol v Washingtone pri shesti prezidentsakh S.S. (19 1962– 1986)
 General Gribkov wrote that an attack with mediumand intermediate-range missiles on targets in the United States could have been launched by the commander of the RVSN division based in Cuba, only with authorization from Khrushchev, who was commander in chief of the armed forces .
 There is evidence that suggests that the Soviet defense minister issued a follow-up order to Pliyev that said the Luna missiles could be used only with authorization from the Soviet leadership .
 Despite the total superiority of the United States armed forces in the sea and in the air around the Caribbean, the Soviet secrecy and disinformation measures succeeded in concealing the military deployments .
 This makes it all the more surprising that Soviet forces in Cuba did not take adequate measures to conceal the construction of the mediumand intermediate-range missile launch positions . The Cuban government failed to take adequate, large-scale measures to hide the launch positions, it says .
 We should all give them credit for their endurance, courage, and professionalism, which prevented a very dangerous situation from triggering World War III and catastrophic consequences for all . The U.S. military says the situation was a 'very dangerous situation'
 " Lessons for United States Foreign Policy Today" is published in Foreign Affairs 91, no. 14 . The author of the book is also published by Foreign Affairs magazine .
 President Kennedy set up a special body, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . It played an important role in resolving the crisis . The committee played a key role in solving the crisis in Vietnam .
 The channels of communication between the top leaders of the USSR and the U.S. played an enormously important role in the crisis . The channels were important for the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Both sides were extremely fortunate that such a diplomat happened to work in Washington at the time . Both sides are extremely fortunate to have a diplomat working in Washington .
 Robert Kennedy proved to be a skilled negotiator during the Cuban crisis . Diplomacy was beyond his official duties, but he proved a master of diplomacy .
 In addition to the official channels for Soviet-American communication, there were two informal channels . The Soviet-U.S. channels were also used in the Cold War .
 Feklisov worked under the cover of the Soviet’s Washington embassy . He maintained communications with ABC foreign-policy correspondent John Scali, who had close ties to the Kennedy clan, including John F Kennedy .
 It was extremely important to ensure that the information was not distorted when passing through such channels . Messages were communicated completely and rapidly, without intermediaries offering speculations .
 Bolshakov would send messages to Moscow through the GRU station’s channels, but would also sometimes brief Ambassador Dobrynin . Bolshakakov would also send messages from Moscow to the Russian ambassador .
 The establishment of the Bolshakov–Robert Kennedy channel was designated by the Presidium as an “unofficial channel for exchange of information,” according to Andrei Fursenko . The Presidium has designated the channel as an unofficial channel .
 Moscow gave Bolshakov detailed instructions on how to handle the channel . Moscow gave him detailed instructions in the spring 1961 .
 From May 1961 to December 1962, Bolshakov and Robert Kennedy met and called each other a total of thirty-one times . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 . Bolshakakov and Bobby Kennedy called the FBI in May 1961 .
 The United States State Department treated this channel with jealousy and the FBI intensified its surveillance of Bolshakov . Bolshkov was a key figure in Russia's anti-Russian propaganda .
 Bolshakov’s activities violated the entire military chain of command, GRU said . GRU's leadership also had a negative opinion of the channel . The GRU also said the channel violated the GRU’S. command chain .
 Alexander Fursenko, a member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, revealed that Gromyko and Dobrynin managed to sideline Bolshakov from the confidential channel of communication with the United States .
 Robert Kennedy again used the Bolshakov channel on November 9, 1962, after an agreement had been reached on both sides to end the crisis . Robert Kennedy used the channel again in November 1962, when an agreement was reached .
 Kennedy told Bolshakov that Soviet IL-28 bombers should also be removed from Cuba, arguing that a conflict over these aircraft could lead to nullifying of the agreements that had been reached earlier . At that meeting, Kennedy said that these aircraft should be removed .
 Dobrynin and Kennedy's interaction was key to Kennedy's success . Dobrynins' interaction with Kennedy was crucial for Kennedy's assassination .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara was a prominent representative of the American technocrats in upper echelons of the U.S. government .
 He proposed a plan of action that helped buy time during the negotiations with Moscow that was needed in order to reach mutual understanding with the Soviets .
 His proposal was to introduce a naval blockade around Cuba, which the U.S. leadership decided to call a “quarantine,” which would sound less provocative to the international community . The American leadership called it a ‘quarantine’
 The operation was also called a quarantine because experts at the State Department and Department of Justice determined that the Western Hemisphere mutual defense treaty allowed Washington to declare a blockade of Cuba only if the Organization of American States passed a resolution authorizing it .
 The resolution would have had to be authorized by two-thirds of the organization’s members . That resolution would need to be approved by a majority of members of the U.S. Senate .
 From the American point of view, the blockade didn't eliminate the danger that the Soviet missiles already in Cuba would become combat ready . The blockade didn’t eliminate the possibility that Soviet missiles would be combat ready, the U.S. says .
 Allison and Zelikow write that a number of Soviet civilian vessels crossed the line of blockade without any consequences . The quarantine was enforced selectively, they write .
 The adoption of McNamara’s quarantine proposal also made it possible to delay consideration of the plan to launch air strikes against Soviet missile launch positions in Cuba, despite support for this plan among senior U.S. officials .
 McNamara also controlled the actions that the U.S. military, and especially the Navy, was taking to enforce the blockade of Cuba . McNamara controlled the military's actions .
 McNamara played an important role in preventing dangerous confrontations between Soviet cargo ships and U.S. Navy ships enforcing the blockade . McNamara helped prevent confrontations with Soviet ships entering the zone of blockade .
 McNamara even watched the actions of individual U.S. Navy ships to ensure that they acted appropriately and would not cause a further escalation of the conflict .
 Allison and Zelikow, Kvintessentsiya reshenya resheniya, 165.27, was born in Russia . That was certainly a vital 27-year-old . Zelikowski: "That was certainly an important 27"
 The Navy has rich traditions and standard operating procedures for enforcing a naval blockade, but none of them were appropriate for use during an acute nuclear conflict . None of these were appropriate to use during a nuclear conflict, Navy says .
 He is not proposing inaction, but is recommending that decisions to carry out military strikes should not be rushed . He says that decisions should be not rushed .
 The Cuban missile crisis had a sobering impact on both Soviet and American leaders . It was the first time the U.S. had seen the threat of Cuban missile attacks .
 From the political perspective, it was resolved in a mutually acceptable way . The ultimate solution had both public and nonpublic elements, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 One of the consequences of the crisis was the creation of a hotline between Washington and Moscow . The hotline allowed leaders of the U.S. and the Soviet Union to communicate directly in a crisis if needed .
 First, this line makes it possible to minimize distortions in communications with each other . Second, it allows the sides to conduct direct negotiations at the highest level . Third, it provides significant time savings for crisis communications .
 Time is always a critical resource for senior leaders, particularly during crises . Time, as we know, is always always a crucial resource for leaders, especially in crises .
 A line connecting the leaders of Russia and the U.S. exists to this day . It is kept constantly open by the appropriate services in both countries . A line between the two countries is still open .
 We should remember that the Cuban crisis taught us to avoid getting involved in future nuclear standoffs . It also led both sides to reinforce and improve the quality of their strategic intercontinental nuclear weapons .
 Moscow was unable to forward-deploy missile systems capable of striking the U.S. mainland . It became especially important for the Soviet Union to acquire more of these weapons to achieve effective nuclear deterrence .
 The Soviet military viewed U.S. military inspections of the ships that transported Soviet missiles back from Cuba as humiliating . As General Gribkov has written, the Soviet military saw the inspections as humiliating and humiliating .
 Soviet military officials reminiscence about how a promise was made after the crisis to never let it happen again . I have heard high-ranking Soviet military . officials remonstraced about how they were made to never allow it to happen again after the disaster .
 General Gribkov has argued that forty intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba did not have a radical impact on the Soviet-American strategic balance as a whole . General Gribkov has argued that the presence of forty intermediate-range missile missiles in
 Soviet R-12s and R-14s were far less precise than America’s Pershing II intermediate-range ballistic missiles . They were capable of delivering a decapitating strike on the United States government and disrupting military command and control .
 The strategic imbalance favoring the United States reached its apogee during the Cuban crisis . It ended by the time the Soviet Union and U.S. signed the first strategic arms limitation agreement in 1972 .
 McNamara initiated signing of the treaty at a 1967 summit meeting in Glassboro, New Jersey . McNamara was president of the United States .
 The Soviets fought to preserve the ABM treaty as one of the cornerstones of strategic stability . Later, the Soviets fought against the Reagan administration’s decision to pursue the Strategic Defense Initiative .
 George W Bush administration withdrew from the ABM Treaty in 2002, complicating Soviet-American efforts to preserve reliable, unambiguous strategic stability . Regretfully, the George W. Bush administration unilaterally withdrew .
 This continues to have malignant effects on the Soviet-American relationship to this day, particularly on achieving the political and psychological consensus necessary to achieve strategic stability . The Soviet-U.S. relationship continues to be malignant, especially on achieving a political consensus .
 The level of uncertainty present at the time of the Cuban missile crisis has not returned . However the degree of uncertainty at the height of the crisis is not back to the time .
 Much has changed since then in the relationship between our two countries and in the development of our strategic nuclear forces . Much has since been changed since the 1950s, including the creation of the U.S. of a nuclear force .
 The official name of the agreement was Interim Agreement on Certain Measures with Respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms . The agreement was signed in 2007 .