 This article examines how Sagan’s important study affects our understanding of the salience of deterrence and non-proliferation in the post-Cold War order and the prospects of nuclear peace .
 The conclusion contends that Sagan’s advocacy of nuclear arsenal modernisation and active non-proliferation efforts may well increase, rather than diminish, the chances of major nuclear war .
 Sagan: In the long run, we’re all dead. We’ll all die in the long-run, we're all dead . Sagan: The long-term impact of the Cuban missile crisis is not worth paying attention .
 U.S. military personnel and officials made mistakes during the Cuban missile crisis . Scott Sagan's book The Limits of Safety shows these mistakes could have triggered an accidental nuclear detonation .
 The guard shot at the intruder after being warned that Soviet operatives had been deployed in the United States to sabotage the American warning network before a Soviet attack, the guard says .
 This set off an alarm in a nearby Air Force base in Wisconsin, but the alarm erroneously indicated not a security breach but that war may have actually begun .
 The United States had deployed high-altitude U-2 aircraft to collect radioactive samples from Soviet nuclear tests since the late 1950s . The U.S. had deployed U.2 aircraft in the 1950s to collect nuclear material from Soviet tests .
 For some reason, no one had thought to cancel flights during the crisis . No one had planned to cancel the flights during this crisis .
 A U-2 pilot strayed at relatively low altitude over Siberian air space . The pilot was flying over the border with Russia at the time of the incident .
 Soviet fighter jets scrambled to intercept the U-2 but at the last moment held their fire as the spy plane turned back . The spy plane was intercepted by Soviet fighters in the early hours of the day .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were ‘eyeball to eyeball’ in the early hours of this morning . The most alarming accident of the entire crisis occurred early in the morning of this day .
 A U.S. radar facility in Alabama detected a satellite in the vicinity of Cuba just as someone inserted a test tape announcing an imminent Soviet attack . The tape was recorded by someone who inserted it into the tape .
 An official in the radar facility spotted what he thought was a Soviet missile en route to Florida, a simulation tape came on confirming that an attack was in progress . In other words, just as an official thought the missile was going to Florida was spotted, an official said .
 Strategic Air Command in Colorado was informed that an attack was on . Only after it became clear no nuclear detonation had actually happened did officials on the scene realise what went wrong .
 Sagan’s book, the product of several years of research and dogged pursuit of highly classified documentation, has two overarching scholarly purposes . Sagan: The book is the result of several . years of . research . and dogged . pursuit of . highly classified documents .
 One of his goals is to use evidence from the missile crisis to evaluate ‘accident theory’, a branch of organisational theory that is employed regularly by military, industrial and other institutions for which accidents can have catastrophic effects .
 Good social science evaluates theories by subjecting them to tough tests, such as the theory’s predicted outcome is logically unlikely . Social science is about testing theories to show that the theory holds, even in a case where the predicted outcome was logically unlikely, scientists say .
 'normal' accident theory has not been confirmed by an actual accidental nuclear war . We are all here, of course, because ‘normal’ accident theory hasn’t been confirmed .
 Normal theory will always remain speculative on this question, because if it is ever tangibly verified, there may well be no one around to note its success . In a sense, normal theory will still remain speculative, because it is speculative .
 Sagan argues that near-misses of the Cuban crisis represent effective disconfirmations of high reliability theory . Sagan’s argument, however, is that the near misses of Cuban crisis, and other episodes he analyses, represent disconfirms of reliability theory, he says .
 War avoided in the above examples not so much because of the system worked, but because of individual common sense, factors outside the organisation and, most important, simple dumb luck . He maintains, and I would concur, that war was avoided by common sense .
 Sagan points out that had any of the accidents mentioned above led to an initial U.S. or Soviet strike, it likely would have cascaded into a general war . The ‘fog’ created by one nuclear detonation would probably have caused further overreactions and accidents
 In the nuclear age, not only are the stakes of one accident spectacularly high, so is the likelihood that the initial one would, given the unprecedented chaos and uncertainty a nuclear explosion would foment, escalate towards a total nuclear exchange . In the nuke age, the stakes are
 The second point of Sagan’s work is the far more obvious one – to demonstrate that accidental nuclear war was, and is, quite possible . Sagan's work shows that accidental war was quite possible, and could be accidental .
 If the reader of his book accepts that any one of the mistakes mentioned above could have triggered a nuclear war, it follows logically that in a similar crisis today or tomorrow, we might not be so lucky as the world was in October 1962 .
 This article will discuss two of the topics discussed in this article . It will also make some concluding remarks . This article is an attempt to make a point about some of the issues discussed in the article .
 During the Cold War, scholars and military officials in the West engaged in a substantial debate about the durability of nuclear deterrence . Deterrence is not really the issue, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 President Eisenhower installed the massive nuclear triad and warning system in the second half of the 1950s . Many argued that the U.S. was vulnerable to a Soviet first strike .
 Kennedy initially tried to replace MAD with a new military strategy that envisioned limited nuclear war, though this was soon abandoned . When he became President himself in 1961, Kennedy tried a similar strategy .
 Nuclear deterrence worked during the great Cold War crises of 1958–1962 . Political leaders on both sides were clearly quite averse to going to war for fear of nuclear holocaust .
 There are few subjects in Cold War history that are less debated than this . The Cold War is still a hot topic of debate .
 Military establishments on both sides planned for limited nuclear war and deployed weapon systems to that end . Some historians argue that both the U.S. and the USSR were not content with deterrence and the condition of MAD .
 This is an odd interpretation, however, because it elevates military strategies and weapon acquisition over the actual behaviour of political leaders when they faced the possibility of nuclear war . This is a very odd interpretation .
 Historian must distinguish between what lower-level officials plan for and what political decision-makers actually do at the moment of implementation . When evaluating the salience of any foreign policy, the historian must distinguish .
 Sagan’s thesis in The Limits of Safety changes the debate about the possibility of nuclear war among great powers . Sagan's thesis is to say that this is to change the debate . Sagan: "The limits of Safety" is to be changed by Sagan's theory .
 If such a war occurs in the future, it is much less likely to happen because political leaders have become unafraid of nuclear war or unconvinced by the deterrent power of nuclear weapons, and more because of an accident like the Cuban crisis .
 ‘normal’ accident theory over time becomes central to our consideration of great-power nuclear war in the future . It is here where the application of 'normal' accident theory becomes quite central .
 As long as interstate anarchical politics continue, confrontations involving nuclear weapons will recur . In one of these confrontations, despite the wishes of the political leadership on both sides, an accident will trigger not a false alarm or narrowly averted unauthorised strike but an actual nuclear attack
 It is extremely difficult to imagine how a replay of indefinite ‘Cuban’ crises in future international orders would not once see an accident (or miscalculation) spiralling out of control .
 American and Soviet officials established direct lines of communication after 1962 and tightened up command and control procedures . They had no wish to experience that again .
 International Relations theorists – especially neorealists – argue that the contemporary unipolar order is likely to revert to multipolarity in the foreseeable future . This conclusion speaks directly to the argument put forward by some International Relations theorist – especially Neorealists .
 Some theorists have suggested that such balancing is likely to stabilise great-power politics . That a new Cold War between China, the European Union or some other nation and the United States would be more conducive to long-term peace than the unbalanced unipolar order we see today .
 Sagan’s organisational theorising about the Cuban crisis provides us with one of the most powerful rebuttals of this neorealist argument . Sagan's organisation theorising is a powerful rebuttal of the neorealism argument .
 One day there will be a geopolitical confrontation – over Taiwan or Palestine or Kashmir – in which an accident is not contained . Even if future American leaders, along with future Chinese or European or Indian ones, remain deterred by prospect of nuclear war .
 If anarchical great-power politics perpetuate over the long term, nuclear war will happen, sooner or later, writes David Frum .
 In other words, a realist conception of international politics foresees an eternal series of great-power rivalries is also a nuclear war . In this case, a conception that also predicts an eventual nuclear war is that of a series of rivalries that could lead to nuclear war,
 Most realists have not reckoned with balance-of-power inevitability that most realists don't reckon with . That fact constitutes in itself itself a powerful objection to balance of power inevitability .
 The absence of balancing over the past two decades suggests to other IR theorists that the United States is destined to remain the world’s sole superpower over the indefinite future . We are hence unlikely to see the rise of new Cold Wars and geopolitical crises that accompany them .
 Normal accident theory comes logically into play in a unipolar condition as well, as well . Unfortunately, normal accident theory doesn't apply to unipolar patients .
 A key argument that Sagan makes in The Limits of Safety deals with the durability of tight-coupled and complex systems . A key part of the book is the ability to work with complex systems, he says .
 Such systems require ongoing determined authority, particularly in liberal political orders . Such systems need ongoing authority, especially in liberal orders .
 They require committed leaders, highly disciplined employees and a steady flow of generous funding to maintain redundant safety mechanisms and high-tech maintenance . They also need to be highly disciplined and highly disciplined .
 Sagan shows how the SAC spared no expense to achieve this during the Cold War . Sagan: "Sagan shows how it was a waste of time and effort to get this done"
 The problem here is that it may become difficult to sustain the political and institutional will to maintain such a system over the long term, especially in the absence of clear international dangers and crises .
 SAC was able to command elite leaders and ample funding because during the Cold War, the possibility of an accident leading to catastrophe in a major crisis remained quite real, even in the calmer period after 1962 . SAC commanded elite leaders .
 Organisation organisations naturally cut corners, relax rules and lose funding as the urgency of system perfection diminishes over time . But as the pressure of international danger ebbs, organisations cut corners and relax rules .
 SAC authorised some 20 million miles worth of B-52 sorties in the week after the Cuban crisis ended . In the event tensions resumed, without one reported accident .
 It is difficult to picture a similar operation today in response to a setback in Afghanistan or a naval encounter in the South China sea . It is quite difficult to imagine a similar mission today .
 The ensuing cascade would not result in a possible general nuclear war between two superpowers, as in 1962, but in an age of thermonuclear weaponry, this is cold comfort . The ensuing cascading would not lead to a general war between the superpowers .
 If a nuclear war involving one of these nations spiralled out of control, it would be hardly less catastrophic than the one that could have happened 50 years ago .
 Sagan’s organisational analysis of the Cuban missile crisis gives us reason to believe that nuclear war among the major powers could well occur over the foreseeable future .
 The crux of his argument is that the problem is, in the end, apolitical . He says it's apolitical. The problem is apolitical, and that the solution is, for example .
 Accident theory suggests that organisations will eventually permit an error that leads to a nuclear war . The logic of deterrence suggests that any leader, no matter how acute his ideology, dissatisfaction with the international status quo or territorial ambition may be, will want to avoid nuclear war. But accident theory suggests
 IR theory argues that rise of certain kinds of powers to international preponderance is likely to lead to peace . A large swathe of IR theory argue that the rise of some kinds of power to international pre-eminence is likely .
 Sagan’s interesting rejoinder is that even a world full of liberal democracies would run the risk of nuclear war, for the simple reason that all of them use organisations . Sagan: Even a world with liberal democracies, even a liberal democracy would run a risk of a nuclear war .
 If nuclear deterrence works, it should work among all nations, not just the two Cold War superpowers, says Kenneth Waltz . The dangers of proliferation are the dangers of nuclear proliferation, says Waltz.
 The argument was straightforward: when a state acquires a basic retaliatory nuclear arsenal, no rational state will try to conquer it . The author argued that the acquisition of a nuclear bomb by small states would contribute to international stability .
 The security nuclear weapons provide will make states less paranoid about their enemies, reducing one source of tension . It will dissuade these enemies from contemplating attack, reducing another, says Peter Bergen .
 Waltz’s essay delivered a broadside to the non-proliferation regime, a collection of international organisations and institutes dedicated to enforcing the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 . The treaty sought to prevent the spread of the bomb to small states and encourage the
 Non-proliferation had long been seen as an unquestioned good, as debatable a project as a debatable good . For many in the so-called international community, it was seen as a good thing .
 The basic requirements of nuclear deterrence – government competence and rationality – was evident among existing nuclear states but perhaps not so much among some of those seeking a bomb . Lurking behind this international consensus was the widespread conviction that the basic requirements were evident among the existing nuclear powers .
 Leader of any state can be expected to want his regime and society to survive, Waltz says . He says the one sure-fire way to threaten that survival is to use one’s nuclear weapons aggressively . Waltz's rebuttal was that the leader of any nation can be
 A Debate – revised edition in 2003 – remains perhaps the strongest argument for non-proliferation in print in print . A Debate, published in 2003, by John Avlon, is perhaps the best argument in print for the U.S.
 Waltz's application of accident theory to great-power behaviour avoids distinguishing between political regime types or ascribing nuclear aggressiveness to certain types of leaders . His assessment of the dangers of nuclear proliferation to smaller states avoids the ethnocentrism that Waltz identifies in the nonproliferation
 Sagan argues that the problems that nuclear organisations face in large powers are likely to be even worse in small ones . Simply put, Sagan argues, the problems in nuclear organisations are worse than in small nations .
 Small states seeking to acquire a basic arsenal will have to dedicate a large proportion of their resources to the simple act of building a working bomb . North Korea, Iraq in the 1990s or perhaps Iran today may have had to do so in the face of international sanctions .
 This will leave them with much less money to develop a sophisticated command and control system and to build in the redundancies and fail-safe technologies necessary .
 Waltz counters that small regimes will have far fewer bombs to worry about . Small states will be exceptionally motivated to protect their bombs, given how much they have gone through to acquire them .
 Sagan allows these points but insists that simple material realities overcome them . Sagan: "Simple material realities" overcome them. Sagan: 'Material realities' are the key to success .
 A small state will have less money and access to the most modern technologies, experts say . Small states will need to be able to afford to use the technology they need to use .
 It will have a smaller population from which to choose capable military and civilian commanders . The U.S. will have to choose from which it will be able to choose its leaders .
 It will be less familiar with organisational techniques for avoiding accidents and unauthorised use . It will also be unfamiliar with how to use the internet to avoid accidents, unauthorisation use .
 Small nuclear states can find themselves in turbulent regional environments where the danger of infiltration and sabotage is far greater than in large states with well-guarded borders and friendly neighbours . What is more important to small nuclear states is that they are in turbulent regions, such as regional regions .
 That a poor person will be less capable of protecting her possessions than an affluent one is not a castigation of her – it is just a statement of probability . That poor people are less likely to be able to protect their possessions than those of an affluent person .
 Many poorer states that have sought a bomb over the past 20 years do not possess the tradition of clear civil authority over the military that one finds in wealthier and more established states .
 Civilian leaders are wary of antagonising powerful military officials . They may be reluctant to insist upon the unglamorous business of establishing acceptable command and control systems .
 Military officials on the scene may feel less constrained by civilian pressure to remain cool . In a crisis, military officials may not feel constrained to not take matters into their own hands .
 In The Limits of Safety, Sagan stresses how vigorously the Kennedy administration sought to ensure absolute civilian control over the military during the Cuban crisis . Sagan: Officials at the operational level took matters into their own hands on several occasions .
 For a small state in possession of only a handful of bombs, preventive war becomes a far greater risk, as we are witnessing today . For small states with only a few bombs it becomes a much greater risk for preventive war .
 A state may come to believe that it can launch an attack that can take out the entire arsenal of its adversary, experts say . A state could come to think that an attack could take out an entire arsenal, they say .
 A small state government may relax redundancies or delegate launch authorisation powers to military officials on the ground .
 In such conditions, normal accident theory magnifies radically in importance . Normal accident theory is magnified by importance of normal accidents .
 For Waltz, structural incentives push states towards policies that enhance their survival . There is no more vivid such incentive than to stay out of a nuclear war, he says .
 One can essentially ignore what is going on internally in any given nuclear power and assume that they will become war-avoiders . Because states are going to pursue that end irrespective of their political make-up, one can't ignore what's going on in the country .
 A world in which all states had nuclear weapons, then, would be a world of perpetual peace, a kind of utopia . A world of all states with nuclear weapons would be peace, the author says .
 The theory Sagan develops in The Limits of Safety and deploys in his debates with Waltz arrives at precisely the opposite conclusions . Sagan's theory is the opposite conclusion, Waltz says .
 Political outcomes are shaped by the fact that all governments by necessity use organisations . All organisations are vulnerable to accidents, no matter what kind of regime is in charge of them, and – crucially – no kind of international conditions prevail .
 As long as states possess nuclear weapons, one will eventually go off . The more states that possess them, the sooner it will happen, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A world on the brink of catastrophic war would be started by a faulty warning system, drowsy pilot or panicky base commander . A world of all states with nuclear weapons would be a world of catastrophe .
 Sagan’s examination of near-misses during the Cuban missile crisis makes a cogent and persuasive case that nuclear war was more likely than commonly perceived during the last two weeks of October 1962 . The Limits of Safety and contemporary international politics .
 On pure historical grounds, it is an extremely important argument, and one that has remained compelling even as much new documentation has been released over the past two decades .
 The likelihood that an accidental nuclear attack during an international crisis would cascade into general war, makes this problem one of supreme importance . The unprecedented chaos and panic the explosion of any nuclear weapon would create, makes it one of the supreme importance of this problem .
 First, he calls upon the United States to develop more effective systems of command and control over their nuclear arsenals .
 The argument here is essentially technocratic and largely uncontroversial . The argument is essentially the same as that of many others .
 The U.S. should modernise its nuclear organisations, eliminate as much of its offensive and battlefield nuclear weaponry as possible, and rigorously apply normal accident theory in its training of personnel .
 It should systematically study cases of accidents and near-misses of the past in order to troubleshoot existing defects . It should undertake war-game exercises based upon an initial accidental detonation and indoctrinate all civilian and military personnel associated with the nuclear establishment .
 Sagan urges U.S. and international agencies to assist other existing nuclear states with their own command and control techniques . Sagan urges Russia and other former Soviet republics with nuclear weapons on their soil .
 Sagan’s advice could well apply to India, Pakistan and even, if implausibly, North Korea .
 Sagan’s second argument is simply to oppose the spread of nuclear weapons to other states, especially smaller and less technologically advanced ones . Sagan: ‘I’m not concerned about the nuclear weapons’, but about the spread to smaller and technologically advanced states .
 This point is made much more directly in his debates with Waltz than in the 1993 volume, but he does touch on it in the book . It is based quite explicitly on the book’s main thesis and follows logically from its conclusions .
 He is advocating not so much aggressive actions to prevent states eager for a bomb from getting one, but rather to create an environment in which few states are interested in going nuclear . He stresses that in supporting non-proliferation, he is .
 Sagan acknowledges that the pessimistic, almost fatalistic, implications of his foregoing argument would seem to demand more dramatic action, such as the abolition of nuclear weapons entirely . Sagan recognises the limitations of these two recommendations and acknowledges that .
 He concludes that such an objective is simply too utopian to consider seriously . In a short section, however, he iterates the familiar reasons why abolition is unworkable .
 Sagan’s moderate suggestions may make the problem worse rather than better . Nevertheless, to conclude this article, I will try to show how these two objectives are contradictory .
 Sagan contends that as long as some states possess nuclear weapons and they use organisations to manage them, an accidental nuclear war will someday occur . Sagan contends in The Limits of Safety that an accidental war will eventually occur .
 Statistical probability suggests that an accident is sure to happen sometime in the indefinite future . It is possible that some leader of a large nuclear state will come to the conclusion that deterrence is unstable and decide to wage a nuclear war .
 As long as interstate anarchy persists, therefore, an eventual nuclear war is on the cards . The international system of interstate anarchy will continue to be an international war .
 Sagan accepts this but argues that fundamental change is impossible . Sagan accepts that changing the international system is impossible, but says it is impossible to change .
 He supports modernisation of existing arsenals and non-proliferation efforts, especially those that aim to create an international environment in which states eschew the bomb .
 Sagan’s two central policy recommendations, when taken together, are likely to solidify the nuclear status quo . For Sagan, the two policy recommendations will likely be likely to be solidified, he says .
 By modernising their nuclear systems, major nuclear states are signalling to the rest of the world that they intend to deploy thermonuclear weaponry over the indefinite future .
 President Obama’s announcement of an US$85 billion upgrade of the U.S. nuclear arsenal in 2010 and of the similar Russian declaration in early 2012 . This was certainly the message .
 From the point of view of accident theory, the U.S. and Russian decisions make perfect sense . Sagan supported the United States modernisation or at least elements of it .
 In the world of international politics, international politics has different effects . But in the world, they have different effects on the world .
 They may talk about a world without nuclear weapons, as President Obama did in Prague in 2009, but their actions say otherwise . President Obama visited the Czech Republic in 2009 to discuss nuclear weapons .
 Non-Proliferation Treaty originally signed in 1968 stipulated that major nuclear states were obligated to disarm just as other states were to eschew the bomb . This hypocrisy matters, because the treaty stipulated quite clearly, in Article VI, that major states were obliged to disarm . Article VI
 Some 40 years later, none of the major nuclear powers appear anywhere close to disarmament . Some of the world's biggest nuclear powers are still at odds with disarmament.
 Other states, such as Iran, point to the brazen hypocrisy of nations like the U.S. when seeking to justify their nascent projects . The United States has been accused of hypocrisy by Iran .
 It is impossible to see how the existing nuclear powers can make improvements to their command and control organisations without signalling to the rest of the world that their intention is to maintain their arsenals .
 The longer the major nuclear states hold tightly onto their own weapons, the harder it will be for them to persuade smaller states that they should eschew the bomb for the sake of international peace .
 If Sagan wants to create a future in which states have no desire for a bomb, one of the worst things he could advocate is the organisational modernisation of nuclear systems .
 The logic of normal accident theory collides with the logic of international politics, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'Normal accident theory and international politics collide'
 Sagan: There is a deeper problem with his support for practical improvements in nuclear safety . Sagan: "There is a deep problem with Sagan’s support for nuclear safety"
 By advocating modernisation of existing nuclear organisations and supporting non-proliferation policies, he pushes to the fringes the only serious long-term solution to nuclear danger . It is not necessarily of all nuclear weapons, but of the interstate system that permits the possibility of their being used in
 Sagan is correct that the abolition of nuclear weapons is not viable and indeed more dangerous than doing nothing . If states are able to build them again surreptitiously, they will be able to do so again .
 The solution to that is to construct a global entity powerful enough to prevent that from happening, which is to say, a world government . But the solution is to that, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Proliferation optimists say spread of nuclear weapons to more and more states is the least bad of all possible outcomes . We have to hope that the logic of deterrence will work forever, Waltz says .
 Everything that Sagan argues in The Limits of Safety runs counter to Waltz’s reasoning, Waltz says . But everything that Waltz argues in the book is wrong, he says . Waltz: "It's not a science fiction, it's a fantasy. It's a
 In a world of interstate anarchy, a nuclear war will happen in the real world of accidents, panic and organisational breakdown . In a real world, accidents and panic will happen, says author of the book .
 Short-term solutions Sagan proposes to forestall this disaster create a political impasse that is likely to make things worse . And as I have tried to show, the short-term fixes Sagan proposes are likely to worsen the situation .
 The only way to deal with the problems Sagan has so masterfully documented is to create an authority that can do away with them . Over the long term, the only way of dealing with them is to have an authority .
 Sagan makes such an authority much harder to conceive . By calling instead for moderate improvements to the existing order, Sagan makes it harder to imagine .
 It is difficult to pinpoint the exact beginning and end of any historical episode . Key participants did not realise at the time that the crisis was definitely over on 28 October . Leaders of the two sides were reckoning with the possibility of imminent war .
 Mueller argues that nuclear fear played only a small role in the Cold War . He says the threat of nuclear terrorism and proliferation is seriously exaggerated . Mueller also advances an interesting, but untenable, argument .
 On the Soviet side, also see Naftali and Fursenko, Khrushchev’s Cold War . On the other side, Fursko and Naftli are seen as the Cold War.
 Campbell Craig and Sergey Radchenko, The Atomic Bomb and the Origins of the Cold War , chs 5 and 6. See Campbell Craig's book, "The Atomic Bomb" for details .
 In neither article does Sagan suggest that more substantial reform is necessary to achieve an enduring nuclear peace . Sagan says more substantial reforms are needed to achieve lasting peace .