 The CUBAN MISSILE CRISES are the result of the Cold War . The Cold War was the first major conflict between the U.S. and Russia .
 COLD WAR is a state of hostility between nations without physical fighting . Cold war is a war that occurs without physical combat .
 An economic and ideological struggle between the super powers . The United States and the Soviet Union and their allies .
 A spark for the biggest arms race in history with fears of a nuclear war . The spark was a spark for a huge arms race . The nuclear arms race was a precursor to an arms race.
 It is a doctrine that advocates a classless society in which private ownership has been abolish . Means of production belongs to the community .
 Communist countries often one-party state in which industry and agriculture is controlled by the state . Communist countries are often one party state, controlled by state .
 The government controls most aspects of a person’s life and there is strong censorship of what is written and said, says CNN.com.com .
 Capitalism is an economic system based on the private ownership of the means of production and distribution of goods . It is characterized by a free competitive market and motivated by profit . Capitalistism is a system that is based on private ownership .
 It is a government for the people by the people, in the form of their elected representatives . It is the government of the people for the first time .
 Cuban Missile Bay of Pigs Crisis 1962 invasion 1961 . Cuban in Cuba Missile Crisis was the Cuban in Cuban Missile Crisis . 1962 invasion of Cuba was the result of the Cuban missile crisis .
 1962: U.S. spy planes observed weapons in Cuba . 1962: 1962: The crisis unfolded in Cuba and the United States. 1962: Cuba's crisis unfolded .
 One member later recalled that Kennedy was more tense than he had ever seen him . One member of Kennedy's staff recalled that he was 'more tense' than ever .
 Experts say that the Soviets are working non-stop and that the missile sites are nearly ready . Experts said that the Soviet missile sites were nearly ready to launch missiles .
 The USSR was told that the USA would retaliate against any missile launched from Cuba against a Western nation . The USSR told the U.S. would retaliate if it launched a missile from Cuba was launched against a western nation .
 That evening Kennedy went on television to make a live broadcast to the American people . Kennedy made the announcement to the public that night .
 The speech was 'probably the most important speech made in the whole period of the Cold War' It was probably the biggest speech made during that period of Cold War .
 Around 25 Soviet ships were spread across the Atlantic on their way to Cuba . Approximately twenty-five Soviet ships made its way to the island .
 The USSR might withdraw the missiles if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy promised to keep the missiles out of Cuba if he was not invaded .
 A second message then arrived insisting that the USSR would only remove their missiles from Cuba if the USA removed theirs from Turkey . The USSR insisted that the US would remove its missiles from Turkey if the US removed theirs .
 Some of Kennedy's more hard-line advisers urged the president to attack Cuba . Kennedy's advisers urged him to attack the island nation .
 Kennedy had already moved his wife and children to Washington so that they could be in the presidential bunker . Kennedy had moved his family to Washington to stay with him .
 He suggested that the USA should reply to the first message and ignore the second, more aggressive one . He said that the U.S. should ignore the other .
 Khrushchev therefore said that the USA would promise not to invade Cuba but would not make a decision on Turkey until they had talked to their NATO allies . Kennedy's reply to 8 was 'no' and the U.S. would promise to not invade Cuba .
 In return for the Cuban guarantee, America demanded the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba . The U.S. withdrew the missiles in exchange for a Cuban guarantee .
 Privately, the Americans agreed to remove their missiles from Turkey as long as the USSR kept it a secret 5. The U.S. and the USSR agreed to the removal of the missiles as part of the agreement .
 Key question provides the focus of the content in the article . REMEMBER: The key question is key to understanding the content of the story .
 In most cases it will indicate what the source is about, why it was written, who wrote the source, when it took place and where the event took place . It will also indicate what it is about and why it is written, where it is .
 The colours used in the contextualisation answer the questions indicated here . The colour used in this contextualisation is the colour used to explain the questions .
 "We were quite convinced that the Americans would never reconcile themselves to the existence of Castro’s Cuba," the author says . The Cuban government was overthrown by the U.S. in 1961 .
 "The fate of Cuba and the maintenance of Soviet prestige in that part of the world preoccupied me," he says . The fate of the Cuban government preoccupied him .
 We sent a note to the Americans saying that we agree to remove our missiles and bombers on condition that the President gave us the assurance there would be no invasion of Cuba . We agreed to remove missiles on condition of the President giving us the President .
 The two most powerful nations of the world had squared off against each other, each with its finger on the button . From the start of the war, the U.S. and Russia had been at odds .
 USSR laid down conditions to remove missiles planted in Cuba . Explain conditions laid down by USSR to remove them from Cuba . Ex-Soviet state of Cuba says missiles were planted there .
 Explain why the Russian President rides a horse while the Cuban President rode a donkey in the context of the Cold War . Explain why Russia's and Cuba's presidents ride horses in the same way .
 The characteristics of these new missile sites indicate two distinct types of installations . The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere… The characteristics indicate two types of installation .
 All ships bound for Cuba from any nation and port will be turned back . If found to contain offensive weapons, they will turn them back . The Cuban government has vowed to crack down on ships bound to Cuba .
 Hostilities between the Guomindang and CCP eased during WW2, as the Chinese struggled against Japanese occupation . Hostilities eased during the Chinese struggle against the Japanese occupation of Japan . Events leading up to the Communist takeover in 1949 .
 Mao’s plans to industrialise China resulted in mass famine . It was an ambitious plan to turn China into a modern state in a single generation  A massive industrialisation programme was followed with collectivisation of farm land .
 Essay questions require learners to take a stance and to develop a relevant and coherent line of argument . Other historians, believe it continued until his death in 1976 China .
 Introduction should make it clear to the reader what is going to be discussed and the line of argument that will be followed .
 The opening sentence of your first paragraph must make a clear statement or point . Use this article's opening sentence to make a point .
 The next few sentences in your paragraph should explain the point you have just made . Next few sentences should explain your point you've just made.
 The next few sentences should give evidence to substantiate the statement you made above . Next few sentences will give evidence that substantiate your statement .
 This will be the dates, details, facts, figures from reading your textbook and source material . This is a list of facts, facts and figures .
 At the end of your paragraph you must link back to the essay question and/ or forward to the next paragraph . The essay question must be answered by the author .
 Your introduction should contextualise the question and directly address or answer the essay question . The essay question should be answered by an essayist .
 This essay writing frame can be used for structuring any History essay . The frame is designed to help students understand the history of America .
 Use it with the paragraph structuring frame and guidelines for writing introductions and conclusions . Use it as a structure frame for writing your own introductions, conclusions and introductions .
 Learners can adapt this frame to include as many paragraphs as they need . Learners will be able to use the frame to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 This is a belief in sharing economic resources in a traditional African way . African Socialism is based in traditional African ways . It is believed in sharing resources in the traditional way .
 Afro-Marxism is a one party state that exercises centralized policy making . This is ideology adopted by many African countries . Many African countries adopt a one-party state .
 Neo-Colonialism Refers to the continued exploitation of Africa’s resources by the former colonial powers and the develop world . Neo-colonialism refers to the exploitation of African resources .
 Private sector is part of the economy that is not state controlled and is run by individuals in companies for profit . The private sector is the private sector, not the state-run economy .
 Socialism is an economic system based on the idea that the enterprises which produce wealth should be owned by those who work in them . Socialism is a socialist economic system .
 A political system in which all citizens are free to elect representatives to establish a multi-party government . Neo-colonialism ironically Africa with its rich resources enriched foreign powers in one-sided relationship with the former colonial powers .
 Angola’s civil war soon became a proxy in which East and West played out Cold War politics . UNITA: Huambo Huambo FNLA: Ambriz . Angola's civil war was a proxy for the West .
 NP’s policy of destabilization in region to stop spread of communism; to destroy SWAPO bases . NP‘s policy’ of destabilizing in region is to stop spreading of communism .
 The next major South African invasion took place in August 1983 . The Lusaka Accord of 1984 was signed by the South African government in 1984 .
 An extract from I Filatova and A Davidson, The Hidden Thread. SOURCE 2A . An extract of the book is excerpted from the authors' book, "The Hidden Thread"
 At the time of the war in Angola, SWA/Namibia was still legally in international terms under the administration of South Africa; and Namibia has common borders with Angola and South Africa . On the other hand, at the same time, Namibia/SWA/N
 Officially Soviet military advisers and specialists were fulfilling their ‘international duty’ and assisting friendly Angola in building its national army and repulsing external aggression .
 The then Soviet leadership had other motives for sending thousands of Soviet citizens to take part in a bloody civil war . But the then Soviet leaders had other reasons for sending troops to fight .
 To spread their influence into Angola . . . And then into Namibia, illegally occupied by South Africa, and finally into South Africa itself .
 Explain the reference, “global confrontation with the USA” in the context of the Cold War . Explain the references, ‘global confrontation’ with the U.S. in context of Cold War.
 Cartoon shows a large hand knocking ash from a cigar into an ashtray . The cartoon shows the hand knocking the ash from the cigar into the ashtrays . Cartoon is based on a series of popular television shows .
 The role, impact Short and Long and influence of term gains Martin Luther King Jnr. CIVIL SOCIETY PROTEST 1950’s to 1970’‘CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT Reasons and origins of the protest movement .
 Many African American people believed that their lives would change after the World Wars . Protest, forms of protest Campaigns and through civil Demonstrations disobedience .
 Martin Luther King influenced by liberation struggle which Gandhi led against British colonial rule in India . King had been influenced by the liberation struggle in India, Gandhi led .
 First phase of Civil Rights Movement sparked off by Rosa Parks’ arrest in December 1955 . Rosa Parks was arrested in 1955 in Montgomery, Georgia, following her arrest .
 Interracial group of 13 students travelled on two Greyhound buses from Washington DC to the South . These protests became known as ‘Freedom Rides’ The Birmingham Campaign organised an economic boycott of white businesses and a series of protest marches in Alabama .
 President Kennedy was faced with a public outcry about treatment of black people in southern states . Kennedy's response to the outcry: "Don’t be afraid of it. It’s not easy to ask the president for help."
 Explain to what extent the different forms of civil-rights protests that occurred in the U.S. of America made an impact on the struggle for human rights 1960 . Explain to What EXTENT the different . forms of . civil- rights protests . occurred in . the United States of America
 Black nationalists believed that the use of force was justified in order to gain social, political and economic power for African Americans . Black Power was a movement that gained social power in the 1960s to the 1970s .
 Militant Military in attitude; assertive, achieving goals by using force . Militant military in attitude . assertive and assertive .
 Elite is a group of people considered to be superior in a society or organisation . Conspiracy is a plot to do something which is harmful and illegal . Elite is an elite group considered superior in society or organisations .
 Being well informed, open to different views and ideas and free from prejudice or ignorance . Enfranchisement Having the right to vote . Enlightenment Being open and free of prejudice .
 Nationalism The sense of belonging to a nation that people feel because they share similar backgrounds and common culture characteristics . Oppressor A person of authority who dominates and subjugates others Supremacist A person who insists that one group is better than another, especially a group determined by race or gender
 This section includes: Reasons for the movement; • Black Panther; • Roles of Stokely Carmichael and Malcolm X; and • Short-term and long-term gains .
 Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael were leaders of the Black Power Movement . The Civil Rights and Black Power movements were formed in the 1960s .
 The economic situation of most African-Americans had not improved significantly . The Civil Rights Movement had helped achieve the gains of the Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act .
 Inadequate public transport made it difficult for people to take jobs far from their homes . People in need of public transport are often unable to get to their jobs .
 Inadequate health care resulted in a mortality rate for black babies twice as high as that for white babies . Black babies' mortality rate was twice that of white babies, according to the CDC .
 In June 1966, James Meredith undertook a solitary March against Fear to protest against racism . Meredith undertook the March in June 1966 to raise awareness of racism .
 When he was shot, others took up his march, including the Student’s Non-violent Coordinating Committee . The committee took up the march after the shooting .
 Carmichael did not invent the term ‘Black Power’ He now proceeded to popularise it . Carmichael was not inventing the term, but popularising it .
 Malcolm X played a key role in the Black Power Movement . He was a member of the Nation of Islam, a Muslim group which taught that white society was preventing African Americans from empowering themselves . Malcolm X was a dedicated human rights activist .
 Short-term and long-term gains  Greater racial pride and self-confidence among black people . The gains include greater racial pride, self-confidentness among black .
 This included a sense of a unique African-American culture in music, fashion, hairstyles (e.g. the Afro), literature, art and even food . This included music and fashion, fashion and literature .
 There can be no doubt that the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements helped bring about significant progress towards equality and civil rights for AfricanAmericans .
 The most notable was that of 1964 which outlawed discrimination based on racial, ethnic, national, religious and gender identity . The 1964 law was the first to outlaw discrimination in the country .
 The Act of 1968 made it illegal to discriminate in matter related to housing . The Act was passed in 1968 . It was made illegal to deny discrimination in housing matters .
 The Voting Act of 1965 made it illegal to discriminate in voting practice . The act was passed by Congress in 1965 .
 Evidence of this is the growth of the ‘Black is Beautiful’ movement and the rich development of black art and culture in a range of fields . The 'Black is beautiful' movement has seen a rise in black culture in recent years .
 Martin Luther King Jr. Day was created in 1983 as a symbol of King's legacy . King was assassinated in 1968 in Atlanta, Georgia .
 On June 5, 1966, James Meredith was shot in an ambush as he attempted to complete a peaceful march from Memphis, Tennessee, to Jackson, Mississippi .
 Civil rights leaders such as Martin Luther King Jr., Floyd Mcissick of CORE, and Stokely Carmichael of SNCC rushed to Meredith's bed .
 As Carmichael and McKissick walked through Mississippi, they observed that little had changed despite federal legislation .
 Local white townspeople harassed the marchers while the police turned a blind eye or arrested the activists as troublemakers . Local white townsfolk harassed the protesters, but police turned the police on to them .
 Carmichael and McKissick rejected integration as a short-term goal . They were influenced by the words of Malcolm X and rejected integration .
 Carmichael felt that blacks needed to feel a sense of racial pride and self-respect before any meaningful gains could be achieved . Carmichael said that blacks need to feel racial pride before they achieve any real gains .
 He encouraged the strengthening of African American communities without the help of whites . The president encouraged the strength of black communities without help of white people .
 In the 1930s, skin lighteners and hair straighteners were used by fashionable black women in an effort to look whiter .
 By the end of the 1960s, afros and dark skin were desirable . Being proud of the African heritage dictated that afro was desirable .
 Chapters of SNCC and CORE — both integrated organizations — began to reject white membership as Carmichael abandoned peaceful resistance . SNCC chapters began rejecting white membership .
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the NAACP denounced black power as the proper forward path . MLK Jr. said black power was not the proper path for black power . Dr. King Jr.'s death was the result of the civil rights movement .
 But black power was a powerful message in the streets of urban America, where resentment boiled and tempers flared .
 Soon, African American students began to celebrate African American culture boldly and publicly . Soon, students were celebrating black culture .
 Colleges teemed with young blacks wearing traditional African colors and clothes . Colleges were flooded with African-themed clothing .
 Comment on the impact of the slogan, ‘Black is Beautiful’, as described in the source . Comment on how the slogan has been used in the past .
 Name three concerns of black people with regard to the attitude of the police . Name three of the concerns: fear that police will treat black people differently .
 The Ku Klux Klan will organise self-defense units among people among people, Klan says . If the Federal Government will not send troops to your aid, just say the word and we will immediately dispatch some of our brothers there to organise self defense units .
 Malcolm X: “Some Negroes have been walking down a dream street talking about sitting next to white people’s . “This country has been feeding us a thalidomide drug (medication to treat a certain cancer) of integration,” Malcolm X said
 "That when we went to Mississippi, we did not go to sit next to Ross Barnett," she says . "That is when we go to Mississippi. That when we ... did not ... go to sat next to Barnett," he says .
 He was a prominent member of the Dixiecrats, Southern Democrats who supported racial segregation . He was prominent in the South .
 The philosophy of Black Consciousness emerged in South Africa in the 1960s . It urged black people to free themselves from the chains of oppression and for all blacks (including Africans, Coloureds and Indians) to work towards liberation .
 Biko urged Black people to take the responsibility for their own struggle and not rely on white liberals . Biko: Black people must take responsibility for the struggle .
 Black people were to develop a pride in being black, and develop the self-confidence to determine their own future, the author said .
 The Black Consciousness Movement challenged the entire white structure that existed in South Africa by developing alternative structures . The movement challenged the white structure in the South African society .
 The students established the Black People’s Convention . It was an umbrella organisation to co-ordinate all Black Consciousness activities . The convention was established by the students .
 It encouraged self-reliance through the creation of Black Community Programmes . The programme was set up by the Black Community Foundation .
 Black Consciousness played an important role in inspiring the Soweto youth to action in 1976 . It was an important part of the revolution that led to the death of the Sotho youth in 1976.
 Its philosophy filled them with the selfconfidence to address their own harsh circumstances, they say . Its philosophy was filled with self-confidence .
 The South African Student’s Movement was a Black Consciousness organisation of high school students . It was an organisation of black students from high school .
 Identify three different groups whose living conditions Black Consciousness attempts to improve . Identify each other as having different living conditions they want to improve. Identify them as groups that need to improve their living conditions .
 Steve Biko says black South Africans should be responsible for their own struggle . He says it was important for Biko to say that black South Africa is responsible for its struggle . Biko: Black South Africans must take responsibility for their struggle .
 Name TWO organizations that were established by Black Consciousness to encourage black South Africans to accept own responsibility for political change . Name two organizations that are established by black South Africa to support black South African political change. Name two .
 "I became more conscious of the situation of black people in this country and this township," she says . She says she is now more conscious about the situation in the township .
 "I was able to see the contrast (between black and white), the differences and all that raised questions in my mind," she says . "I'm able to go into town," she said .
 Among us, we began to develop a keen sense for wanted to discover more idea about the struggles, not only in this country, but also what was happening in other areas . Among us were those who wanted to find out more about their struggles .
 There was always a list published of books that were banned and for us it meant that whatever the government banned must be something good . It was part of our adventure as youngsters to actually go out to actively look foot these books .
 The 1970s was not long after major student uprising in Europe, France, and the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power Movement in the U.S. The Portuguese defeat in Mozambique and Angola and Angola had a major boost on us .
 Identify two international events that served as an incentive for students to oppose apartheid . Identify the two events that helped students oppose apartheid in South Africa. Identify each other's motivation to oppose the South African government .
 Comment on the usefulness of this source for a historian who do research on the influence of Black Consciousness on students of the 1970s . Comment on whether this is useful for students of that era .
 It was used at Steve Biko's funeral in 1977 to pay tribute to Biko’s contribution to the liberation movement .
 Explain the limitations of using the information in this source to a historian studying the impact of Steve Biko on the freedom struggle . Explain the limited use of this information to a history student .
 Use the sources and your own knowledge to explain what contribution did Steve Biko make to the freedom struggle in South Africa . Write a paragraph of EIGHT lines explaining what contribution Biko made to the South African struggle .
 Steve Biko was one of those whose dedication to freedom, to justice, whose bravery, and whose appalling suffering, surely epitomise the ordeals of merciless oppression and resistance to them . Biko's bravery and appalling suffering epitomised his struggle for freedom .
 It is difficult not not to speculate with enormous regret, on what he would have meant in the creation of the new South Africa in progress today . His clear-mindedness and deep knowledge of the country's and its people's real needs would have contributed to our development .
 Source explains how Black Consciousness influenced Murphy Morobe as a student . Source explains that Morobe was influenced by the teachings of the African-American movement . Source: Morobe's experience was a formative part of his education .
 There was always a list published of books that were banned and for us it meant that whatever the government banned must be something good . It was part of our adventure as youngsters to actually go out to actively look for these books .
 Use historical evidence to assess the role of international resistance against Apartheid . Substantiate your argument with relevant historical evidence . Use this article to support your argument against apartheid .
 Botha's attempts at reforming the system of apartheid were met with intense international resistance . The South African government's attempts to reform the system met with international opposition .
 The South African Republic is the country's first democratic state of democracy . South Africa has been in the midst of a decade of political turmoil . The country is now in the throes of a democratic revolution .
 Referendum Process of putting a legislative decision to the vote of the people for approval or rejection . Constitutional The fundamental political and legal principles according to which a nation is governed . Rolling mass Many people protesting, where there is a feeling that the more people protest, the quicker change will occur
 Armed struggle Was a strategy by both the ANC's and PAC’s military wings (MK and Pogo) to launch covert military operations against the apartheid regime in order to attain democracy . Armed struggle was a strategy .
 Third Force A term used by ANC leaders in the 1990s to refer to an unknown political faction that was accused of being responsible for a surge in political violence in South Africa, especially in KwaZulu-Natal .
 Consensus is an agreement that is reached by various parties regarding key issues . Consensus was reached at CODESA 2. The consensus is a consensus agreement reached by all parties .
 Assassination Involves the deliberate killing of a political figure such as Chris Hani . Assassination is a deliberate killing by a politician such as Hani. Hani was assassinated in 2007 .
 In the context of the above statement, critically discuss how South Africans reached a political settlement between 1990 and 1994 . Criticise South Africa's political settlement in the 1990s .
 The hope and optimism that greeted Nelson Mandela on his release from prison in 1990 soon ended, as the realities of negotiating a new future for South Africa began in earnest . Nelson Mandela was released from prison after serving two life terms in prison .
 Critically discuss this statement in the context of the process of negotiations that occurred in South Africa between 1990 and 1994 . Critically consider this statement as a statement of support for the South African government .
 TRC's work of reparation and rehabilitation has been found inadequate . Negative aspects of TRC have been found to be negative . TRC has been criticised for its lack of rehabilitation and reparation .
 Important at many levels, not least in terms of their potential contribution to processes of reconciliation . Important for many, including the potential for reconciliation .
 Perpetrators were to apply for amnesty in relation to each of their offences, provide a full disclosure, and prove that their actions were politically motivated . The amnesty provisions were to be applied to each offence, providing full disclosure and providing the full disclosure .
 This probably would have taken the form of prosecutions along with reparations, other efforts . This would have included reparations and other efforts, including reparations .
 Volume 2: addresses the commission of gross violations of human rights on all sides of the conflict . Volume 3: Addresses the perspective of the victim, is a companion to Volume 2 . Volume 4: Seeks to address the nature of the society in which gross violations took place . Volume
 The extract below explains why the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established . It explains how the commission was established and how it was set up .
 After the end of apartheid, South Africa witnessed the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 1995 . The commission formed a crucial component of the transition to full and free democratic country .
 The TRC was established by the first democratically elected president Nelson Mandela under the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act of 1995 . Archbishop Desmond Tutu with Dr Alex Boraine were appointed as its chairperson and vice chairperson respectively .
 The Human Rights Violations Committee gathered testimony of politically motivated gross human rights abuses . The Amnesty Committee dispensed amnesty to perpetrators who gave ‘full disclosure’ of atrocities they had committed for political ends . The Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee sought to recommend to the government a policy for
 The aim of the TRC was to combat impunity and recreate a culture of accountability . The aim was to uncover truth about gross human rights violations and assist families of the victims in getting closure .
 Use the source and your own knowledge to explain the conditions for granting amnesty . The conditions for amnesty are described in the above article .
 TRC succeeded in promoting national Unity in South Africa . Tell us what you think the TRC did to promote national Unity .
 Benzien conceded that he could have dropped the pistol, so as to put it out of Kriel's reach . Benzien said he did not do so because he was grappling with a terrorist and he believed that no purpose would be served by dropping the pistol .
 He said that he didn't cock the pistol as it was already cocked when he took it from Kriel . He said he did not cock the gun as it had already been cocked .
 He admitted that he could have subdued Kriel by hitting him on the head with the firearm but could not recall whether the thought of doing so had occurred to him at the time .
 He conceded that it was more likely that at some stage he pointed the firearm at Kriel and that his finger was on the trigger when the shot went off . Kriel was shot dead in the head at the scene of the shooting .
 He maintained that he did not consciously pull the trigger but conceded that the shot went off while the gun was in his hands . He accepted sole responsibility for the death of Kriel .
 Benzien's evidence did not convey a clear picture of the events or the sequence in which they occurred . Benzien said Benzien did not give a clear view of the sequence of events in which occurred .
 It's unclear whether Kriel was shot while he was attempting to get up or when he was standing . It's not at all clear whether he was shot when he got up or not when he stood down .
 Benzien is not clear whether he climbed onto Kriel's back when the shot went off . It's not clear if Benzien climbed onto the back of Kriel when the ball went off, nor is it clear if he climbed on Kriel .
 He said Benzien's version of shooting of Kriel was accidental . Benzien says Benzien shot Kriel in the head, but Benzien said it was an accident . Kriel died of gunshot wounds to the head in 2009 .
 His conduct did not constitute an offence or delict and he was therefore not entitled to amnesty . That being so, his conduct didn't constitute a delict . That was so, he wasn't entitled to an amnesty, and therefore he was not entitled .
 Explain how Benzien’s testimony differed from the conclusion of the Committee . Explain why Benzien testified that Benzien was not a member of the committee .
 Compare Sources A and B Explain how these two sources differ regarding reasons for granting amnesty . Compare Sources B and B . Explain how they differ regarding why they grant amnesty .
 Use a visual clue in the cartoon to indicate the punishment for perpetrators . Use the visual clue to indicate that perpetrators are punished .
 The extract below explains why the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established . SOURCE 2A The extract explains why it was established by the commission .
 The end of the COLD WAR and a new world order 1989 to the present CONTENT . The new world of war begins at the end of World War II . The end to the Cold War is the end to World War One .
 Globalization implies the opening of local and nationalistic perspectives to a broader outlook of an interconnected and interdependent world with free transfer of capital, goods, and services across national frontiers . Globalization means the transfer of money, goods and goods across national borders .
 It does not include unhindered movement of labor and, as suggested by some economists, may hurt smaller or fragile economies if applied indiscriminately . However, some economists say it could hurt smaller economies if used indiscriminately. However, it doesn't include .
 Mandela’s success in avoiding outright civil war in South Africa is key to avoiding outright war . Mandela's policy of reconciliation is to blame for the country's failure to reach a consensus agreement .
 Some believe that South Africa would benefit from a stronger central government . South Africa needs a strong central government such as in the economically successful East Asian countries and Botswana .
 To date this has involved the USA waging war in Iraq, Afghanistan and carrying out the assassination of Osama Bin Laden, al-Qaeda’s leader .
 Climate change, deforestation, global warming, population growth and resource depletion are the key challenges facing the world in the 21st century . Environmental Movements is the focus of environmental activism .
 This movement became famous for its tree planting projects in East Africa . It works with rural communities to help them address their need for essential basic services such as water .
 Greenpeace is an international and non-aligned environmental organisation . Greenpeace is based in the United States and Canada . Greenpeace was founded in 1987 .
 NGO which works to publicise, oppose and eliminate environmental problems facing the world . NGO is based in New York, New York .
 The New Left Review focuses on the impact of Structural Adjustment Policies on developing countries . Mike Davis is the editor of the New left Review newspaper in California .
 It consisted of common guiding principles, such as privatisation, deregulation, and liberalisation . The country's economy was privatised, privatised and liberalised in the 1990s .
 SAP, a ‘one-size-fits-all’ policy imposed in the late 1970s/early 1980s, contains policies that debt burdened Third World countries must follow to qualify for IMF and World Bank loans . SAP was imposed in 1970s and 1980s . SAP
 The loans were meant to help the countries repay their older debts to commercial banks, governments, and the World Bank . These loans were intended to help them repay older debts . The World Bank says the loans are meant to be used to repay the debts .
 The IMF and the World Bank have been the driving force behind the creation of modern slums, says Davis . Davis says the IMF and World Bank created slums in order to create slums .
 Davis explains that although the countryside still contains the majority of the world’s poor, this distinction will pass to urban slums no later than 2035 . Davis says the countryside will no longer be the most poor in the world, but the slums will be no later in 20
 The 1985 Baker Plan was a way to attack the Third World debt crisis . In the first section of ‘Urban Poverty’s Big Bang’, Davis mentions how the plan was designed to attack poverty . Davis mentions that the Baker Plan is a way of attacking poverty in the
 In Abidjan (Capital of Ivory Coast) one of the few tropical African cities with an important manufacturing sector and modern urban services – deindustrialisation, the collapse of construction, and the rapid deterioration in public transit and sanitation took place because of the SAPs regime .
 Explain how the programme instituted by the international institutions affected the ‘Third World’ countries . Explain how it affected the 'Third World' countries .
 In July 2001 the summit of the G8 was organised in Genoa . 0,000 people demonstrated against the summit and the globalisation is represented .
 In the demonstration and in many of the seminars linked to them the impoverishment caused by globalisation was highlighted . The demonstration and seminars highlighted the impact of globalisation .
 In practice they have meant a reduction of public expenditure on healthcare, education infrastructure . In practice it has meant a cut in public spending on healthcare .
 The prices of food and other necessities are rising because of the subsidies of rich countries, replace domestic food production and throw large numbers of people into unemployment . When SAP’s have taken jobs from men, women in impoverished families seek any employment opportunities available in formal and informal sectors, no
 Children have to take care of household duties to a far larger extent than traditionally . While mothers are away, children have to do household chores .
 Often a family cannot survive on the mother’s paltry earnings, and it has to send children to work . The mother's salary is the lowest in the country's history .
 History of Structural Adjustment Programmes on Third World countries . Explain why a historian would consider the information in this source useful when researching the impact of structural adjustment .
 Name one aspect of society at the right which is sucked in by the big vacuum on the left . Name one of the society's social functions at the bottom of the left? Name one thing you want to know about the society at right? Name it. Name it .
 Structural Adjustment Programmes on developing countries . How do these sources support each other regarding the impact of structural adjustment programs? How do they work together? What do they say?
 The source below is that of Mike Davis the editor of the New Left Review newspaper in California, United States focuses on the impact of Structural Adjustment Policies on developing countries .
 Explain to what extent Gorbachev’s policies of Glasnost and Perestroika in the Soviet Union contributed to political changes in South Africa .