 On the United States side, there was a lot of strong and thought-filled debate . On the U.S. side, the debate was strong .
 One of the main aspects was how to retaliate to the Soviet missiles in Cuba, and which options to use . The U.S. responded to the threat of Soviet missiles .
 EX-COMM went back and forth with the ideas and what they should do, and the result wasn’t fully decided until the day Kennedy gave his speech . The result of the decision was not decided until that day .
 In the end, he decided that an airstrike was not the best course of action, partly because of the estimated casualties . The estimated casualties, both military and civilian, were too high .
 Kennedy was not looking to start a nuclear war, but rather to avoid it . As it turned out, casualties would have been much higher than anticipated . Kennedy was looking to avoid a war, and not to start it .
 Another important debate was whether or not to blow off soviet vessels’ rudders if they refused to stop at the blockade line . Another issue was whether to blow them off if they didn't stop at blockade line.
 This was put under much consideration by many people, and Kennedy rejected the idea at first . This is not the first time Kennedy has considered the idea .
 The Americans constantly wondered what to do about the four soviet submarines trailing some of the freighters, and even had to surface one . The Americans also wondered what they would do with the four submarines .
 Another huge problem was what to do if the American reconnaissance planes were shot at by Soviet or Cuban anti-aircraft guns . U.S. reconnaissance planes would have to be able to shoot down if they were hit by Soviet and Cuban aircraft .
 This never happened; if it did, it might have led to nuclear war . Fortunately, this never happened, it never happened .
 The internal Soviet debate was just as thorough as the internal American debate . The internal debate was also thorough and thorough .
 One of the most important and obvious debates was whether or not to put missiles in Cuba in the first place .
 It was a while before the next big debate within the Soviet Union, which took place after Kennedy’s address to the America, took place .
 Khrushchev had to decide whether he should order his ships to turn around or attempt to fight their way through . The blockade was formed in the early 1950s .
 The final debate within the Soviet Union was the one that saved the world from nuclear war . The debate was the last debate in which the world was saved from going to war .
 It was what they should ask of the U.S. if the Soviet Union were to remove their missiles from Cuba . The Soviet Union should also ask the United States to remove its missiles from the country .
 Khrushchev originally had the idea of the Americans signing an agreement to never invade, or help an invasion of Cuba . The agreement was signed by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 After more thought and discussion, he decided to come up with a plan that he found more appealing . But after more thought he came up with the plan, he chose a different approach .
 President Obama asked that the United States remove their missiles from Turkey . Then he asked that they remove them from the country . The U.S. should remove the missiles, he said .
 The United States decided to ignore that idea and only respond to the first . But the U.S. did not respond to that idea .
 There were multiple instances of diplomacy and debate between the Soviets and the Americans . The Soviets and Americans were both involved in the Cold War .
 Adlai Stevenson and Zurin discussed Soviet missiles in Cuba at the U.N. debate at the United Nations in Cuba .
 John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev wrote letters to each other about each other's actions . Another great example is the letters between Kennedy and the Soviet Union leader .
 Diplomatic actions started with the first meeting between Kennedy and Gromyko . Kennedy had proof that Soviet offensive missiles did exist in Cuba, contrary to what Ambassador Dobrynin had said .
 In their second meeting, Kennedy presented the United States offer to never invade Cuba, if the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba . On the Soviet side diplomacy continued when Gromyko contacted Khrushchev .
 A key point in the diplomatic effort was the meeting between Robert Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin . The meeting is considered by many to be the turning point of the crisis in the Soviet Union .
 In essence, diplomatic actions or initiatives were carried out by both sides . Both parties relied on debate, which in turn was both internal and mutual .