 Cuba openly alings it self with the soviet union and their policies . December 9,1960 Cuba openly . openly . alings itself with the .soviet . union and its policies . Cuba openly. alings self .
 April 17,1961 Bay of Pigs, a group of Cuban exiles backed by the U.S. invades Cuba but as resulted in a failure attempt to tiger an anti-Castro rebellion .
 June 3-4,1961 Khrushchev and President Kennedy hold summit talks in vienna regarding the cuban missile installation . The summit took place in Vienna, Austria .
 Senator Kenneth Keating tells the senate that there is evidence of soviet missile installation in Cuba . August 31,1962 Senator Keating told the senate there was evidence of missile installation .
 Andrei Gromyco warns that if U.S. attack on Cuba it means war with the soviet union . The minister of the .soviet foreign warns that . if America . attacked Cuba it would mean war with Russia .
 1962 U-2 spy plane flew over Western Cuba to obtain photographs of missile sites . October 14, 1962, U.2 was flying over Cuba to take photos of missile bases .
 Major Rudolf Anderson was killed by the Cubians in 1962 . The U-2 was shot down over Cuba .
 President Kennedy sends Khrushchev a letter saying that the U.S. will never invade Cuba unless he removes the missiles from Cuba . October 27, 1962, President Kennedy says that the United States will not invade Cuba if the missiles are removed .
 October 28,1962 Khrushchev announced over the radio of moscow that he will take out the missiles of Cuba . October 29, 1962 . October 30, 1962, Khrushchchev announced that he would take out Cuba missiles .
 Fidel Castro was born in 1929, he graduated from law school, with the mission to free Cuba from the U.S. As Batista was on the power, it was hard for Castro to take over the island as Batista put an end to democratic elections . Castro took the hills
 Batiste's government collapsed in 1959 leaving Castro in control of the island . Castro's government was overthrown in 1959 . Castro was in charge of the government until 1959 .
 Cuba knew that the island was in danger after the revolution so Fidel Castro was aware of the United States . Fidel Castro knew that having soviet union by it's side would saved them from a disaster .
 Fidel Castro wanted to exchange sugar by oil with the soviet union . Plan in which the union agree on, this made Cub and union even stronger . Castro and the union agreed on the plan, which made Cub even stronger.
 The United States Had a plant to take Fidel Castro out of the power named bay of pigs, but it didn't work . The U.S. had a plant in place to take Castro from the power .
 JFK JFK, a president who prefer peace instead of war, was assassinated in 1968 . JFK was the first president of the United States to take office in 1945 .
 In October 1962, a U-2 spy plane secretly photographed nuclear in Cuba, that were brought from the soviet union . The plane was photographed in Cuba by the U.S. government .
 President JFK didn't want neither Cuba or the soviet union to know that he already knew . President JFK already knew about Cuba . JFK wanted neither Cuba nor the Soviet Union to know he already did .
 He had severals meetings with he's advisor discussing how to deal with this problem . He had meetings to discuss how to handle the situation .
 They came out with this plan to place a naval blockade, or a ring of ships, around Cuba . The plan was put in place by the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The aim of this plant was to prevent the soviet union from bringing in more military supplies . It was named ""quarantine" and was called a quarantine . The aim was to stop the union bringing in military supplies to Russia .
 JFK demanded the removal of the missiles and the destruction of the sites . President JFK demanded that the missiles be removed and the sites destroyed .
 Nobody was sure how the soviet union would respond to the naval blockade and the U.S. Demands . Nobody was certain how the Soviet Union would respond .
 JFK and Nikita Khrushchev agreed to deal in which soviet union would take out the weapons sites in exchange of the pledge for the U.S. Not to invade Cuba, also the United States Agree to remove it's nuclear missile from Turkey .
 White House, Washington DC and Kremlin created a telephone line known as ""hot line"" between White House and Kremlin in Moscow .
 This way they could send messages to each other easily instead of sending letters which took more time . This way of sending messages instead of taking more time to write them .
 Non-Proliferation Treaty stopped the countries from sharing nuclear information . They also started signing Treating Treatments such as Non-Punishment Treaty .
 The United States had their missiles all around Russia so they were forced to think that U.S. was going to attack . Russia was forced to believe the United States was planning to attack Russia . Russia's President Barack Obama was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 The United States learned that it was their fear which made Russia place their missiles in Cuba . The U.S. learned that the fear of the Cuban people led to the placement of missiles .
 U.S. went through many Crisis but always recover from it and start over again . Crisis an unsuitable situation of an extreme danger . Crisis is a state of crisis, but the United States always recovers from it .
 The U.S. blockade the Soviet ships from entering Cuba . Blockade preventing a way through of something prevents the passage of something .
 Fleming, Fergus. Fleming. Fergus . Fleming. Fleming . Fleming . Fergus Fleming .
 The west was afraid that the Soviet Union wanted to spread communism . The Soviet Union feared that the west wanted to destroy it. The West was afraid of spreading communism, and the west feared it would destroy it .
 Both sides put huge amount of money in making weapons to secure themselves . So both sides put money into making weapons, secure themselves, says CNN.com correspondent .
 It brought the United States and the Soviet Union closer to nuclear war . U.S. and Soviet Union came within an hour of each other's nuclear arms race .
 Since 1898, most of the Cuba's economy was under United States control . Fidel Castro took over in 1959, he upsets the U.S. because his new government took control of all the industry and businesses which were mostly owned by Americans .
 Castro made friend with the Khrushchev , the enemy of the United States . Castro made friends with the Soviet Union . Castro was the leader of Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 To the communist party in Cuba, Castro was irresponsible, furious and stubborn . Castro was responsible for Cuba's downfall . He was irresponsible and furious, but was also stubborn .
 When Castro came in power, his first action was to reduce the rent on the island, and in 1960 he pushed the Cuba to the left forced Cubans to left .
 U.S. U-2 spy planes flew over Cuba and photographed Soviet nuclear missiles being built . The crisis began on October 14, 1962, when U.2 photographed Soviet missiles .
 Cuba was just 93 miles away from Florida's coast so it was obvious that the U.S. felt threatened . The United States felt threatened by Cuba .
 President Kennedy called out executive meeting which included 13 advisers . President Kennedy was president of the United States in 1961 . Kennedy called executive meeting with 13 advisers, including the President of the Republic .
 One was to air strike to destroy missile bases even before they were held out to attack . Another was to destroy the missile bases, even before the attack .
 The second proposal was to invade Cuba; And the third was to put a naval blockade around Cuba to stop Soviet ships from delivering missiles . The last option was to block Soviet ships delivering missiles from Cuba . This was not guaranteed that all the missiles will be destroyed by the air strike .
 Committee members thought Kennedy was being soft and it was a weak response . Some committee members thought that Kennedy was soft . Kennedy's response was a strong response .
 On October 24, United States blocked the soviet ships from entering Cuba and they went back without questioning . U.S. blocked the ships and the ships went back to Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote letter to Kennedy saying he was willing to remove missiles from Cuba if he guaranteed that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . Kennedy said that he would remove the missiles if he was guaranteed the United States would not attack Cuba . Khruschev wrote that he was
 Kennedy ignored the first letter asking to remove the U.S. missiles from turkey . Kennedy ignored that letter and responded to the first one .
 Khrushchev announced that he would be removing missiles from Cuba on October 28, 1962 . Kennedy agreed to not invade Cuba and agreed to remove missiles from the country .
 Thanked to Khrushchev for backing down because it save the world from having another nuclear war . The world was saved from having a nuclear war.
 President Kennedy negotiated/compromised with Soviet for nuclear arm reduction . Following year, President Kennedy negotiated/committed with Soviet for disarmament . President Kennedy also negotiated/negotiated with Soviet .
 They signed Nuclear Test Ban Treaty on July 25, 1963, which ended nuclear tests underwater or in the air . Nuclear tests were banned in the United States and Japan .