 FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover has been dead for almost 50 years . Hoover was the FBI's most prolific director and FBI director in the world . Hoover died in 1966 at age of 50 .
 "Don’t embarrass the Bureau” is very much alive and well in corporate America . But his rule --“Don't embarrass the bureau’s -- is still alive and very well alive .
 Crosswell assembled an army of state troopers, set up roadblocks, and swooped down on the estate . The estate was raided by state troopers and the estate was eventually destroyed .
 More than 60 underworld bosses were arrested and indicted following the raid . Even though, more than 60 people were arrested, the raid was not the first .
 Hoover vigorously denied the existence of a nationwide Mafia . Hoover had vigorously and vocally denied the . existence of the nationwide Mafia.
 Hoover feared his agents would fall prey to the bribes of well-heeled mobsters . Hoover feared that his agents—-long renowned for their incorruptibility—would fall prey . Hoover's agents were renowned for being incorruptible .
 Hoover feared that his allegedly homosexual relationship with his longtime associate director, Clyde Tolson, would be exposed by the Mob . Hoover feared the Mob would expose his alleged relationship with Tolson . Hoover believed the Mob was behind the cover-up .
 Rumors still persist that mobster Meyer Lansky came into possession of a compromising photo of Hoover and Tolson engaged in flagrante delicto . The photo is believed to have been taken by Lansky .
 Hoover knew of ties between moneyed mobsters and their political allies in Congress . Hoover knew about the ties between mobsters, political allies . Hoover also knew of the connections between the FBI and mobsters in Washington .
 Hoover preferred flashy, easily-solved cases to those requiring huge investments of manpower and money . Hoover prefers flashy cases that require huge investments and money to be solved .
 J. Edgar Hoover encouraged agents to use wiretapping and electronic surveillance to make up for lost time and Intelligence . Hoover set up a Top Hoodlum Program and encouraged his agents .
 Hoover imposed restrictions on assignments that could destroy an agent’s professional and personal life . Hoover: “These assignments could destroy the professional and . personal life. Hoover . Hoover . imposed restrictions .
 William E Roemer, Jr., assigned to the FBI’s Chicago field office, was one of the first agents to volunteer for such duty . William E. Roemer Jr. was assigned to Chicago's Chicago office . Roemer: "I am a hero of the day"
 If confronted by police or mobsters, agents were to try to escape without being identified . Agents were to be able to get away from police and mobsters without identifying themselves .
 If caught by police, agents were not to identify themselves as FBI employees . Agents were not allowed to be identified as agents by police .
 If they were arrested by police and the truth emerged about their FBI employment, the Bureau would claim they were “rogue agents” acting on their own . The Bureau would then say they acted as ‘rogues agents’ if they were found guilty .
 Anyone who doubts this need only examine the public scandal involving Applebee's International, Inc. Inc. Applebee’s International has been accused of sexual misconduct .
 Workers would be forced back into the workforce regardless of wages, giving the company the upper hand when it came to compensation . Because workers were no longer supported by government stimulus, desperate workers would return to work .
 Applebee’s struggling to keep up with competitors, Pankratz says . Competitors have been raising wages to attract more workers, he says .
 The memo was posted to an anti-work forum on Reddit and then picked up on social media . It was posted on the site and was picked up by social media after being posted on Reddit .
 At least three managers quit their jobs at a Kansas Applebee’s over the memo .
 Pankratz was desperate for employment when he was fired from his job . He was fired by the government .
 We understand that the franchisee who owns and operates the restaurants in this market has placed the individual on leave . The individual has been placed on leave from the restaurant, the company says .
 Niccolo Machiavelli faced the issues he confronted was how to preserve liberty within a republic . Among the issues was how he dealt with the issue of preserving liberty within the republic . Machavelli was born in 18th century .
 Key to this was mediating the eternal struggle between the wealthy and the poor and middle class . And key to this is mediating a struggle between rich and poor, middle class, he says .
 Machiavelli deeply distrusted the nobility because they stood above the law . He said he deeply disliked the noble because they had no obligation to obey law . Machiavellani's work was published in 17th Century .
 He saw them as a major source of corruption because they could buy influence through patronage, favors or nepotism . He said they could be a source of influence because of patronage .
 Successful political leaders must attain the support of the nobility or the general populace . Successful politicians must attain support of nobility or general populace. Successful leaders must also attain support from the nobility .
 Groups have conflicting interests, but the safest course is to choose the latter . The safest course would be to choose between the two sides .
 He who becomes prince by help of the people has greater difficulty in maintaining his power than he who is raised by the populace . He has more difficulty maintaining power than princely princely .
 He is surrounded by those who think themselves his equals, and thus unable to direct or command as he pleases . He's surrounded by people he thinks himself his equals .
 One who is raised to leadership by popular favor finds himself alone, and has no one, or very few, who are not ready to obey him . It is impossible to satisfy the by fair dealing and without inflicting injury upon others .
 Machiavelli warns that the general populace is more honest than the nobility—i.e., wealthy . Machiavellani: "I'm not a fool, I'm a fool. I'm just a fool," he says .
 The wealthy seek to oppress, while the populace wants to simply avoid oppression . The wealthy want to oppress the poor, but the people want to avoid oppression. The rich and poor want to escape oppression .
 A political leader cannot protect himself against a hostile population, owing to their numbers, but he can against the hostility of the great, as they are but few . A political . leader cannot . protect himself from a hostile . population . But he can . against the . hostility of . the
 The worst that a prince has to expect from a hostile people is to be abandoned, but from hostile nobles he has to fear not only desertion but their active opposition . The worst thing a prince must expect is desertion, not abandonment, but desertion .
 As they are more far seeing and more cunning, they are always in time to save themselves and take sides with the one who they expect will conquer . And as they become more far-seeing and more clever, they always save themselves, they save themselves .
 The prince is not obliged to live always with the same people, but he can easily do without the same nobility, being able to make and unmake them at any time, and improve their position or deprive them of it .
 Political leaders throughout the world, including the United States, have ignored this sage advice . Unfortunately, political leaders in the U.S. have ignored the sage advice, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Tax Justice Network, which campaigns to abolish tax havens, commissioned a study of their effect on the world’s economy in 2012 .
 By 2010, at least $21 to $32 trillion of the world’s private financial wealth had been invested virtually tax-­free through more than 80 offshore secrecy jurisdictions . More than $21 billion of the global private wealth is invested in offshore secrecy .
 Many countries’ public sectors were borrowing themselves into bankruptcy, suffering painful adjustment and low growth, and holding fire sales of public assets . This happened while many of those countries were borrowing itself into bankruptcy .
 The assets of these countries are held by a small number of wealthy individuals while the debts are shouldered by the ordinary people of these nations through their governments . The assets are held in these countries by a few wealthy individuals .
 The offshore industry is protected by pivate bankers, lawyers and accountants . They get paid handsomely to hide their clients’ assets and identities .
 Bank regulators and central banks of most countries allow the world’s top tax havens and banks to hide the origins and ownership of assets under their supervision . Most countries allow tax havens to hide and evade the origins of assets .
 Although multilateral institutions like the IMF and the World Bank are supposedly insulated from politics, they have been compromised by Wall Street . The IMF and World Bank have been highly compromised by the collective interests of Wall Street, writes Peter Bergen .
 Regulatory bodies have never required financial institutions to fully report their cross-­border customer liabilities, deposits, customer assets under management or under custody . Financial institutions have never been required to report cross-border customer liabilities .
 Less than 100,000 people, .001% of the world’s population, now control over 30% of world's financial wealth . Less than 1% of population now control the financial wealth of 30% .
 Global offshore financial wealth of $21 trillion earns a total return of just 3% a year . This unrecorded wealth might have generated tax revenues of $189 billion per year . It is estimated that global offshore wealth would be taxed an average of 30% in the home country .
 Assume evil among men—and most especially among those who possess the greatest concentration of wealth and power . Assume Evil among men, especially those who have the most wealth, power .
 The FBI now regularly monitors those of the Mafia and major terrorist groups . Carefully monitor their activities, the FBI now monitors them .
 Ruthlessly prosecute the treasonous crimes of the rich and powerful . Imposing severe punishment is necessary .
 The Godfather was the highest-grossing film of 1972 . Moviegoers flooded theaters across the nation to make it the highest grossing film ever made .
 Audiences rooted for the Corleones and thrilled whenever a Barzini “soldier’s” bit the concrete . Audiences rooting for Corleone .
 Vito Corleone was shot and wounded at an outdoor market in New Jersey . And they moaned when Vito was wounded in a New Jersey causeway . They moaned about the deaths of Sonny and Vito, Sonny .
 Don Corleone rejects an offer by the Barzini Family to enter the narcotics-trafficking business . One reason is that, early in the film, he rejects the offer .
 They don't mind if people want to gamble, or drink, or even pay for a woman . And they don’t mind if they’re going to gamble or drink .
 The other reason so many viewers identified with the Corleones lay in the brilliant casting of their members .
 Marlon Brando is considered one of the greatest actors of his time . He starred in the film, directed by many of his peers .
 Al Pacino, then an unknown, aroused sympathy as Michael, the Family outsider forced by the shooting of his father to become the Boss of All Bosses . Pacino was an unknown when Pacino became an unknown .
 James Caan is handsome and the defender of his brutalized sister, Connie, against her abusive husband, Carlo Rizzi . The film stars Caan as Connie's sister, who is brutally brutalized .
 John Cazale is riddled with insecurities and not very bright . He won the audiences’ sympathy by his sheer helplessness when compared to his ruthless siblings . John won the audience’s sympathy with his helplessness .
 The Corleones were every bit as greedy and lethal as their Mafia competitors . Yet they were also as ruthless and ruthless as their competitors .
 Former President Donald Trump and most of the Republican party are embroiled in a political struggle . Former President George W. Bush was the president of the United States in 1996 .
 As President, Trump had Derided the value of NATO and traditional global security alliances . Lavishly praised Communist tyrants such as Putin, China’s Xi Jinping and North Korea’�s Kim Jon-Un . Threatened to withhold $400 million in aid to Ukraine unless
 House and Senate Republicans had repeatedly backed him up . They refused to impeach him on February 5, 2020, for his attempted extortion of Zelensky .
 Mike Pence, while refusing to criticize Trump, attacked Putin on Fox News . Former vice president Mike Pence refused to criticize the president's actions . Pence attacked Putin for his comments .
 NATO is flexing its strength in response to Russia’s aggression . NATO, which Trump dismissed as ‘obsolete’, flexes its strength to respond to the aggression of Russia .
 Despite the wishes of isolationists, the U.S. can’t ignore the world’s problems, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The United States can't ignore the problems it faces, he says .
 Face the wrath of voters outraged by Russian barbarities against a helpless Ukraine . Side with their continuing leader, Donald Trump, who has sucked up to Communist dictators .
 Several Republicans, such as Pence, have attacked Putin without mentioning Trump . Several Republicans have done so without mentioning the president .
 Trump’s embrace of Putin has been so fervent for so long that any attack on Putin must be seen as a repudiation of Trump . But Trump's embrace of the Russian leader is so strong that attacks on him must be repudiated of Trump, says Julian Zelizer .
 In 1959, J Edgar Hoover, the longtime director of the FBI, declared war on the Mafia . The FBI declared war against the Mafia in 1959 . Hoover was a longtime FBI director .
 He encouraged his agents to use wiretapping and electronic surveillance to make up for lost time and Intelligence . He set up a Top Hoodlum Program and encouraged agents to wiretap .
 If he had been intercepted by the mobsters, he would have likely been shot . If he'd been intercepted, he'd likely have been shot, police say .
 The agents who took them on were so committed to penetrating the Mob that they willingly accepted Hoover’s dictates . The agents involved in the Mob were so dedicated to penetrating them that they accepted Hoover's dictates .
 In 1986, President Ronald Reagan’s “arms-for-hostages” deal known as Iran-Contra had been exposed . Oliver North was arrested for his role in the Iran-contra scandal in 1986 .
 Reagan had secretly agreed to sell some of America’s most sophisticated missiles to Iran . To retrieve seven Americans taken hostage in Beirut, Lebanon, Reagan agreed to Iran to retrieve them .
 During this operation, several Reagan officials diverted proceeds from the sale of those missiles to fund Reagan’s illegal war against the Sandinistas in Nicaragua . Reagan officials, including North, diverted proceeds to fund the war .
 His superiors were supposed to step forward and protect him, but they didn't, he says . He says they should have done so .
 Roemer speculated that North had been led to believe he would be rescued from criminal prosecution . Roemer speculates that North was led to think he would not be prosecuted .
 In 1989, he was convicted for Accepting an illegal gratuity; Aiding and abetting in the obstruction of a congressional inquiry; and Ordering the destruction of documents via his secretary, Fawn Hall . He was convicted in 1989 for accepting a gratuity illegal .
 To carry out whatever assignments they are given and take the blame if anything goes wrong, they will be responsible for the outcome of those assignments . To carry on with assignments they will take responsibility for anything that goes wrong .
 Wal-Mart escaped criminal charges when it agreed to pay $11 million to end a federal probe into its use of illegal aliens as janitors in 2005 . In March, 2005, the company escaped charges after agreeing to pay an end to the probe .
 Agents raided 60 Wal-Mart stores across 21 states in October, 2003 . Agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement raided 60 stores in 21 states .
 The illegal immigrants had been hired as janitors at Wal-Mart stores . The illegal aliens had been working in Wal-mart stores for years . ICE raid was the result of an ICE raid .
 Many employees worked seven days or nights a week without overtime pay or injury compensation . Many of the employees worked 7 days, nights or nights, without overtime or injury pay .
 Court-authorized wiretaps revealed that Wal-Mart executives knew their subcontractors hired illegal aliens . Officials say they knew subcontractors were hired illegal immigrants . The federal government says the illegal immigrants are illegal in the United States .
 Wal-Mart blamed its subcontractors for hiring illegal aliens . Instead, it said it hadn't been aware of this and blamed subcontractors . The company said it wasn't aware of the problem and said it was a problem .
 Wal-Mart meant to sacrifice its subcontractors for hiring illegal aliens . Just as the FBI planned to have its agents take the fall in “black bag’s cases, Wal-mart meant to sacrificed subcontractors . The company's subcontractors were also to sacrifice their subcontractors
 The Feds had, for once, treated corporate executives like Mafia leaders and had tapped their phones . The government had tapped corporate executives' phones and tapped them .
 Federal law enforcement agencies should treat future corporate executives when their companies are found violating the law . Which holds a lesson for future executives . The federal government should treat the executives responsible for their companies' actions .
 Their phones should be tapped, their boardrooms and bedrooms bugged, and their closest associates should be given immunity to testify against them . Their phone calls and boardrooms should also be tapped and their boardroom and bedrooms should be bugged .
 Widespread illegal and corrupt behavior cannot happen among employees of a major government agency or private corporation unless those at the top have ordered it and are profiting from it . Those at top don’t want to know about it and have taken no steps to prevent or punish it .
 This sounds great—as though the corporation is seeking people who will get along with their colleagues and work to achieve a worthwhile objective . This sounds like it sounds great, as though the company is looking for people who get along and work together .
 At times, that is precisely what is being sought in a potential employee . And, at times, it is often the case of a potential employer .
 Someone willing to commit any crime for the organization—and take the fall for its leaders if anything goes wrong . The organization's leader would be willing to take responsibility for his organization's crimes .
 Crosswell assembled as many troopers as he could find, set up roadblocks, and swooped down on the estate . Crosswell set up a roadblock, set off roadblocks and set off the attack .
 The mobsters panicked, panicked, fled in all directions . Many of them fled into the surrounding woods .
 Hoover had vigorously and vocally denied the existence of a nationwide Mafia . Up to that point, he had vigorously . denied the . existence of the nationwide Mafia. Hoover .
 He carefully kept his own agency well out of the war on organized crime . But he had carefully kept it out of an organized crime war .
 The arrests of more than 60 known members of the underworld deeply embarrassed Hoover . The arrests were in what the news media called “a conclave of crime’s”
 The FBI had virtually nothing in its files on the leading lights of the Mafia, the FBI had opened its files to the Senate Labor Rackets Committee . It was all the more embarrassing that while the FBI opened its voluminous files .
 Heading that committee as chief legal counsel was Robert F Kennedy—a fierce opponent of organized crime . Kennedy was a fierce opponent to organized crime in the 1960s . Heading the committee was Kennedy's attorney general .
 Hoover created the Top Hoodlum Program to identify and target selected Mafiosi across the country . The program was created by Hoover to target and target the Mafiasi in the U.S.
 He would wiretap mobsters’ phones and plant electronic microphones in their meeting places . He would then plant microphones in the meeting places of mobsters' meeting places.
 The information gleamed from these techniques would arm the Bureau with evidence that could be used to strongarm mobsters into “rolling over” on their colleagues in exchange for leniency . The information would be used by the Bureau to arm it with evidence .
 Hoover believed he had authority to install wiretaps because more than one Attorney General had authorized their use . Hoover believed that he had . authority because he believed he was authorized by more than . one attorney general .
 No Attorney General had given permission to install bugs, which involved breaking into the places where they were to be placed . The bugs had to be broken into the place they were placed .
 Before agents could install electronic surveillance devices in Mob hangouts, agents had to request authority for a survey . Agents had to first request authority from the Mob .
 Agents faced not only the threat of arrest by police, but that of death at the hands of the Mob . Agent Romer: 'Man Against the Mob' Agents faced a life-threatening threat from the Mob, including arrest and death .
 Sean Penn is not the first celebrity to “get close to” a gangster . Sean Penn isn't the first person to ‘get close’ to’t gangster.
 Sinatra was often seen in the company of notorious Mafiosi such as Charles “Lucky” Luciano and Willie Moretti . Sinatra set the standard as far back as the 1940s .
 Sam "Mooney" Giancana was the mobster whom Sinatra was most-often linked with . The mobster who Sinatra most often linked with was Sam “Mooney’s”
 Giancana started out as a “wheelman” and enforcer for the teenage “42 Gang,” then joined the Chicago mob in the late 1930s . He was a "wheelman, enforcer" for the teen ‘42 Gang .
 Sinatra often partied with Giancana, both in nightclubs and at his own residence in Palm Springs, California . Sinatra was a close friend of the singer .
 In December, 1959, financier Joseph P Kennedy summoned Sinatra to the family compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts . Sinatra was invited to the Kennedy compound .
 His son, Senator John F Kennedy, was planning to run for President in 1960 . His son was also planning to be a Senator .
 Joseph P Kennedy had done business with the mob as a bootlegger during Prohibition . Kennedy did business with mob as bootlegger during Prohibition. Kennedy had been a bootiegger .
 Mafia wanted to pressure union members into voting for JFK . Now he wanted the Mafia to pressure local union members to vote for the Kennedy campaign . The Mafia was behind the Kennedy Presidential campaign .
 Sinatra went to his friend, Sam Giancana, and asked for the mob’s support . Sinatra asked for his friend's support, and the mob agreed .
 Giancana and other mobsters expected to win an ally in the White House . In return, they expected to get an ally with the president, according to a CNN report .
 Since 1959, Giancana and other “Top Hoodlum’s” mobsters had been under increasingly heavy FBI surveillance . The mobster was one of the top "Hoodlum" mobsters .
 Sinatra had assured him that, under the Kennedy Presidency, it would stop . Sinatra assured him, under a Kennedy Presidency it would be stopped .
 On Election Night, 1960, John F Kennedy carried Illinois—and won the White House by a mere 120,000 votes nationwide . Kennedy carried the state by a narrow margin .
 JFK installed his brother, Robert Francis Kennedy, as Attorney General . Then, to the horror of the Mafia, JFK installed him as attorney general . Kennedy's brother was also Attorney General.
 RFK pursued gangsters as chief counsel for the Senate Rackets Committee . RFK had pursued gangs from 1957 to 1959 . He was RFK's chief counsel in the Senate .
 Convictions against organized crime figures rose 800% during his four years in office . Convictions were 800% higher during his time in office, he says .
 Robert Kennedy sent his Rat Pack pal Peter Lawford to talk with Robert Kennedy about laying off on the Mafia don . Lawford was Kennedy's brother-in-law to the President . He sent Lawford, a Rat Pack friend, to talk to Robert Kennedy .
 FBI agents put a 24-hour “lockstep” surveillance on him, following him even in church and restrooms . FBI agents followed him even into church and restroom .
 Let’s show those ‘hollywood fruitcakes that they can’t get away with it as if nothin’�s happened. Let's show those fuckin’ Hollywood fruitcakes’ that they’re not able to get away from it as
 "Or I could whack out a couple of those other guys, Lawford and that Martin," he says . "I'm going to whack them out," he adds .
 Sean Penn believes the Mexican Government wants to put him at risk by convincing Joaquin "El Chapo Guzman" that Penn played a role in Guzman's capture . Penn says the Mexican government is trying to convince him that Penn had a role .
 Penn says he and actress Kate del Castillo arranged to meet in Mexico . Penn: "We were there together. We were there to meet"
 Almost certainly this happened with the collusion of some prison guards . Prison guards may have been involved in the deaths of some inmates .
 There is evidence that “El Chapo’s” regrets having given an interview to Penn and del Castillo in the Mexican jungle on October 2, 2015 .
 Mr Penn should be called to testify to respond to the stupidities he has said, says Mr Penn . Penn should testify to the stupidity of his comments, says Ms Penn .
 Guzman is responsible for the deaths of thousands of rivals, journalists and police . Guzman has been accused of killing thousands of people in the past .
 An anonymous law enforcement official said Penn could be in danger . Penn's entire family could be at risk, the official said .
 “The problem with dealing with someone like Guzman on this personal basis, where one is perceived as a ‘friend’ or an aide or a business partner of sorts to Chapo, is that you have to be prepared to inherit all his enemies, and there are many
 The notoriety gained by killing someone like Penn or even del Castillo will actually turn these bastards on . It will be the notoriety gained from the murder of Penn or Castillo that will turn them on .
 Levine: "W unwittingly these two may have stepped into a world where there is an actual competition to kill them" Levine has dealt face-to-face with Latin American drug lords . “I believe me it is there,” Levine says .
 Countless men would love to “do El Chapo a favor” by gunning down Penn and/or del Castillo . Penn is a former cartel member .
 The assassin of a “big celebrity” like Penn would receive. The fame—or infamy — would be the fame, or infamy, that the assassin would receive .
 John Lennon died at the hands of such a fame-obsessed, psychotic gunman . John Lennon was killed by a man obsessed with fame . He was shot in the head by a crazed gunman in the 1970s .
 This means that literally anyone could be a potential assassin, making it that much harder to defend against . This is especially true in the United States .
 Deputy United States marshals assume that a witness is the best judge of who poses the greatest danger to him . Deputy U.S. marshals operate the program .
 Witness Security Program protection detail works well when a witness is unknown and testifying against someone who is equally unknown to the public . Witness security program protects the public from the public when testifying against a witness who is unknown .
 Sammy “The Bull” Gravano and John Gotti are both notorious . But when a witness is notorious and a defendant is equally infamous, all bets are off .
 First, they are protected by the United States Marshals Service, which has an excellent track record in protecting their charges . Second, they're expected to assume a low profile, which serves as their best protection .
 Actor Sean Penn is used to being a tough guy—onscreen . Sean Penn stars in a new HBO documentary about his life .
 In 2013, he played Willie Stark, a corrupt, Huey Long-type Southern governor in a remake of All the King’s Men .
 As Cohen, Penn put out contracts on his enemies and even went mano-o-mano in a long-running fistfight with an LAPD detective . Penn also starred in a series of other films, including The Walking Dead .
 As Stark, he clawed his way into power and bullied both his enemies and his supporters . He clawed through the ranks of the Republican Party and the Democratic Party .
 Penn should have paid more attention to the way those movies ended, he says . Perhaps he should have been more careful .
 Sean Penn Mickey Cohen goes to prison, where he is brutally waylaid by other inmates . Sean Penn and Mickey Cohen go to prison . Mickey Cohen was brutally beaten to death by fellow inmates .
 Willie Stark, at the height of his power, is shot by a longtime enemy . Willie Stark was shot by longtime enemy. Willie Stark is a former president of the United States .
 Had he thought about it, he might have decided it could be a mistake to meet with Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman, the notorious Mexican drug lord .
 Penn met with Guzman on October 2, 2015, in an undisclosed location in the Mexican jungle . Penn met Guzman in the jungle in October 2015 .
 He reached out to Mexican actress Kate del Castillo, asking her to meet with him to discuss such a project . So he had reached out .
 Guzman said Penn could come along for the meeting . Guzman referred him to Penn, whom Guzman asked to come along . Penn is a former New York mayor .
 Mexican Marines and Federal Police launched an early-morning raid on a house in Los Mochis, in northern Sinaloa, where Guzman’s drug cartel operated . Three months later, on January 8, 2016, Guzman was killed in a house raid .
 Guzman escaped from prison in July after escaping from a prison in Mexico . The Marines found him at the end of his six-month flight .
 Rolling Stone published Penn’s 10,000-word article a day after Guzman was captured . Penn wrote about the capture of the Mexican drug lord .
 Penn had not been allowed to bring a tape recorder or even take notes with pen and paper . Penn had been told he could not bring a recording device or take notes .
 He had been forced to memorize as much of Guzman’s tale as he could . So he had been . memorizing Guzman's tale .
 He's wearing a casual patterned silk shirt, pressed black pants, and appears remarkably well-groomed and healthy for a man on the run .
 Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman approved the interview with Penn . Penn came under fire for allowing Guzman to approve the article .
 He also drew sharp criticism for having used his status as a movie star to play the part of a reporter .
 Mexico’s Attorney General Arely Gomez credits Penn with having played a vital role in the capture of “El Chapo,” Gomez said .
 Sean Penn is a movie star with a big target on his chest and back, experts say . Sean Penn was a target for Mexican organized crime cartels . Penn is accused of being the target of Mexican drug cartels .
 He argued that del Castillo was likely to be at risk because she was the one in contact with Guzman . Guzman is accused of having a relationship with the Mexican drug lord .
 She was the one whom Guzman’s associates supplied with a Blackberry—the phone they believed most secure . Guzman's associates supplied her with the phone they thought most secure.
 She and Guzman’s flirtatious exchanges led to the meeting with Sean Penn .
 One of the traditional violent methods use is if they can’t get to the target, they’ll go after their family members . If they can't get to a target, the family members will go after them .
 “John and Robert Kennedy knew what they were doing.” “I’m sure they knew what I was doing,” says Robert Kennedy . “The Kennedy’s legacy will be defined by his legacy .
 Oswald, a former Marine, was a committed Marxist, whose hero was Castro . Oswald was a devoted Marxist . Oswald's hero was Fidel Castro .
 The CIA’s ongoing campaign to overthrow and/or assassinate Castro was an open secret throughout the Gulf . The CIA's ongoing effort to overthrow Castro was open secret in the Gulf, according to reports .
 Jack Ruby murdered Oswald because he was distraught over Kennedy’s death . Ruby, a Dallas nightclub owner, murdered Oswald . Ruby was a nightclub owner who was distraught about Kennedy's death .
 American Tabloid, by James Ellroy, is a well worth reading about America’s Cuban obsession during the early 1960s . Another book worth reading is by James Ellis .
 Although a novel, it vividly captures the atmosphere of intrigue, danger and sleaziness that permeated that era in a way that dry, historical documents never can . The novel, which is based in New York City, is available now on Amazon.com .
 That crisis stemmed from the American Right’s twisted obsession with Cuba, an obsession that continues today . The American Right is obsessed with Cuba and its obsession continues today.
 The CIA and FBI concealed the CIA-Mafia assassination plots from the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was assigned to investigate Kennedy’s murder . The plot was concealed from the public .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and President Lyndon B Johnson were involved in the cover-up . Other government officials participated in the scandal .
 This secrecy ignited widespread belief that the President had died at the hands of a government conspiracy . Ironically, this secrecy ignited the widespread—and false—belief that the president had died . The President's death ignited the false belief that he had died in the government's hands .
 Robert Kennedy feared that his relentless pursuit of Castro might have led Castro to “take out” JFK first . JFK feared that he might have been killed by Castro .
 Fearing his own assassination if he continued Kennedy’s efforts to murder Castro, President Johnson ordered the CIA to halt its campaign to overthrow and/or assassinate the Cuban leader . President Johnson was afraid to continue efforts to kill Castro .
 Cuban community continues to exert influence on American politics . Cuban community in Miami, Florida, exerts a blackmailing influence on U.S. politics .
 Right-wing politicians from Richard Nixon to Donald Trump have reaped electoral rewards by catering to the demands of this hate-obsessed voting block . Richard Nixon, Donald Trump and Barack Obama have all benefited from catering to these voters .
 Cuban ex-patriots hope that the U.S. will launch a full-scale military invasion of the island to remove Castro . They say that the United States will do so to remove the Cuban leader .
 They fear to risk their own lives by returning to Cuba to overthrow the Castro regime . Having grown rich and soft in the U.S. they fear to return to Cuba .
 Only President Barack Obama had the political courage to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba—in 2015 . Only President Obama had to make the decision .
 This occurred long after the United States had done so with such former enemies as the Soviet Union, China and Vietnam . The U.S. did so with former enemies such as China and the former Soviet Union .
 President Donald Trump hoping to please anti-Castro voters in Florida, abandoned engagement and increased sanctions against Cuba . President Trump also abandoned engagement with Cuba, increased sanctions .
 Americans should initiate major changes in its foreign policy toward Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Americans should take action to change their foreign policy, he writes .
 America should end the half-century contamination of U.S. politics by those who live only for their hatred of Castro . Cuba must end the 50th century contamination of American politics by Cubans .
 Those who continue to hate Fidel Castro should be left to their own private feud . Those who still hate or love Castro should leave their own feud to their private feuds .
 A feud with the U.S. should settle on their own island, not from the shores of the United States . But that's not a feud they should settle in their own country, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On October 22, 1962, President John F Kennedy went on nationwide TV to announce the discovery of the missiles and his blockade of Cuba .
 On October 26, the U.S. raised the readiness level of SAC forces to DEFCON 2—the step just short of war . The readiness level is the highest level of the military's readiness level .
 For the only time in U.S. history, B-52 bombers were dispersed to various locations and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes’ notice . For the first time in United States history, the only place in history was to disperse the bombers .
 Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52s were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union .
 The Kennedy Administration didn't know that the Russian soldiers guarding the missiles had been armed with tactical nuclear weapons . But the Kennedy Administration–and the American military – didn’t know .
 A full-scale nuclear exchange between the U.S. and the Soviet Union would have almost certainly followed . And a full scale nuclear exchange would have followed . The United States and the USSR would have been at odds for decades .
 At the height of the crisis, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy offered a solution . Attorney General Kennedy offered to solve the problem .
 The first had agreed to remove the missiles, but the second had demanded that the U.S. remove its own missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union . The first and second had agreed that the missiles would be removed, but not removed .
 The administration should ignore the second message, and announce that it had accepted Khrushchev’s offer to remove the missiles .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . Under enormous pressure he agreed to pull the missiles .
 Behind his decision lay a secret promise by the Kennedy administration to remove its obsolete nuclear missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union . The Kennedy administration promised to remove the missiles, which had been in the region .
 On the night the crisis ended, there occurred a prophetic exchange between the two Kennedy brothers . The two brothers exchanged prophetic exchange on the night of the crisis .
 President Kennedy was not finished with Castro . But President Kennedy still wanted to keep him in touch with him .
 The Kennedys planned such an attack on Cuba just one month before the November, 1964 Presidential election . Now the Kennedy's planned such a strike on Cuba would be one month prior to the election .
 On November 22, 1963, while the President rode through Dallas in an open-air automobile, a rifle-wielding assassin opened fire . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Some of those who had waged a secret, lethal war against Fidel Castro for the previous two years didn't come as a surprise . Kennedy’s death—at least in retrospect—didn’t come as surprise .
 Robert Kennedy spent the remaining years of his life agonizing over the possibility that his war against Castro had backfired . Robert Kennedy, in particular, spent the last few years agonizing about the possibility of his war .
 Castro fed up with the CIA’s assassination plots against him, had retaliated with one of his own . That Castro, fed up . with the . CIA's assassination plots, he retaliated . Castro .
 Robert Kennedy’s fears and guilt were compounded by the fact that, while waging war on Castro, he had waged an equally ruthless crusade against organized crime . Robert Kennedy's fears were compounded with the fact he had also waged a war on organized crime in the past .
 He knew that some of the mobsters he had tried to send to prison had played a major role in the CIA’s efforts to “hit” Castro . He knew some of those mobsters had helped the CIA's efforts to "hit" Castro .
 Former reporter, legal investigator and troubleshooter. Chistka.com.com .
 Fighting political and bureaucratic arrogance, incompetence and/or indifference . Fighting political, incompetence, incompetence or indifference .
 Follow Blog via Email . Follow us on Twitter @CNN.com/Heroes .
 When making complaints in writing, carefully review your email or letter before sending it . Follow TIP OF THE WEEK: Read your complaints in the comments below .
 If necessary, note any regulatory agencies that can make life rough for the company or agency if your complaint isn't resolved .
 Do this after you have stated you hope your complaint can be settled amicably and privately within the company . But do this only after you've stated you want your complaint to be settled privately .