 Through his eyes, we gain knowledge about President Kennedy's inner most circle during the whole crisis . We gain knowledge of President Kennedy from his inner circle .
 President John F Kennedy and his advisors had to come up with a plan of action against the Soviets . President Kennedy and advisors came up with an idea of how to deal with the USSR .
 Pentagon advises U.S. military strikes against Cuba which could lead to another massive war . Kennedy is determined to show that he is strong enough to stand up to the threat .
 Kennedy is not eager to follow through because a U.S. invasion could cause the Soviets to retaliate in Europe . However, Kennedy does not want an invasion because it could cause retaliation in Europe.
 Throughout the movie, it seemed like war was unavoidable, but through John F Kennedy’s decisions, it saved the lives of millions of people .
 Although the term “war’s” was in the labeled name, nobody engaged in violence . Nobody engaged into violence during the war .
 Rumors were made that the Soviets had access to weapons of mass destruction which later found out to be true . During that time, rumors were made about the Soviets having access to WMD .
 Armies were set up on both sides, but neither army had launched an attack . Armies had been set up in both sides of the border, but no attack was launched .
 Fear of communism speaking was common in the U.S. Consequently, the fear of communism was common among Americans .
 The Iron Curtain was a result because of the Soviets and the U.S. It was also a result of the Soviet-American relations .
 Robert F Kennedy was a senator and brother to President John F Kennedy . It is told from the perspective of Robert F. Kennedy, who was in charge of the Kennedy administration .
 These 13 days were the time period in which the fate of the world was decided . These thirteen days are the time when the world's fate was decided on .
 The focus of the book was on the decision of both the U.S. and Russia . The focus was on both Russia and the United States .
 The United States learned that the Soviet Union was placing missiles with nuclear weapons in Cuba . The U.S. learned that Russia had placed missiles in Cuba with nuclear arms .
 The movie follows President John F Kennedy and his advisors as they try to come up with a plan of action for how to handle the situation . The movie is based on the story of the Kennedy assassination .
 JFK’s leadership saved the world from having World War III or worse, Nuclear War . It shows how JFK's leadership prevented World War II .
 JFK’s crisis management and decision-making skills was tested during this period . JFK's crisis management skills were tested during the period .
 Jay Asher takes an innovative approach in telling Hannah Baker’s story . Unlike other tragic stories written about suicide and various types of bullying, the author takes a unique approach to telling the story . Hannah Baker committed suicide at the age of 16 in February .
 The book will touch its readers more than they ever thought possible, stimulating their emotions and creating new thoughts and perspectives regarding the issues of suicide and bullying . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 Tracy, the main actress, was a defiant thirteen-year-old in the film . The film is based on Tracy’s life that caused her to be such a defiant 13 year old .
 It is not disscussed or even contemplated by most, yet it is important to everyday life and yes even your health . It is important for everyday life to be aware of your health.
 There are advances in technology today that would have blown your mind not only a century ago but thirty years ago as well as a century as well . Technology today would have blew your mind if you were to have seen it 100 years ago .
 With this technology has come much lower levels of faceto face communtication, causing misconceptions to arise . But with this technology, there are still some misconceptions about face-to-face communication .
 President John F Kennedy and the Soviet Premier Khrushchev were key players in the Kennedy-Krushchev era . The key players were President Kennedy and Soviet Premier .