 56 years ago, the Cuban missile crisis took the world to the brink of nuclear war . Here's what it looked like from sunny Florida beaches from 1962 .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba, seen in reconnaissance photos taken in October 14, 1962 . Use this photo to help people understand today's featured images of Soviet missiles . Share your photos with CNN iReport .
 One of the U.S. Air Force's vaunted U-2 spy planes soared over Cuba on October 14, 1962 .
 Photos taken during high-altitude pass reveal assembly of Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles . The photos were taken during a high-speed pass over the USSR .
 Soviet nuclear weapons were vastly outnumbered by U.S. nuclear weapons in the early 1950s . To that point, the Soviet Union was outnumbered by the United States nuclear weapons .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba could reach most of the U.S. within minutes . President Kennedy was less than a year and half from the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro responded to Kennedy's decision to set up a blockade over Cuban radio and television on October 23, 1962 . Castro responded with a response to the blockade .
 Members of a 14-man detachment of air police exit a Southern Airways plane at the Key West International Airport, October 24, 1962 . Southern Airways was flying from Key West to Key West, Florida .
 The detachment was from Seymour Johnson Air Force Base near Goldsboro, North Carolina . The detachment is part of the Air Force National Guard .
 Members of a 14-man detachment of air police unload from a Southern Airways plane at the Key West International Airport, October 24, 1962 . The air police were stationed in Key West, Florida .
 The detachment is from Seymour Johnson Air Force Base near Goldsboro, North Carolina . The detachment was part of the Air Force National Guard .
 Two women watch U.S. soldiers setting up anti-aircraft missile launchers on a beach in Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962 . Two women watched as U.N. soldiers set up missile launchers in Florida .
 The Army took over a large section of public beach named after U.S. Senator George A Smathers . The beach was named after United States Senator George Smithers .
 U.S. Army soldiers set up anti-aircraft missile launchers on a beach in Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962 .
 Smathers, a dedicated Cold Warrior, served two terms in the United States House of Representatives and three terms in U.S. Senate . He was elected to the Senate in 1964 and 1965 . Smather's Senate seat is currently being held in the Senate .
 Smathers sold his home in Key Biscayne, Florida, to Richard Nixon . He was close to Kennedy, speaking at his wedding rehearsal dinner, and to Nixon .
 U.S. soldier makes adjustments on anti-aircraft missile equipment set up on a public beach at Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962 .
 The Army obtained permission from the City of Key West to use the beach for the installation . The Army has been using the beach in Key West, Florida .
 Anti-aircraft missile equipment was set up on a public beach at Key West, Florida, on Oct. 31, 1962 .
 U.S. troops moved into Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962 . The city was occupied by United States troops who moved into the city .
 U.S. Army troops moved into Key West, Florida, October 26, 1962 . The city was occupied by the United States Army .
 Two soldiers sit in a machine-gun emplacement beside anti-aircraft rocket positions on a beach at Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962 .
 U.S. Army anti-aircraft rockets pointed out over the Florida Straits in full view in Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962 . The rockets were fired from a range in Florida's Key West area .
 U.S. Army anti-aircraft rockets mounted on launchers are in full view over the Florida Straits in Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962 .
 Two soldiers sit in a sandy dugout beside a machine-gun position on a beach at Key West, Florida, October 27, 1962 .
 Key West sightseers have an extra attraction on a tour of the beach facing Havana, November 1, 1962 . Key West was the site of the Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1962 .
 Key West sightseers have an extra attraction on the tour the military installations on the beach facing Havana, November 1, 1962 . The military installations are located in Key West .
 U.S. troops string barbed wire along the Key West shore facing Havana, Cuba, November 1, 1962 .
 Military installations, rushed in during the Cuban missile crisis, line the beach in the background .
 Military installations, rushed here during the Cuban missile crisis, line the beach in the background . Military installations were rushed to the beach during the crisis .
 Soldiers on their first day off-duty since their arrival seem to be enjoying themselves, fish or no fish, in Key West, Florida, November 4, 1962 . Soldiers on the first day of off duty since arriving in the U.S. in Florida .
 Even if the fish are not biting it’s nice to have girls around to talk to. Even if they're not biting, it's nice to be around .
 These soldiers having their first day off-duty since their arrival seem to be enjoying themselves fish or no fish in Key West, Florida, Nov. 1962 .
 Soldiers manning Army installations on the barricaded beach may look relaxed to the tourists driving along the road, but they are on the alert for anything that comes along in Key West, November 5, 1962 . Soldiers on the beach were on the lookout for anything coming along .
 Khrushchev said the Soviet Union would remove the missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union said the missiles would be removed if the United States promised to stop invading Cuba . In a message on October 26, Khrushche said the missile would be
 The next day, he sent another message saying the USSR would remove the missiles if the U.S. removed its missiles in Turkey . The United States did not remove missiles from Turkey .
 Robert Kennedy, the attorney general, delivered the message to the Soviet Embassy, and the crisis drew down on October 28 . Robert Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 The following April, the United States removed its Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. removed the missiles from the country .