 The Academic Journal Ecolloquial 2019 seeks to provide a platform for students to delve into important economic issues . The journal is published by the Department of Economics at Lady Shri Ram College for Women's New Delhi University .
 The aim is to encourage them to read, analyze and present a clear perspective . The aim of this article is to help them understand the world's most complex issues .
 The Annual Journal of the Department of Economics 2019 . Neha Grover: It is with great honour, humility and pleasure that the Editorial Board presents to you the .
 The Ecolloquial 2019 aims to expand horizons and kindle interest in the varied and dynamic fields of economics . The Ecology 2019 will be the first of its kind in the world .
 This year we conducted an opinion article writing competition called Redefining Contours across all years and departments of Lady Shri Ram College to encourage students to vocalize their opinions about the world we live in .
 We have introduced a new section called Redefining Contours which aims to include these opinion pieces shedding light on the brimming and disruptive ideas of today . The section is Redefined Contours .
 Editorial board is delighted that it received an overwhelming response of submissions from the student body . The Editorial Board is delighted with the overwhelming response .
 We hope this journal serves as an inspiration for future research and ignites discussions of contemporary and pertinent issues . We hope that this journal will inspire future research .
 The Annual Journal of the Department of Economics 2019, is a culmination of months of hard work on the authors and the editorial team .
 The Editorial Board is excited to present this year’s journal and hopes that the reader enjoys it as much as we did .
 The Cuban Missile crisis has been a subject of extensive discussion, debate and research in the domain of game theory . The Cuban missile crisis was a major topic of discussion and debate for game theorists .
 A long distance has been traversed from the initial usage of the Chicken game to the evolution of Bram’s theory of moves, the theory of metagames and others . Numerous developments have taken place in this regard .
 This paper critically evaluates the appropriateness of different theories and games in modelling the crisis . This paper criticises the use of games and theories to model the crisis in a game .
 An attempt has been made to reason out the outcome of the conflict by using multiple game theoretic approaches . At the same time, an attempt was made to . use multiple game theory approaches .
 The US and USSR engaged in a tense, thirteen day political and military standoff in October 1962 over the installation of nuclear-armed Soviet missiles in Cuba, only 90 miles from United States shores .
 The missiles were a secret that American U2 spy planes brought to President Kennedy’s notice and then began the weighing of varied American responses to this new threatening finding amidst an already very Cold War .
 Khrushchev's and Kennedy’s fingers a hair-strand away from the trigger buttons to nuclear war and mutually assured destruction of at least the Northern Hemisphere . An aggressive risk-taking foreign policy in which “one of both parties force the interaction between them to the threshold
 In this essay, attempts are made to evaluate and link the existing game theoretic lenses to view the Crisis . This essay attempts to break down different decisions during the thirteen days through games modelled for specific days in the timeline .
 The most commonly discussed game of Chicken is used to model various conflicts in International Relations where the players are on a collision course . This paper starts with the most common chicken game of chicken which is used in international relations .
 We discuss why this model fails to explain the Crisis and how an alternative approach to Brahm’s theory of moves is an improvement to the Chicken . We discuss how Brahm's theory of move is an improved to the chicken .
 A new game models the negotiation between U.S. and USSR on the removal of United States missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . The game is based on the negotiations between the United States and the USSR .
 We highlight the assumptions and limitations of the games and our model . Finally, in our concluding remarks we highlight the limitations of our model.
 The Cuban missile crisis, like any other conflict where the players are on a route to collision, can be modelled as a Chicken game . The Chicken and the Alternative is available in the UK .
 This results in United States victory and thwarting of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was defeated by the U.S.
 This results in a compromise as as both sides decide to cooperate or back down . Both sides decide whether to back down or cooperate . This is a compromise .
 This results in nuclear war or an escalation of conflict as neither side backs down . This means either side of the border will not be able to back down .
 Both players maximise their payoffs in the case of their victory where the other player defects or back down . As is the case in a classic chicken game, both player maximises their payoff .
 The second most preferred outcome is that of compromise and the worst outcome is conflict . The worst outcome of conflict is conflict, and compromise is compromise, the author says .
 A Nash equilibrium is the accepted measure of rational behavior in normal-form games with complete information . But the two Nash equilibria are neither equivalent or interchangeable . They are associated with different payoffs to the players .
 Neither of the two predicted outcomes actually translated into reality which was a situation of compromise which was also the mutual next best outcome for the two players . The two sides will meet again in a friendly on Saturday .
 The chicken game’s inability to predict compromise as an outcome of a conflict situation leads us to discard this model . We need to discard the chicken game, says the author .
 The question is that in the event of naval blockade by US, why does USSR decide to withdraw and not maintain the missiles in Cuba even though maintenance would result in a higher payoff for them . The question that we are faced with is that .
 Even if we were to look at this crisis as a sequential game, we still fail to understand the choice of USSR’s move given that United States is the first mover and the move chosen by them is blockade . U.S. was the first to move, and the
 We refer to Brahm’s Theory of moves and the alternative game of sequential bargaining . To solve this puzzle, we refer to the Theory of Moves .
 Brams assumes that once a game begins either player can move from whatever outcome is the initial state and, if it does, the other can respond, the first can counter-respond, and so on . Brams says that once the game begins, either player moves from the outcome is
 Any outcome from which neither player, looking ahead indefinitely, has an incentive to move to another state of the world, including the initial state, is said to be a non myopic equilibrium . The outcome of the 6 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 is a non-myopic equilibrium,
 Compromise is not the Nash equilibrium but it is the nonmyopic equilibrium . The Nash equilibrium is not Nash equilibrium, but it's non myopic equilibrium, says John Defterios . Compromises are not Nash equities, but they are nonmyopics .
 Theory of moves makes use of intuitive logic to reach nonmyopic equilibrium . The theory of moves uses intuitive logic .
 Soviet ships on their way to Cuba are intercepted by the U.S. Navy . The blockade is followed by a blockade by the United States navy .
 The blockade move opted by the United States carries with it implicit threat of escalation of conflict in case United States decides to up its game by engaging in air strikes . The U.S. has not responded to the threat of air strikes in Syria .
 The Kennedy administration had finally decided on the naval blockade, a Compromise sent a letter to the Kremlin that very day on the 22nd of October . The first in a series of direct and indirect communication between the White House and the Kremlin . Cuba and Turkey in the Cold War .
 Khrushchev sent a message indicating that any proposed deal for a resolution must include the removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey . After a series of exchanges and a stalemate later, on 27th of October, on . The United States Jupiter missiles were removed .
 USSR’s two possible moves remain to withdraw or maintain the installation of missiles . This dilemma again can be modelled by a Chicken game similar to the one discussed above .
 There exist two Nash equilibrium, one where USA wins as USSR withdraws missiles but the Jupiters remain . The other where USSR wins and USA withdraws Jupits but the Cuban missiles remain .
 The middle ground lies in Compromise once again where USA pursues Remove and USSR pursues Withdraw . The middle-ground is the middle ground .
 If neither budge then the two enter into a Mexican Standoff . No party achieves victories and no victories and strategic tension is maintained with a still unresolved crisis .
 Kennedy ignored the second message and instead sent Khrushchev a message listing the proposed steps for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under supervision of the United States . In reality, the message was a proposal to remove Soviet missiles .
 The United States was planning to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey anyway . However, later it was revealed that the U.S. would remove the missiles anyway and it would do so .
 Khrushchev issued a public statement that the missiles in Cuba would be dismantled . In the end of October 1962, the naval blockade was lifted as well . In November, the Cuban blockade was also lifted .
 Even 7 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 though the Jupiters were removed they were not removed as an immediate response to Kremlin’s demands but rather as a secret, delayed chain of actions in April 1963 . Thus, in our game, this time it was not a Comp
 The U.S. was able to get USSR to remove its missiles from Cuba without conceding to the Soviet demand that the United States remove missiles from Turkey . The United States prevailed over USSR in the sense that it was successful in removing Cuba missiles .
 In this paper, we rely on the intuition behind Nigel Howard’s Theory of Metagames to explain the same . We rely on Nigel Howard's theory of metagames .
 Players send signals to one another before the game begins . The logic behind metagames is that players send signals before the start of the game .
 The reason USA gets an upper hand in this scenario is because they make the first move and demand the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba by conducting a blockade . There is a delayed response from Soviet Union in demanding the removal from Turkey .
 This delay acts as a signal of Soviet weakness and lack of seriousness, urgency with respect to their demands in this game . This delay is a sign of weakness, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin has been accused of a lack of urgency in Russia .
 This is exploited by the United States to turn the tables in its favour, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 These games don’t fully capture the dynamic nature of the crisis . They don't take into account any secret channels of information that may have existed with the players . They may have allowed them to preempt the moves and strategies of their enemy .
 One of the starkest deficiencies of these games is their inability to incorporate the different perceptions with which the two sides view the same game . Also, one of the main deficiencies of the games is that they are not able to incorporate different perceptions of the two teams playing .
 Game Theory and Beyond, Peter G Bennet, Wiley on behalf of The International Studies Association, 1995 . Peter Bennet's book is published by The International Study Association .
 India was the first country in the world to have launched National Program for Family Planning in 1952 .
 "With time, this program has transformed in terms of its policies and implementation," says program . With time, program's policies have been transformed, says program director .
 Currently, the goal is to stabilize population growth, promotion of reproductive health and reduction of maternal, infant and child mortality and morbidity . The goal of the project is to stabilise population growth .
 To stabilize population growth, use of contraceptives is one of the key factors . Use of contraceptives has been key to stabilizing population growth .
 There are a number of factors that can affect its usage, ranging from number of years of education to poverty . There are also factors that affect the usage of the device .
 The 29 states and 7 Union territories of India vary significantly in these factors . These differences are also expected to be reflected in the states’ contraceptive use .
 This paper aims to study the effect these factors have on the use of modern methods of contraception and the efficiency of government family planning schemes . It also aims to examine the effectiveness of government schemes .
 Two econometric models have been constructed to understand these socio-economic factors and efficiency of the services . The models are based on data from a range of econometrics and econograms .
 In Model 1 our dependent variable is Use of Modern methods of Contraception in each state and union territory . The explanatory variables are Poverty Rate, Total Fertility Rate, Fertility rate, Health worker ever talked to female non-users of family planning, Median age at first marriage and
 National Program for Family Planning, Contraceptive Usage, Population, Reproductive Health, Modern Methods, Traditional Methods . National Program of Family Planning . National Family Planning: Contraception usage, Population . Reproductive health: Modern Methods .
 In the early 1950s, India was the first country in the world to launch the National Program for Family Planning . The main objective was to slow down population growth .
 Mass media campaign has played an important role in promoting and acceptability of contraception . Mass media has played a key role in the promotion and acceptance of contraception, says Dr. Anthony Bourdain .
 National Family Planning Program was renamed as National Family Welfare Program . After the Emergency period, the program was renamed after the National Family welfare Program . The program is now known as the Family Welfare program .
 A number of spacing methods are used, including IUCD, Injectable contraceptive MPA, combined oral contraceptive, Centchroman pill, ProgesteroneOnly Pill, Condoms, Emergency Contraceptive pills, and conventional vasectomy .
 Injectable contraceptive MPA and non-hormonal weekly Centchroman pill, Chhaya, are said to be easy to use and can be discontinued .
 Contraceptive use is a vital element of quality of care and provision of family planning services in India . Contraception use is an important part of the quality of health care and family planning in India.
 The program also tries to cover the socio-economic aspects of family planning, which includes, improving the quality of life, health and family planning . Family planning is a family-planning program that aims to improve the quality and health of life .
 The history of the National Family Welfare Program teaches us that we can do a lot by trying and creating the conditions for demographic transition . But most of the demographic variables are majorly matters of economic, social and cultural changes, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 The factors such as total fertility rate, women talking to a health worker regarding the family planning methods (indicating the level of awareness), and women with at least 10 years of schooling, poverty rate and so on, reflect these economic, social and cultural changes .
 Family Planning 2020 is a global partnership committed to empowering women and girls by investing in rights-based family planning . Family planning 2020 is based on the values of family planning in the United States .
 India, being one of the prime protagonists in this global platform, has extended its efforts to achieve the set goals . India is one of India's key players in the global platform .
 The focus has been on reducing the unmet needs by improved voluntary family planning services, supplies and information, expanding the basket of choices, increasing the access to contraceptives through community health workers, addressing equity in access to quality services for the poorest .
 One of the main objectives of the family planning and welfare program is to spread the knowledge of different planning methods, increase awareness, and to develop among the people an attitude in the favor of using contraceptives .
 Since the inception of the program, several knowledge, attitude and practice of family planning studies have been conducted .
 In the late 1960s, scales were developed and utilized in KAP surveys . Sample size increased and studies were done concerning the correlation of knowledge, attitude and practice of family planning .
 Knowledge and practice of family planning is strongly related to higher level of education, to labor force participation, to fertility . Knowledge is strongly linked to higher levels of education .
 Traditional methods of family planning like rhythm and withdrawal may have health repercussions on both partners . The traditional methods of birth control may be harmful to both partners, experts say .
 The contraceptive prevalence rates in many states are low because of their dependence on government facilities, which are insufficient to meet the needs of the people . Many states are dependent upon government facilities which are inadequate to meet their needs .
 The private sector can be one of the partners in strengthening the status of contraceptive use in the Indian states . Private sector must be partners to strengthen status of contraception use in Indian states, say experts .
 The TMA has been implemented in Nicaragua, Vietnam, Eastern Europe and Central Asia to create a sustainable model to make contraceptives available to even the poorest citizens . TMA is a model that has been successful in Nicaragua and Vietnam .
 This approach directs people who can pay for the service to the private sector . This approach frees up public resources for those most in need . It also increases family planning access to underserved populations .
 Contraceptive use helps couples and individuals realize their basic right to decide freely and responsibly if, when and how many children to have . Contraception use helps people realize their right to have children .
 Family Planning 2020 focuses on 69 of the world’s poorest countries . Every Woman Every Child has a broader strategy of accelerating improvements in health of all women, children and adolescents by 2030 .
 The development agenda includes two targets relevant for family planning under broader goals on health, gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls . The new development agenda .
 The data used for the model is secondary data, for each Indian State and Union Territory, collected from the National Family Health Survey for 2015-16 .
 MODEL 1 shows the socio-economic factors affecting the use of modern methods of contraception . Model 1 shows a range of social factors affecting contraceptive use in the UK .
 Using any modern method of Contraception : Our dependent variable is the percentage use of modern methods of contraception in all the states and union territories of India . The percentage of people using modern contraception in India is dependent on the percentage of women using modern methods .
 Different methods like female and male sterilization, injectables, condoms, implants and implants, contraceptive pills, IUDs, emergency contraception and so on, are included in the same .
 The average number of children a woman would have by the end of childbearing years if she bore children at the current age-specific fertility rates . The average fertility rate is based on the age-at-full fertility rate .
 Age specific fertility rates are calculated for three years before the survey, based on detailed birth histories provided by women . The age specific fertility rate is based on the birth histories of women .
 Model 2 shows the effectiveness of government family planning services in promoting the use of modern methods of contraception . Model 2 is based on a study of family planning in the UK .
 13 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 injectables, condoms, implants, implants and contraceptive pills, IUDs, emergency contraception and so on, are included in the same . Different methods like female and male sterilization, condoms and implants, contraceptive pills and emergency contraception are included .
 Proportion of women who are not pregnant and not postpartum amenorrhea, are considered fecund, want to postpone their next birth for 2 or more years or stop childbearing altogether . Women who are fecund are not using a contraceptive method, or have a mistimed
 The B2 coefficient was -3.61, inferring that for every one unit increase in the median age of marriage there is a corresponding 3.61 percentage point decrease in the use of modern method of contraception .
 The B3 coefficient for Poverty Rate was -0.54 that is for every one percentage point increase in poverty, the contraceptive use decreases by 0.54 percentage points . For every one per cent of poverty increase in contraceptive use, the use of contraception decreases .
 The B4 coefficient was -0.21, indicating that for every one percentage point increase in Women with 10 or more years of schooling, there is 0.21 percentage point decrease in the use of modern method of contraception . Women with more than 10 years of education are more likely to
 For every one percentage point increase in awareness, contraceptive use increases by 0.77 percentage points . The B5 coefficient for Awareness was 0 .77 that is for every . one percentage . point increase of awareness, the contraceptive use is increased .
 The B6 coefficient for Total Fertility Rate was -10.10, that is for every one percentage point increase in TFR, contraceptive use decreases by 10.10 percentage points .
 The respective t-values for the variables are -1.857, -2.372, -1 .219, 2.850 and 2.795 all of which are significant at 95% level of significance .
 The B2 coefficient was -0.022, inferring that for every one percentage point increase in the informed choices, there is a corresponding 0.022 percentage point decrease in the use of modern method of contraception .
 The B3 coefficient for Total Unmet Need was -0.82 that for every percentage point increase in total unmet needs, contraceptive use decreases by 0.82 percentage points . For every percentage increase in the contraceptive use, the use of contraception decreases 0.83 percentage points, the
 The B4 coefficient was 0.58, for every percentage point increase in any method of contraception use; there is a 0 .58 percentage point . increase in the use of modern contraception is 0.56% .
 The respective t-values for the variables are -0.3730, -2.447 and 4.468 all of which are significant at 95% level of significance except for the “InformedChoices” variable .
 In this model, we regressed use of modern methods of contraception on female median age of first marriage, poverty rate and poverty rate . We also included percentage of women with 10 or more years of schooling and total fertility rate .
 This model aims to show the effect of economic and sociological factors on this use . This model was created to show how economic and social factors affect this use.
 The median age of first marriage has a negative coefficient and is significant in its effect on the usage of modern methods of contraception . It is significant for women to use modern contraception .
 This shows the higher the Age by which half of the female respondents have been married at their first marriage, the less likely they are to use any modern methods of contraception . The higher the age by which a woman is married at her first marriage than the younger they are .
 This suggests that the lower the poverty rate, the higher will the use of modern methods . The lower poverty rate means that modern methods are more likely to be used in the future .
 The factor that shows the percentage of health workers who have ever talked to the female non-users of family planning can also reflect the level of awareness among the users and the efficiency of the health workers .
 The coefficient of this variable is positive, with high significance, showing that the higher the proportion of health workers talking to female non-users, the higher is the use of modern methods . This means that, the more aware and more efficient the health workers are, more women start using the
 Total fertility rate, calculating the average number of children a woman would have by the end of childbearing years if she bore children at the current age-specific fertility rates, has a negative coefficient and is highly significant . The lower the rate the higher is the use of modern methods of contraception
 The proportion of women with ten or more years of schooling is an insignificant variable with a negative coefficient, probably because of the quality of education matters more . However, the number of women who have ten years of schooled is not insignificant .
 Economic factors like poverty and hence income level and social factors like total fertility rate, awareness and women’s age at first marriage are very important in determining the use of contraceptives, especially the modern methods .
 In this model, we regressed use of modern methods of contraception on informed choices by women, total unmet needs and use of any method of family planning, including both modern and traditional ways .
 This model aims to show the efficiency of government family planning services on the use of modern methods of contraception .
 The lower the percentage of women’s unmet needs, the higher the use of modern methods of contraception . The variable, total proportion of women with . unmet . needs is highly significant in our result .
 A positive sign of the coefficient and high statistical significance of the variable reflects that the higher the level of use of any method, the higher will be use of modern methods of contraception . The higher the use of a modern method of contraception is the higher use of contraception than any method .
 Percentage of women making informed choices is an insignificant variable with a negative coefficient . However, this can be taken up for further research, according to the study .
 Factors like use of any method, that is both traditional and modern methods and the total unmet needs of women are very important in influencing the use of modern methods of contraception .
 There is a need for the government to tie-up with private sources for increasing the supply of contraceptives, as successfully done by some other countries . These reflect the efficacy of government services, because most people depend on public sources of contraceptives .
 Health workers working in this field need to be more efficient in making women more aware of different methods, side effects and what is the solution if they face any . It will help women make more informed and aware choices .
 One of the main problems we faced while working on this paper was the lack of availability of data for each state . We hope to use the data to improve the accuracy of the study .
 Some of the factors such as the median birth interval and exposure to family planning messages couldn’t be included in the model because the detailed information for each state and union territory was not available in the government survey report .
 Some of the other factors that could have been incorporated are the needs and demands for family planning, men’s contraception-related perception and knowledge, and so on. Some of these factors could be incorporated .
 Stakeholder perceptions of a total market approach to family planning in Nicaragua . Family planning is a key part of the country's family planning strategy .
 Stakeholder perceptions of a total market approach to family planning in Viet Nam . Drake JK, Thanh Thanh LHT, Suraratdecha C, Thu HPT, Vail JG . Drake .
 The paper focuses on women who leave their country of origin in search of economic opportunities and work . A Comparative Analysis of Women in the Middle East .
 Many migrant women are invisible players in the global economy and often suffer pervasive violations of their human and labor rights . Many migrants are invisible in the world economy and suffer violations of human rights .
 Women contributed $300. billion dollars in 2016, which equals half of the world's remittances . Women contribute $300 billion dollars to the United States alone .
 This indicates that women move as much money as their male counterparts, however at a greater percentage of their income, because they usually earn lower wages than men . Women move more money than men, according to the study .
 The feminization of migration is a dynamic and multidimensional phenomenon . It is a multi-laylaylayed phenomenon, says Ms. Frida Ghitis .
 A major objective of our study is to expose the unprotected status and vulnerability of migrant women . The study will expose the unprotected status of migrants and their vulnerability .
 Migrants face much more unfavorable conditions, for long hours and for lower amounts of payment .
 They have no channels to claim their rights in cases of non-payment of wages . Also, they have no legal means to claim compensation in such cases . Also have no right to claim unpaid wages in the absence of payment .
 A migrant woman also faces the additional risks of sexual harassment and sexual violence . In the case of working in the commercial sex industry, sexual violence and sexually transmitted diseases are a risk .
 In the United States of America, victims of trafficking are almost exclusively immigrants, and the majority of them women . The majority of the victims are immigrants, according to the U.S. of America .
 This paper looks at the effect of migration on the demand and supply mechanism of feminised jobs with the help of a comparative analysis . It looks at how migration affects the supply and demand mechanism of these jobs .
 Feminisation, Migration, Personal Remittances paid JEL Classification: J61 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 4 .
 Domestic labor trade creates transnational networks between different households and families around the world . Many analysts talk about the internationalization of households .
 The global care chain is started by a woman in a rich, developed country who is unable to fulfil her ""domestic duties" after entering the labor force . The global chain is therefore started by women in rich, developing countries .
 This other woman usually comes from a poorer household and is an international migrant . The other woman is usually a poorer woman and a migrant from abroad .
 Most of the time, this other woman also has dependent children in her home destination . Therefore, she requests the help of another woman from an even poorer background to replace her in her work . The other woman often has children in their homes .
 The chain continues 19 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 gradually and, as we go down, the value attributed to the work decreases and at the end of the chain often becomes unpaid . At the end, the work is unpaid .
 The global care chain is a feature of an increasingly globalized world in which the demand for migrant workers in developed countries continues as well as the supply of migrants from less developed countries .
 The underlying causes of this phenomenon include the entry of women into the workforce in the developed world, which leads to a reduced ability to care for children and the elderly . The lack of family-friendly policies and childcare facilities in the workplace increases the demand for caregivers at home .
 The global care chain analysis has opened theoretical perspectives and discursive spaces for the sophisticated understanding of the processes of globalization .
 Global care chain analysis has contributed significantly to a better understanding of the socio-spatial dimensions of various forms of care worldwide and the identification of transnational policy and policy responses .
 International domestic labor trade in the context of an overall increase in international migration and, in particular, the feminisation of international migration . It becomes important, therefore, to place international domestic labor . trade in a context of increased increase in migration and feminisation, she says .
 The Global Care Chain approach is concerned with the transfer of care workers and resources from poor to rich countries through the employment of women from poor countries as caregivers in their middle-class homes . Review of Literature .
 Critical accounts of global capitalism tend to be based on the distinction between economic and moral, market and society . Critical analysis of the global care chain is based on analysis of global health care chain .
 Dependence is scorned for the neoliberal subject and lack of self-care is a mark of social inferiority . Dependence has been scorned in the neoliberal world . Self-care should be a priority in the future of the world .
 Research of the social dynamics of gender migration is still too narrowly focused on the relationship between South and North and a specific selection of countries . However, the research of the gender migration of gender migrants is too narrow to be focused on specific countries .
 Care importers argue for increased interest as care importers in southern and middle-income countries . They argue for more interest as health importers .
 Social care structures in these countries often differ significantly from those in the global North . The global care chains that emerge in these contexts are therefore also very different .
 When women and men emigrate to work, gender-based social structures in source countries are changed in complex ways . However, it is clear that when women emigrate, social structures are changed, they are changed .
 Global outsourcing of care work not only reproduces gendered social orders, but also interacts with other forms of inequality . In fact, it is now widely acknowledged that the restructuring of care involves processes in which the global outsourcing of . care work reproduce social orders and interacts with inequality .
 Research presented in the paper relies heavily on the empirical-statistical methodology . Data used for observation has been drawn from publications of governmental and international organisations . Methodology
 According to the author, the research required using macroeconomic data which is essentially secondary in nature . The author of this article has published a number of articles under the name of the author .
 Authors have taken five major centres that attract immigrants due to their economic size . The authors have taken a look at five major cities that attract migrants .
 These centres are the United States, Russia, India, Germany, Germany and Saudi Arabia . The centres are located in the U.S. and Russia .
 Personal Remittances Paid, in million USD and Female Migrants as a share of Total Migration for the time period mentioned above . We observed the trends of two variables Personal Remittance Paid in million dollars .
 The variables do not produce a precise image of the situation due to lack of information on important parameters such as remittances sent by women . However, the general pattern that emerges is instructive and informative .
 Remittances paid to the country of origin show a decline in the growth rate . Results indicate that as more number of women migrate as a share of total migration, the remittances are decreasing .
 This trend hints towards the phenomenon that women tend to get concentrated in low paying jobs mainly domestic work . Women tend to tend to work in low-paying jobs such as domestic work.
 India and Saudi Arabia are the two most populous countries in the world . However, this model doesn't explain the trends noticed in the case of Saudi Arabia and India .
 The authors argue that due to the fact that female labor force participation rate is low in India and Saudi Arabia, there is less demand for domestic workers, and thus less inflow of women migrants for low-paying jobs .
 The other three nations, however, show high rates of female labor force participation . Women who have a job require another woman to take care of their children, creating demand for domestic work .
 The data exhibits a trend of a decrease in remittances growth along with increased migration of women . The United States of America is one of the world's most populous countries .
 The red line indicates the percentage of women, as a proportion of total migration that enter the USA annually, as well as the number of women entering the country in 2012 . This year's total migration was the highest in the world, with more than 50,000 people entering the U.
 The data exhibits a trend of a decrease in remittances growth along with increased migration of women . Remittances have increased in the U.S. to increase .
 The red line indicates the percentage of women, as a proportion of total migration, that enter Germany annually . The line is based on the number of women entering Germany each year as a result of migration .
 The red line indicates the percentage of women, as a proportion of total migration that enter India annually, as well as the proportion of women entering India annually . The red lines indicate the percentage that women enter India as a part of the total migration .
 The data doesn't exhibit any particular pattern that could explain the relationship between the two variables . Female migration and remittances growth for Saudi Arabia has been slow .
 The red line indicates the percentage of women, as a proportion of total migration that enter Saudi Arabia annually . The figure is based on the number of women entering Saudi Arabia in the country each year .
 The data exhibits a trend of a decrease in remittances growth along with increased migration of women . Russia is the only country in the world to send money from abroad .
 The red line indicates the percentage of women, as a proportion of total migration that enter Russia annually, as well as the number of women entering Russia annually . The red is the percentage that women enter Russia as a part of the total migration total .
 Female Migration and Remittances growth for the Russian Federation . UN DESA 24 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 5.5% growth in female migration and remittances .
 Country-level data on remittances, as part of the balance of payments, are not broken down by gender . It is difficult to estimate the impact of the increasing feminisation of international migration on the amount .
 The gender of migrants influences the underlying motives for migration and remittance . Gender of migrants also influences motives for migrants and remittances . The frequency and quantity of remittance is also a factor in remittance rates .
 The impact of remittances on economic development can also be significantly affected by the gender of migrants . Remittances are also a significant factor in economic development in the country .
 Research, however, is limited in terms of gender and remittance development outcomes . Research has been limited on gender, remittance and other aspects of remittance .
 It is difficult to predict the possible influence on remittances of the feminization of international migration flows and their correlation with economic growth and poverty reduction .
 Women represent approximately half of the world's total migrant population . Today, women represent around half of world's migrants .
 As independent workers, they move more and more to more developed countries in search of a better life for themselves and their families .
 They tend to find work in traditionally femaledominated occupations such as domestic work . This reproduces patterns of gender inequality in the workplace .
 The connections between domestic work and the international migration of women are well established . The connection is well established, but it is also well established in the UK .
 Growing demand for domestic services by households is considered to be one of the main triggers for the feminization of labor migration in recent decades . The growing demand for services by household households is one of many reasons for migration .
 Migrant domestic workers provide essential services to countries in which they travel . They contribute to the richness of ageing societies and the sustainability of the welfare and employment systems of these countries .
 Domestic migrant workers can face additional vulnerabilities, leading to human and labor rights violations . However, as with other migrant workers, domestic migrant workers are often vulnerable to human rights violations, experts say .
 Their vulnerabilities are often linked to precarious recruitment processes, social and cultural isolation due to language and cultural differences, lack of advance information and accurate information on employment conditions .
 Domestic workers often work too long hours, with little pay and almost no access to social protection . Domestic workers have little access to the social network and little pay .
 Migrant domestic workers in private households are vulnerable to a number of human rights violations . Migrant workers hidden in private homes can be subject to human rights abuses .
 Many are vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence and cannot freely meet or practice their religion with friends and associates . Many are also at risk of being sexually assaulted by their friends or associates .
 Migrant domestic workers are disproportionately exposed to abuse compared to nationals in the same sector . They face specific disadvantages because they are non-nationals, including dependence on recruitment agencies, lack of reliable information on migration procedures .
 When they are in an irregular migration status, their vulnerability is exacerbated, says the government . The government says it is not concerned about the impact of irregular migration .
 Gender mainly affects remittances due to the conditions in which migrants find themselves in host labor markets and the strength of their family relationships . Conclusion: Migrants' family relationships and labor market conditions are important factors .
 Women's migration at global level appears to be positively correlated with the remittances received by developing countries . Studies on the feminisation of migrants and remittance are inconclusive .
 The remittances of women migrants are more resilient and reliable than those of men, say experts . Women migrants have a more resilient remittance rate than men, they say . Women are more likely to send money back to their country than men .
 The phenomenon of the global care chain also has a potential destabilising effect on the family, say experts . The phenomenon also has to destabilise the family .
 Having one parent, or in many cases both, living abroad can have a detrimental effect on the well-being of children left behind . Remittance gains have helped improve the education of those left behind, however .
 Potential positive effects of remittances from women migrants on poverty reduction pose challenges to policymakers . Policymakers are concerned about the impact of women migrants' contributions to poverty reduction .
 More relevant and detailed gender-based information would help them develop policies to reduce the employment, wage and remittance costs of women migrants .
 Improved working conditions for migrant women (longterm contracts, better-paid jobs) and lower bank charges (lower bank charges) would allow them to remit more money . Lower bank charges and better working conditions would allow more money to be remit .
 Emotions, gender, and intergenerational relations in Filipino transnational families . Emotions and gender relations in Philippine transnational family .
 Men in a woman’s job, male domestic workers, international migration and the globalization of care . International migration and international migration are key issues in the care of women .
 This paper explores the interlinkages between two different international laws and then examines their implication on sustainable growth in South Asia, with special emphasis on India . A South Asian Perspective .
 The first law is the Paris Agreement on Climate Change which requires signatories to incorporate into their national agenda and policies the goal of abatement of carbon emissions . The Paris Agreement is the first law that requires the goal to be abated .
 The paper seeks to examine the effect that reduction in carbon emission has on economic growth . The paper is based on a study of carbon emissions in the United States . It also seeks to look at the impact of the carbon emissions on the economy .
 The second international issue that we are dealing with is that of climate migrants . Climate migrants will be the second issue to be dealt with by the world's most powerful .
 Climate migrants have been granted the status of refugee due to certain ambiguities regarding the nature of this form of migration . Climate migrants haven’t been granted a refugee status due to some ambiguity about their status .
 Climate migrants continue to cross international borders to seek protection against climate disasters . Yet, climate migrants still need protection from climate disasters, says climate expert .
 There is a great chance that the Refugee Convention may be modified in the coming years to grant refugee status to climate migrants . Climate migrants as the doom is impending as the apocalypse is on the way .
 An attempt has been made to discuss the implications of climate migration on host countries in South Asia . An attempt was made to talk about the implications for host countries .
 This paper envisages a scenario in which the interactions between these two international commitments can trap a country within a trilemma between economic growth, sustainable growth and human rights protection .
 Growth Trilemma, Climate migrants, Carbon emission JEL Classifications: C32, K33, O33, Q01, C01, K01, Q02, Q11, Q12, Q13, Q14, Q15, Q16, Q17,
 Currently, 20 million people are migrating from Bangladesh to India annually owing to flooding of low lying regions due to global warming . Flooding of low-lying regions is a major cause of migration .
 If climate migrants are granted refugee status then India will be legally responsible for integration of these migrants into India . These refugees will expand India’s population. India will have to integrate them into the country .
 Bangladeshi refugees have expanded India’s population by 12 to 17 million in 40 years . In the last 40 years, the population has grown by 12-17 million . The refugees are now living in India .
 In the past, refugees were welcome in most countries because output was limited by labour . Refugees were welcome because of the fact that labour was limited in the past .
 The situation is different now as output is being limited by land and capital in developing countries . But the situation is now different now, as output has been limited by capital and land .
 Solow Model says output grows at a rate equal to the rate of population growth in absence of technological progress . According to the Solow model, the aggregate output grows equal to population growth, in the absence of technology progress .
 CO2 emissions have been found to granger cause GDP, so an increase in aggregate output due to increase in population will raise the level of carbon emission . The rise in output is an impediment to fulfilling the commitment towards Paris agreement and environment protection .
 Relationship between population size and carbon dioxide emissions has remained stable through time . This holds for developed countries and less-developed countries, say experts .
 Population size is a major contributor to total carbon dioxide emissions . Population size has been a major factor in carbon emissions in recent years .
 Also the role of energy efficiency in reducing net carbon emissions is called into question . Carbon intensity or energy efficiency is only one of the contributors to net carbon emission, says the study .
 Population and GDP can put a limit on the amount of restraint you can put on CO2 emission by energy efficiency . Population can also put a cap on how much energy efficiency can be used to reduce CO2 emissions .
 The increase in population due to inflow of climate refugees can put a break on the reduction of carbon emission . This brings us back to where we started that the increase in . population . can put the reduction in carbon emission on the rise .
 We have observed that these international commitments can come in the way of each other and can have a conflicting nature . We've observed that . These international commitments are very important to the world, says the PM .
 Countries will have to tread carefully when trying to balance these goals lest they find themselves in this trilemma . Countries must tread carefully in balancing the goals of the two nations .
 The paper also suggests ways out of the trilemma which involve taking gradual steps towards reducing carbon emission in ways that do not hamper the growth of the developing world while also allowing for better management of refugee crisis .
 The first section deals with climate migration in South Asia and the implication of increase in population of India in particular . The first part of this article discusses the impact of climate migration on South Asia .
 The second section discusses the CO2 emission abatement and its implication on economic growth . The CO2 emissions are abated and the economy will benefit from it .
 The third section brings together the findings from the first two sections and elucidates on the trilemma . The section concludes with the conclusion of the first section of this section .
 The final section gives policy recommendations and suggests ways out of the trilemma .
 There is no literature available on global growth trilemma, however separate aspects of the trilemmas have been researched and conclusions have been drawn .
 UC Jha and Architesh Panda point out the rise in soil degradation and deforestation leading to environmental refugees from Bangladesh to resource scarce cities of India .
 This coupled with ongoing debate on the law of climate refugees by U.N. has widespread implications on economic growth as well as environmental protection in India .
 The rise in unskilled population due to migration from Bangladesh to India would have adverse impact on the economic growth in India as noted by implications of rising population on GDP growth in several models .
 Robert Chambers points out the distributional effects and rise in social marginal cost of refugee influx on the host countries . Robert Chambers says the refugee influx has increased the cost of hosting countries .
 Relationship between population size and total carbon dioxide emissions has remained stable through time . This holds for developed countries and less-developed countries .
 Population size continues to have a large effect on the scale of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions and thus climate change . Researchers found no evidence of decoupling or intensification of this relationship .
 Population size is a major contributor to total 29 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 carbon dioxide emissions . It has been consistently so for close to 50 years . Population size has been a major factor in carbon emissions for over 50 years, say experts .
 The Paris Agreement recognizes the rise in Carbon emissions of the world and mandates its participants to maintain a prescribed low level of emissions every year . Paris Agreement mandates participants to meet a prescribed carbon emission limit every year.
 Kochher point towards the perspective of the developed countries on carbon emission reduction in developing countries . Kochher says developed countries have a different perspective on the issue of carbon emissions reduction in the developing countries. Kochher points out that developing countries need to reduce carbon emissions .
 The OECD and some other developed countries want developing countries to reduce their carbon emissions to ensure carbon equity in the long run . Developed countries want to reduce carbon emissions in developing countries .
 The energy demand of India will rise with increasing industrialisation to meet the demands of growing population . On the other hand, they state that the energy demand .
 Any GHG abatement in India would come at a high cost of fall in economic growth . It requires a shift from cheap fossil fuels to costlier non-carbon energy .
 Environmental degradation granger-causes economic growth in the long run, say experts . Tiwari, Aviral Kumar show that that environmental degradation . causes economic growth .
 Mark R Greer shows that the excise tax on fossil fuels aimed at environmental protection would result in fall in economic growth . Greer argues that the tax would lead to a fall in GDP growth .
 Mark R Greer and Brock, William A and M Scott Taylor provide ways out of the trilemma . Greer, Brock, Taylor and Taylor offer ways to get around the issue .
 They use technological progress as a means of ensuring high GDP growth along with environment protection . They say technological progress is a way to ensure high growth and environmental protection .
 Mark emphasises on the need to gradually phase out fossil fuels and create a demand for environmental friendly technology . Mark in addition emphasises the need for gradual phasing out of fossil fuels .
 Demand induced technological progress would help develop a comparative advantage in that technology and result in better terms of trade; thus spurring higher economic growth . This demand induced technology would help to develop an advantage in technology .
 Carbon dioxide emissions forecasted for four years by fitting a linear trend . Since the time series data for several variables overlaps only over few years, the data is only over a few years .
 The theories have been proven using the following methods: Correlation among variables of interest . Econometric analysis using linear regression models .
 While proving relation between two variables, all other economic factors are held constant . All other factors held constant.
 New challenges have presented themselves in front of the global community . Climate change and global warming has been the most germane one to this discussion . But over the years new challenges have been presented .
 Global warming is a gradual rise in the average temperature across the globe . The average temperature has risen steadily in the past decade .
 This rise in temperature can be attributed to the excessive emission of greenhouse gases, especially CO2 . CO2 and depletion of the ozone layer due to CFCs are also contributing to the rise .
 Global warming is causing ice caps to melt resulting in a rise in sea level . Global warming causes sea levels to rise in the world .
 Scientists and environmentalists over the world have confirmed that the threat is imminent . Although, this process is taking place at a glacial pace, scientists and environmentalists say it is at an all-time high .
 The rise in sea level will cause islands to submerge and flooding of low lying areas and coastal regions . The rise of sea level is expected to cause flooding and submergence of islands .
 Maldives, Kiribati and Tuvalu are expected to submerge fully in the next 30 to 50 years . Islands like Maldives and Kiribatas expected to be submerged fully in next 30-50 years . Maldives is one of the most vulnerable islands in the world
 Global warming is resulting in erratic monsoon leading to crop failure and a loss of arable land, says experts . The scientists say the monsoon is leading to an erratic and crop failure leading to the loss of land .
 This threat to life and livelihood posed by climate change is leading to migration . Climate change is a threat to the lives and livelihood of people around the world . This threat is leading people to flee to their homes and livelihoods .
 People are moving to areas that they find safer and areas where they can find decent work . People are leaving to find safer places to move to find work, says the BBC .
 This kind of migration is not a one of kind case but this may be something bigger and may have a pattern . What needs to be noted, however, is that this kind of . case is not one of . kind case .
 Global community recognises migration driven by climate change as a form of persecution . In such a case, it becomes important that the global community recognisisis migration . Climate change is being driven by a climate change driven by the climate change .
 There is a high chance that this might change owing to the amount of attention that this issue has attracted in the last decade . World leaders have begun to deliberate on the question of whether or not climate migrants should be granted refugee status . Climate migrants haven’t been granted a refugee status
 Climate migrants will become obliged to grant asylum to climate migrants and integrate them into their population . In the event, that this happens and the Refugee convention is modified, the Refugee Convention is modified .
 Even in the absence of this provision large scale migration continues to happen . Migration continues to be large scale in the UK .
 India enjoys a dominant position in the geopolitically in South Asia . Displacement in the region is a major problem .
 Even when it comes to climate change driven relocation and displacement, India’s position continues to be important . India is one of the most important countries in the world to relocate and relocate people .
 Bangladesh has experienced coastal flooding in the past few decades owing to climate change . Bangladesh has been experiencing coastal flooding due to the rising tide .
 The amount of arable land in Bangladesh has shrunk from 73% of total land in 1988 to 59% in 2015 . Arable land has shrunk to around 59% .
 By 2050, the amount of arable land in Bangladesh will be 44.15% of total land . The use of the linear trend model to forecast the land use in Bangladesh shows that by 2050, it will be just 44% of the land .
 When the amount of arable land in Bangladesh is regressed on time’t’ and CO2 emissions from 1972 to 2015, the slope coefficients have a negative sign which is in accordance with our a priori expectation . The amount of . arable . land in . Bangladesh
 As CO2 emission increases by 1 unit, amount of arable land decreases by 0.000138 percentage points . Arable land will be less affected by the increase in CO2 emissions .
 Every year the amount of arable land decreases by 0.12 . Carbon dioxide emissions have been forecasted by fitting a linear trend model to the available data .
 The loss of arable land coupled with flooding has and will continue to drive Bangladeshis into India in search of safety and livelihood . Flooding has also driven Bangladeshis to India .
 20 million people are currently migrating from Bangladesh to India annually . It has been estimated that 20 million are migrating to India each year .
 One of the studies by Homer Dixon has concluded that Bangladeshi migrants have expanded India’s population by 12 to 17 million in the past 40 years due to environmental reasons .
 As the size of population grows, both the number of consumers and labour rises . Implications as the number and labour of people rises, the population will grow .
 Total output grows at a rate that is equal to the population growth rate . It postulates that total output growth grows at an equal rate of equal to population growth rates .
 A higher population growth rate will tend to lower per capita output as the existing capital stock will be spread more thinly over a larger population . At the same time, a higher population . growth rate tends to lower Per capita output, according to the economist .
 A look at these models helps to understand the basic nature of population growth rate . The models help to understand how the population has grown .
 With increase in the number of climate migrants moving to India from across the border, the size of population will rise as well as the population growth rate will witness an upward trend . Climate migrants will be moving into India from the border .
 Population growth will impact economic growth in India . Let us delve a little deeper into how this form of population growth will affect economic growth .
 India's prodigious size of its population has proved to be a major bottleneck in its path to development . India is already burdened with a large population .
 In earlier times, labour was the limiting factor in growth of output but in the 21st century, land is the limit . Land is now the only limiting factor for growth in output, says economist .
 An increase in the amount of labour beyond a point will add very little to agricultural production, says economist . The increase in labour will add little to agriculture, he says .
 This cohort of migrants will largely consist of unskilled labour or farm labour . Looking at the profile of these migrants, one can conclude that this cohort will mostly consist of . unskilled . labour .
 With agricultural production close to saturation, unskilled labour will be looking at informal services sector for employment . Unskilled labour will look at the informal services industry for employment.
 Industrial expansion has been slow in India and may not be able to keep pace with the rising population . Industrial expansion in India is expected to be slow in the coming years .
 The low physical capital relative to unskilled labour may increase the rate of return to physical capital thus increasing the pace of output growth, making India grow faster than before . One may argue that the low return of physical capital .
 Unskilled labour lowers the ratio of human capital to unskilled labour . This brings down the rate of return to physical capital . But the presence of unskilled labourers lowers the return of capital .
 On running Granger causality tests, we find that for a time series data of India, population granger causes GDP as well as CO2 . We find that population grangers causes GDP and CO2 as well .
 This result is quite insightful as it brings to light another dimension of population growth rate: carbon emissions and environment .
 If population granger causes CO2, then past values of population must contain some information that helps predict values of CO2 . Past values must also contain information that could help predict future CO2 values .
 CO2 32 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 emissions will also rise . If population is expected to rise, then CO2 emissions will rise .
 The cross sectional correlation between population and carbon emission for the year 2014 is 0.0. which shows that larger values of population can be associated with larger carbon emission . The correlation was 0.9 per cent .
 The time series correlation between population and carbon emission for India is 0.9.9 . The correlation between India's population growth and carbon emissions is between 0.2 and 0.3 .
 An increase in population due to migration can lead to an increase in CO2 emission, scientists say . These results help to confirm the hypothesis that a population increase in migration leads to a CO2 emissions increase .
 A more welcome effect of increasing population is its effect on rate of technical progress, says David Cameron . The UK's fastest-growing population is now in the form of the world's second largest cities .
 A large population can drive innovation and technical advancement as it has a larger number of innovators and inventors . A larger population can lead innovation and technological advancement as a large number of people can drive it .
 uP is the number of people working in the knowledge and research sector . If the total population is P and the proportion of the population engaged in the production of ideas in the economy, uP means uP . uP can be defined as a person working in a knowledge or research
 The production of ideas is an increasing faction of uP, then as uP rises, the stock of ideas and the the production of knowledge will also rise . As uP is increasing, knowledge production will also increase .
 This rosy picture needs to be viewed with a lens of skepticism . However, this is a caveat, and a caveat must be established, to be established .
 If the level of human capital in the economy is low, then technical progress may not be so easily achieved, says economist . Human capital is key to economic growth, he says. It's not easy to achieve if human capital is low .
 South Asian countries don’t have excellent human capital indicators, say experts . South Asian countries have a poor record of human capital investment .
 The Paris Agreement is an agreement within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . It deals with mitigation, adaptation, and finance, starting in the year 2020 .
 GDP growth and sustainable growth at times appear to be at loggerheads with each other . Implications that sustainable growth and GDP growth are not sustainable .
 The unwillingness on part of nations to become party to agreements that require them to cut down their carbon emission stems from the fear that this will dampen their rate of economic growth . The unwillingness to become part of an agreement stems from fears that this may dampen the rate of growth .
 Most nations place a higher value on current consumption over the perils of environmental degradation that seem distant . Most of the world's nations are concerned about the future of their consumption .
 CO2 emissions granger cause GDP and GDP granger causes CO2 CO2 33 . CO2 emission levels are based on CO2 levels in the United States and Canada . GDP emissions cause CO2 1% higher than GDP emissions .
 The time series correlation between CO2 emission and GDP for India is 0.9.9 .
 CO2 emission and ease of doing business rank for India from 2008 onwards . The correlation between CO2 emissions and ease-of-doing business rank is based on the time series .
 A reduction in CO2 emission brought about by compliance to stringent environmental regulations on the part of businesses negatively impacts the ease of doing business rank . CO2 emissions are associated with with a lower rank on the ease-of-doing business index .
 The rate of investment in a country is affected by its rank on the ease of doing business index . The country is ranked on an index of countries ranked on ease-doing business index.
 Investment is a function of the expected future profitability of the investment or marginal efficiency of investment . Investment is expected to be an investment function of future profitability . Investment should be a result of expected profitability of investment, marginal efficiency .
 Solow model postulates that the growth of per capita income is equal to the rate of technical progress in production in production . This can be labelled as labour augmenting technical progress as it enhances the efficiency of labour .
 The Green Solow model talks about growth in per capita income accompanied by rising environmental quality . The model, on the other hand, is based on growth in income and per capita growth in environmental quality, says Solow .
 Exogenous technical progress is of two types, labour augmenting and pollution abating . Here, labour augmentation is augmenting, abating and abating, the author says .
 Technological progress in goods production is necessary to generate per capita income growth . Technology is essential to generate economic growth in the United States .
 If countries have to continue to grow while simultaneously meeting their CO2 abatement commitments, then technical progress in pollution abatment needs to take place . Hence, if countries . continue to . grow while . simultaneously meeting CO2 . commitments, say experts .
 This brings us to the conclusion that if a part of current investment is diverted towards research in pollution abatement, then the future profitability of current . investment will rise due to the economy following a balanced growth path .
 This diversion of investment will require a certain push from the state, says the governor . The state will need to push for more investment in the area, he says .
 State funded projects may be required as well if private investment falls short . State-funded projects may also be needed as well .
 The only way in which countries can meet the requirements of the Paris Agreement will be by cutting back on production resulting in lower GDP growth rate in the future . However, if such technical progress does not take place, it will be difficult to meet the Paris agreement .
 This will lead to a fall in the current rate of investment which will further dampen growth rate . This will also dampen the growth rate, according to experts .
 There is a limit to the amount of reduction in net CO2 emissions that can be brought about by energy efficiency alone . Not to mention that even in the case of technical progress in pollution abatement, there is also a limit on how much energy efficiency can be achieved .
 It is the aggregate figure that includes different parameters, which define the ease of doing business in a country . It is an aggregate figure, which includes various parameters, to be defined by different parameters .
 A high ease of doing business ranking means the regulatory environment is more conducive to the starting and operation of a local firm . The ease of do business ranking is based on a number of factors such as a company's start-up and operation .
 “a” is the marginal efficiency of energy . This implies that output increases at a decreasing rate if a<1 . Output increases at an increasing rate when a>1. "a" is the energy efficiency .
 In the former case, energy is being used inefficiently in the production of output . In the latter case, each additional unit of energy is contributing lesser and lesser to output generation .
 Now suppose A is an exogenous variable rather than a constant and increases at a constant rate linearly over the time . Now suppose a constant variable increases linearly at the time, A is a constant .
 Let us assume that A takes values 1,2 and so on so that the rate of increase is constante.e. overtime . The rate of the increase is assumed to be constant .
 Carbon abating technological progress ensures that the same amount of energy produces a higher level of output . Technology can also be used to create more efficient energy systems .
 These results are in tandem with the conclusions of the Green Solow Model as mentioned earlier . These results were based on the results of the Solow model .
 Such technological progress will enable countries to honour their Paris Agreement commitments without putting a damper on their growth prospects . The Paris Agreement will be honoured without putting the Paris Agreement on growth .
 The Growth Trilemma is a trilemma between economic growth, inclusive growth and sustainable growth . The interlinkages and interactions between all these factors result in a situation where different SDGs can come in the way of each other, resulting in a three way dilemma .
 Acceptance of climate refugees on humanitarian grounds will increase the population of the country which will results in increased carbon emission as proved earlier in section 4.2.2 . Acceptance will result in an increase in carbon emissions, says IPCC .
 As shown in , population also acts as limiting factor to the amount of restraint you can put on CO2 emission by energy efficiency . Population is also limiting factor in how much energy efficiency can be done .
 So inclusive growth along with fast pace of economic growth can come in the way of eco friendly growth . Inclusive growth is a key part of the eco-friendly growth of India's economy .
 The slowdown of output growth will put the country behind on other development indicators as well as in terms of the demographic cycle resulting in a slump . The slowdown will also lead to a slump in the country's economic growth .
 GDP growth and eco friendly growth will require us to put a cap on population growth rate . This will come in the way of extending help to climate migrants . GDP growth will need to be capped to meet climate migrants' needs .
 It becomes difficult to simultaneously achieve all three goals in the absence of some external stimulus or policy intervention . Thus, it becomes difficult .
 To prevent the economy from spiralling into a slum due to carbon emission restrictions, it becomes imperative to phase out fossil fuels slowly and steadily starting with replacement of thermal power .
 Instead of banning these vehicles from roads right away, these vehicles were taken off the roads in several cycles . An analogous case would be the phasing out of old vehicles from the roads of Delhi to reduce air pollution .
 This process of phasing out of fossil fuels needs to be 37 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 accompanied by gradual invention and innovation in the clean energy sector . Clean energy sector must be led by gradual innovation in clean energy, says the author .
 In South Asia, one does not see this kind of investment emerging primarily from the private sector . In the region, investment is not seen as a result of private investment in South Asia .
 The second is to make the usage of clean energy profitable for the private sector by way of subsidies, tax exemptions, etc or to attract foreign direct investment in this sector .
 All three options seem to put a strain on the government expenditure and the fiscal deficit . The government is looking at a range of options to deal with the deficit .
 The second option comes with the added benefit of home grown technical progress and faster technical progress due to competition in the private sector .
 As the the output will continue to grow, the emission to output ratio will decline as is postulated by the Environmental Kuznets Ratio . An important point to be noted is that if the economy is able to maintain its growth momentum and is . .
 Over time CO2 abatement will become easier . The EKC holds for US data . Over time, over time it will be easier to abate CO2 .
 On the question of climate migrants, it might help to grant them the refugee status . Climate migrants could be granted refugee status by the UN .
 Legal and illegal cross-border migration continues to take place in status quo . Legal and . illegal cross border migration continues . status quo in the country .
 Granting refugee status to these migrants will ensure that the responsibility of their rehabilitation is shared collectively by the whole world, not just by the neighbouring countries . Granting refugees status will ensure the responsibility for the rehabilitation of these migrants is shared .
 This will fix the problem of disproportionate burden sharing and also keep in check the multiple problems that this kind of population explosion poses for the neighbouring countries . This will also keep out check the problems of neighbouring countries. This will be the solution to the problem .
 This will help the global community provide better aid to these migrants and work towards their welfare . Additionally, this will also help the world help these migrants .
 Investment in human capital will also combat some of the problems mentioned earlier . Investing into human capital is also a key strategy to combat the problems .
 CO2 emission at first rises and then reaches a peak post which it Â falls, postulates . It postulates that as income rises, CO2 emissions will rise .
 Environmental laws integrated with social and economic issues are the minimum requirements of sustainable development goals . Sustainable development goals may act as a norm to make judiciary decisions . Environmental laws integrate social, economic issues with environmental laws .
 Evidence suggests the international judiciary system has made their decisions keeping in mind the sustainability issues . In the past, as the evidence suggests, as well as the . evidence suggests the . International judiciary system have made their . decisions keeping . in mind . the sustainability . issues .
 The paper further discusses how to integrate the goals to regional and local contexts by learning from the practices of our neighboring country . The paper also discusses how the goals can be integrated into regional contexts .
 International laws are treaties, agreements and rules between countries that govern how nations interact with other nations . International laws govern how countries interact with each other's citizens .
 The laws address issues like human rights, treatment of refugees, prosecution of international crimes, arms agreements and control, how states can claim new territories, regulate common spaces like water and outer space .
 Sustainable Growth refers to economic growth which satisfies the needs of present generation as well as the future generation . Sustainable Growth is a form of economic growth that satisfies both present generation and future generation's needs .
 There are various elements of growth; these include natural resources, physical infrastructure, population, human resource, technology and laws . The 40 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 resources include physical infrastructure and population growth .
 Millennium Development goals 2015 and Sustainable Development Goals have shown concern for sustainable development of the nations . Millennium Development Goals 2015 and Sustainability Development Goals show concern for the nations' development . The Millennium Development goal 2015 and the Sustainable Development goals are among the goals to be met .
 Sustainable growth has received a lot of attention in international treaties and conventions . Sustainable growth is a key part of the world's economic growth plan .
 Non-binding goals can be found in various non-binding legal agreements . Instances of such goals are often found in legal agreements such as those of the United States .
 Environmental laws integrated with social and economic issues are the minimum requirement of sustainable goals . Sustainable goals might act as a norm to make judiciary decisions . Environmental laws integrate social issues with social, economic issues .
 Globally the more successful alignment to development has been through economic integration efforts in various economies . Globally, the more . successful alignment . to development . has been achieved through economic . integration efforts, such as economic integration .
 Development efforts can be aligned through integration of various frameworks and treaties that govern the operational mechanism of member countries . Currently the European Union stands one best example of how development efforts are aligned .
 The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation in South Asia, BIMSTEC, and ASEAN would be good examples . If we want to see it closer to the region, we need to see them closer to each other, he says .
 These formal economically integrated units have helped bolster trade, development and cooperation between countries . forums like SAARC have explicitly highlighted the cooperation and agreement around achievement of Sustainable Development Goals .
 This has worked out well despite absence of any forms of international law governing these agreements . This has led to the success of these agreements, despite the absence of international laws governing them .
 There have also been international summits and declaration on global platforms that have explicitly outlined various points that mandates the compliance of sustainable development goals .
 Rio Summit/Declaration is a treaty that has been universally accepted . One such treaty is universally accepted is that of the Rio Summit . Rio Summit is one of the world's most successful treaties .
 Nations should share knowledge and technologies to achieve the goal of sustainability . Nations need to share knowledge to achieve goal of sustainable goals . Nations should also share information and technologies in order to achieve that goal .
 Sustainable development goals are the 17 global goals set by the U.N. General assembly in the year 2015 . Sustainable Development goals were set in the United Nations General assembly .
 SDG’s include social as well as economic development issues like poverty, hunger, education, global warming, water, sanitation, environment and social justice . The SDG's include poverty and education issues like global warming and global warming .
 SDGs are not necessarily governed by International law but is rather a guiding document to track development goals that have been globally agreed to and facilitated by the United Nations . SDGs have been agreed to by the U.N. and are not governed by law .
 There are no legal repercussions for not complying or achieving the SDG targets within the time-frame . There will be no legal consequences for not meeting SDG goals .
 Since there is correlation of development agenda of one country to the other, it is hard to justify international laws governing the achievement of the achievement and compliance of the same . It is difficult to justify such laws governing international laws .
 In fact, more practical approach to govern the progress of sustainable development goals is through international treaties and agreements . International treaties are often used to govern progress of development goals in the world .
 International law may not be the way out. This can be binding upon each country but to achieve this, international law is not the way to do it .
 Millennium Development Goals can give us insights on how goals set at international level can be an impetus for the countries growth and development . Millennium Development goals can be a catalyst for the country's development, says David Cameron .
 The goals were inter-dependent and emphasized the improvement in health . The goal was to improve the quality of life in the community .
 The goals were to eradicate poverty, hunger, diseases, illiteracy and illiteracy, women discrimination and environmental degradation to be achieved till 2015 using 1990 as the benchmark . 1990 was the benchmark for eradicating poverty .
 Different countries had different approach towards the goals . Different countries have different approaches to achieving success .
 The progress of these goals also varied across different nations and regions .
 In 2015, 14 percent of the population living in developing world lived on less than $1.25 a day . Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger in the world .
 The primary school net enrolment rate in the developing regions had reached 91 per cent in 2015, up from 83 per cent . Primary school net enrollment rate in developing regions reached 91 percent in 2015 .
 It was behind in meeting the global net secondary enrollment rate which stood at 59% against the global rate 64% in 2014 . However, it was behind 59% of the global enrollment rate .
 Girls had more inclusion in education in 2015 than in 1990 . Girls were more in school than they had been in 1990s .
 There has been a decline in number of deaths per children under five from 12. million in 1990 to almost 6 million in 2015 globally . The number of children's deaths per child under five has dropped from 12 million in 90 to 6 million globally .
 Nepal achieved all the targets of the MDGs which included reducing infant mortality rate, under five mortality rate and increasing immunization against measles . Nepal, however, achieved all of the targets .
 Maternity Mortality ratio declined by 45 percent from 1990 to 2015 . Southern Asia witnessed the drop in this ratio by 64 percent . The ratio dropped by 64 per cent in Southern Asia .
 HIV infections fell from 3. million cases to 2. million globally between 2000 and 2013 . HIV infections in the world dropped from 3 million to 2 million globally in 2013 .
 The people living with HIV who received antiretroviral therapy increased significantly from 80,000 people to 13. million people as measured in June 2014 . The number of people who received HIV treatment increased significantly .
 There was 37 percent fall in global malaria incidence rate and 58 percent in the mortality rate . There was also a fall in the global malaria mortality rate.
 The tuberculosis mortality rate fell by 45 percent between the years 1990 to 2013 . Similarly, the death rate of tuberculosis in the United States fell 45 percent in the same period .
 The official development assistance from developed countries amounted to $135.2 billion, an increase of 66 percent between 2000 and 2014 . 95 percent of the world’s population was covered by a mobile phone signal .
 The reach of internet increase from 6 percent of world’s population in 2000 to 43 percent in 2014 . Reach of internet rise from 6 per cent of world's population to 43 per cent in 2014.
 South Asian countries were able to meet many targets of the MDGs . South Asian nations have been able to achieve many of their MDGs targets .
 They failed to realize the need to start the implementation at local level . But they failed to realise the need for the implementation of the plan .
 Still a lot of people are deprived of good schools, hospitals, electricity, safe drinking water and health care . Still, people were deprived of better schools and hospitals, hospitals and electricity .
 Among the differently abled people, only 30% of them have income enough for self-support . Only 30% have their income enough to support themselves, according to experts .
 Regional consumption has been of more than half of the natural resources which leads to scarcity . Some natural resources are limited but the regional consumption has led to scarcity, experts say .
 If natural resources are not managed it might give rise to environmental damage and directly impact the economies of the region . Natural resources could be affected by environmental damage if not managed .
 UN: After 2005 about 60 percent of global death, 80 percent of people are affected and 40 percent of the economics damage due to natural disaster . According to sources of UN, after 2005 about about 60% of global . death .
 There should be a way to reduce the damage done by the disaster . One major natural calamity will hamper the whole economy of a region, says the author .
 The countries in South Asia have adopted to implement the SDGs, learning from the mistakes earlier . South Asia has adopted the framework the countries in the region have adopted, including South Asia .
 The Ministry of Planning, Development and Reforms in Pakistan sets goals and plans . The ministry of planning, development and reform, Pakistan, is based in Islamabad .
 In India, National Institution for Transforming India took over the Planning Commission in 2015 . The Planning Commission is the country's largest planning authority .
 Sri Lanka has set up the Ministry of Sustainable Development and Wildlife . Sri Lanka also has a ministry for sustainable development and wildlife . Sri Lankan authorities have set up a number of wildlife agencies .
 There is a need to implement certain changes and bring reforms in policies and institutional framework. Secondly, there are a need for changes and institutional reforms, she said .
 To enable faster sustainable growth, there is a need to bring changes in institutions and policies . There is also a need for change in institutions, policies to enable growth .
 There is a need to have local level organizations and more degree of decentralization . There is also a need for local level organization and more decentralization, he says .
 All stakeholders need to be included in all phases of SDGs implementation, monitoring and review . All stakeholders must be included, including all stakeholders in SDG implementation .
 This may call for the participation of civil authorities as well as the private sector . This may be the case for the first time in the country's history .
 India and Bangladesh has been growing at faster rates . While we look at the goal -Decent work and Economic Growth in South Asian Countries, we are focused on the fact that the South Asian countries are growing at greater rates .
 Nepal growth was stagnant in the years 1980 to 2015 while Pakistan had a declining rate . Nepal growth rate was stagnant between 1980 and 2015 . Pakistan's rate of growth was also stagnant in 1980-2015 .
 South Asia has emerged from the global financial crisis as the fastest growing region in Asia . Despite the fact that the current growth is not enough to accelerate the speed of poverty and hunger reduction by 2030 .
 Four out of top five countries in the world with very high proportion of informal employment are from south Asia . Dismissively, south Asian countries have failed to create decent jobs for the people as they have failed .
 The service sector with 57% share in GDP in 2013 has not created enough jobs to absorb the surplus workforce from the agricultural sector .
 Industrial sector needs a boost as it has the potential to create jobs . Industrial sector must be boosted to create more jobs in the UK .
 Goal 9 with the target to enhance the share of industry in employment and GDP needs to be addressed timely . The goal 9 needs to address timely, with the aim of enhancing the share .
 Efforts are being taken to enhance the manufacturing sector . UNESCAP calculation 2016 2016 . Efforts to enhance manufacturing sector are underway .
 In India, the Make in India Campaign seeks to improve the manufacturing sector .
 The expenditure in health and education sector was low in the south Asian countries . Moreover, there is need to foster trade and improve transportation to enhance regional value chains .
 India has skill India Program and established the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship . India has Skill India Program .
 Conditional Cash Transfers with criteria to enroll in education has helped Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh to promote schooling . Conditional cash transfers with criteria for enrolling in education have helped the three countries .
 SDG 3 and SDG 4 concern with good health and well-being, and quality education respectively . SDG 2 concern with health and education, and 3 concern with quality education and good health . SDGs 3 and 4 concern about good health, well and education .
 Investing in these sectors can provide opportunity to use the potential of the 51 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 youth population . Investing into these sectors will provide opportunity for the youth population to be developed .
 The total consumption could increase by nearly $30 trillion by 2050 in South Asia if youth are provided with opportunities for human resource development . c) Financial Inclusion . The south Asian nations have understood the need of providing social security .
 Social protection would mean ensuring basic need and social inclusion to the households . Social protection is a key part of the U.S. social policy . The U.N. government has been criticised for its lack of social support .
 Use of bank-accounts to transfer payments increase financial inclusion, transparency and efficiency . Use of account accounts to transfer money increases financial inclusion and efficiency, says experts .
 SDG 7 relates to affordable and clean energy . The National Financial Inclusion Strategy in Pakistan and Pradhan Mantri Jan-DhanYojana in India were launched to foster financial inclusion .
 It becomes necessary for nations to increase the use of renewable sources of energy, says President Obama . "It becomes necessary" for countries to increase renewable sources, says Obama .
 Bhutan has been able to meet domestic demand and export clean energy to neighboring nations . This has helped Bhutan to meet not only its domestic demand but also export clean power to neighboring countries . Bhutan is one of the world's most populous countries to have clean energy .
 These developments can help South Asian countries self-reliant for energy . These developments will help them become self-sufficient for energy, experts say .
 There is need to increase the use of public transport, energy saving equipments and waste management . There is also need to use public transport and energy saving equipment to reduce waste .
 Many industries in south Asia has started using cost cutting techniques by recycling waste and enhanced energy efficiency . This saves the cost of raw materials and energy, saving the energy and raw materials .
 Bhutan’s Planning Commission was established in 1971 and was reconstituted as the GNH Commission in January 2008 . Bhutan's Planning Commission is a planning body .
 The GNH concept is fully considered in the policymaking, planning and implementation processes . It ensures that GNH concepts are considered in policymaking and implementation .
 The Centre for Bhutan Studies is engaged in GNH surveys and development of GNH index and tools to screen policies and projects against the GNH concept . Policy, plans and programs for the development of the sector are developed and implemented by government ministries and agencies .
 The Royal Government subjects all national and sector policies to the GNH policy . The policy covers 23 determinants in nine areas, including living standards, education, health, time consumption, good governance, ecological diversity and resilience .
 They have progressively implanted sustainable development concepts and approaches to sustainable development . They include sustainable development strategies and sustainable development approaches .
 Green economy fits very well within the framework of the GNH development philosophy which invades into all 53 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 development policies and plans at various levels . Green economy is key to GNH's development philosophy .
 It also provides an alternative social mobilization mechanism to pursue sustainable development on the ground . The project is based on the idea of a sustainable development project .
 The private sector has the immense potential to tackle sustainable development challenges through innovation and the collaboration of ideas and resources . Private sector can tackle development challenges with innovation and collaboration, experts say . The world's biggest challenge is to tackle is to find a solution to sustainable development .
 Public-private partnership is being explored and sustainable development is being pursued . Therefore, various ways of public-private partnerships are being explored .
 Sustainable income means the amount of income that can be consumed in a year by an economy without compromising the consumption need in the next period . Sustainable income is the income that an economy can consume without compromising its consumption needs in the future . Sustainable incomes are the income income that a country can consume
 It subtracts the cost like crime, pollution, loss of leisure, debt and environmental damage, it adds .
 International Laws, Treaties and Conventions have taken into consideration the importance of sustainable growth as well as development of the countries . GPI can provide the much needed information to the nations to assess the activities they carry out in terms of associated costs .
 Sustainable growth would mean the use of the existing output to increase the real output . Sustainable growth means use of existing outputs to increase real output, rather than just increase output .
 The elements of the growth include technology, capital, and human resource, natural resources as well as law . Technology, capital and human resources are key to the growth .
 The issue of sustainability has been raised a lot of times in the past but it was first formally addressed in Rio Summit . Sustainability was formally addressed at Rio Summit in Rio .
 Millennium development goals set by U.N. show how targets set by international level can help individual nations move towards sustainability . Millennium Development Goals set by United Nations show us how targets can be used to help individual countries .
 South Asia was able to achieve the targets of eradicating extreme poverty and universal primary education . South Asia has also achieved the targets to eradicate extreme poverty .
 These two have significance in growth of nations in terms of job creation, skill development and human resource development . These two are important for growth of countries .
 The countries were not able to achieve all targets due to limitation of resources and good institutional and policy framework . However, the countries were also able to achieved all targets .
 For the future growth it is necessary for the countries to regionally cooperate and understand the need to save natural resources and preserve climate to ensure sustainable growth . The region needs to be regionally .
 Sustainable Development Goals very well accommodate the issues of economic growth, job creation, sustainable production and consumption, industrialization and justice . Sustainable Development goals are very well accommodated for the issues such as job creation and consumption .
 The South Asian 55 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 countries have brought changes in its institutions with greater degree of decentralization and review and monitoring system . The 55 countries have changed their institutions in order to be more decentralised .
 All the south Asian countries can learn from the Bhutanese model of growth and development . Bhutan is one of the fastest-growing countries in the world, Bhutan says .
 Learning from Bhutanese model can help in enhancing the overall welfare of the economies by meeting the needs of current generation without sacrificing future generation . Learning from the model can be beneficial for future generations .
 Gross Happiness Index used by Bhutan is perfectly aligned with the sustainable development goals . Bhutan's Gross Happiness index is based on the sustainable growth goals of the country .
 Bhutan has a good network of policy implementation and it has very well decentralized the authority to the local bodies . Bhutan is very well decentralised authority to local bodies, Bhutan says .
 Genuine Progress Indicator can help to access the sustainability of economies . Along with GNH, the Indicator will help to identify sustainability of the economies . GNH and GNH can also help to look at sustainability of countries' economies .
 International laws, agendas and treaties, though not binding in nature, have effects on the growth of nations . Finally, international laws and agendas have effects of the nations, not only on their growth .
 Nations have adopted international policies targeted for sustainable growth of the nations by carefully altering them to suit their needs and existing resources . Nations are carefully altering their policies to suit the needs and resources of their nations .
 Millennium Development Goals Final Country report; Social Statistics Division, Central Statistics Office Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India 5 .
 Nepal and Millennium Development Goals final status report; National Planning Commission 2016, Government of Nepal 6.6. Nepal . Nepal . National planning commission 2016, government of Nepal .
 Pakistan Millennium Development Goals Report 2013; Planning Commission, Government of Pakistan 9. 9.9.9 . 9.3.9 is Pakistan's Millennium Development Report 2013 .
 Bangladesh MDGS progress Report 2015; General Economics Division, Bangladesh Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 10.10.10 .
 Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals in South Asia, Key Policy Priorities and Implementation Challenges 2018 11.11.1.1 . 11.2.3.5.1: Achieved the Sustainable Goals in . South Asia . Key Policy Preoccupations and Implementation Priorities
 Limitations of the Millennium Development Goals: A Literature Review 14.5.5 . Limitations on Millennium Development goals: a Literature Review . The study was published in 1998 .
 Sustainable Development Goals, Regional Road Map for implementing the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development in Asia and the Pacific 15 . www.sustainable-environment.org.uk: Rio Declaration 16.1.1 .
 The Sustainable Development Goals and International Environment Law: Normative Value and Challenges for Implementation 18. 18. The Sustainable Goals and . International . Environment Law is a key part of the Sustainable . Development Goals .
 With very high rates of unemployment and high growth rates, India is currently experiencing jobless growth . India's unemployment rate is very high and high .
 In such a scenario, it becomes crucial to analyse India’s labour market structure to understand impediments to job creation in the manufacturing sector .
 Rigid labour laws, a characteristic of the Indian labour market, are often held responsible for poor rates of job creation . Rigorous labour laws are often blamed for poor job creation rates .
 This paper tries to address the implications of a rigid labour market on employment generation in the manufacturing sector . It looks at both empirical evidence and economic theory .
 Recent reforms in the Indian labour market are also briefly mentioned with their subsequent consequences . Towards the end, recent reforms in India's labour market were also mentioned .
 India’s industrial structure is rather unique. J21, J28, J40, J88, J20, J19, J22, J23, J24, J26, J29, J27, J38 .
 In 2000-2001 about 42% 4 of all manufacturing employment in India was in firms with 6-9 workers . 42% of manufacturing jobs in India were in firms that were with 6 to 9 workers .
 This is particularly problematic because of the large productivity gap between the two types of firms . The productivity gap is particularly high in the workplace, says the economist .
 India has not been successful in the expansion of manufacturing jobs of the kind that has transformed the economies of China and Vietnam . India has failed to expand manufacturing jobs that have transformed the economy .
 There is widespread agreement on the problems of inadequate finance for small and medium firms and of infrastructural deficiency in India . There is also a lack of infrastructure in the country, especially in rural areas .
 European countries have very strict laws against firing employees and hiring temporary workers . For instance, continental European countries are very strict about hiring and firing employees .
 Employers in those countries have less flexibility to adjust their workforces in the face of a 4 A rise from 40% in 1984-1985 . As a result, employers in those . countries have . less flexibility . to adjust workforces .
 A direct effect of this is a small or rather depressed increase in unemployment rates . A direct increase of unemployment rates is a result of the increase in joblessness .
 Firms that anticipate the firing restriction might hesitate to hire in the first place, even in good times . Although this might mitigate an increase in the unemployment rate during bad times .
 A demographic dividend of this magnitude has the potential to lift hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and raise living standards, says David Cameron . A demographic . dividend has the . potential to . lift hundreds . millions of . people from poverty .
 It is increasingly crucial to look at all factors impeding the growth of the job-creating or the manufacturing sector . Therefore, it becomes increasingly crucial for the growth .
 In this paper, I will present empirical evidence on the negligible impact of labour market rigidity on employment in industry . In the paper, we will first present evidence that rigidity in the labour market has negligible impact on employment .
 Next, I describe the theoretical justification for a rigid labour market . I also describe the theory of the labour market as a result of a rigid market .
 Then, I outline reforms in the Indian labour market and their consequences . Then, we outline how they will affect the labour market in India .
 Some countries have strong employment protection laws while some don’t . Empirical evidence on Labour Market Rigidity and Employment is published on the Labour Market .
 The Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development releases an “Overall Strictness of Employment Protection” index 5 . The index is based on the overall level of employment protection in the UK .
 The index takes values between 0. and 4. indicating the most flexible country and the most rigid country respectively . Index values range from 0.0 to 4.0 indicating the country is flexible and rigid .
 Countries with an index value less than that were considered flexible . Countries with a lower index value were considered rigid with respect to their labour markets . Those with a higher index value above that are considered rigid .
 No discernible pattern between rigidity and employment in the manufacturing sector can be figured out from the diagram . All values presented are 5 year averages between 2008 and 2012 .
 Theoretically, rigid labour laws, a characteristic of the Indian labour market 7, can provide a disincentive to hire workers . But they can also be disincentivised to hire more workers .
 Rigid labour laws make it difficult for large firms to fire workers even when they are inefficient . Rigid laws prevent large firms from firing workers even if they're inefficient .
 One would expect a positive relation between flexibility of labour laws and employment in industry or manufacturing . One would be expected to see a positive relationship between flexibility and employment .
 Several papers argue that the effects of rigid labour laws are somewhat exaggerated . Several papers have argued that the effect is exaggerated .
 Dutta Roy 8 found that over the period 19601961 to 1994-1995, the impact of job security regulations was statistically insignificant in 15 of the 16 industries studied . The impact of the regulations were statistically insignificant .
 A comprehensive survey of about 1300 manufacturing firms across nine industry groups reveal that the existence of labour laws and regulations seem to have only a marginal adverse impact on employment .
 We do not know about firms that did not enter because of the stringent labour laws . We do know about the firms that didn't enter due to the strict labour laws.
 A more comprehensive study which can isolate the impact of labour market rigidity on manufacturing employment is required to understand its true impact . The study is needed to understand the true impact of rigidity in manufacturing employment .
 Theoretical Case against Labour Market Flexibility . Economic theory tells us that free market outcomes are efficient and pareto-optimal . Labour market flexibility is a key part of the free market economy .
 Regulation of the market by the state leads to deviations from full employment of resources, says the government . Regulation of market by state will lead to deviation of full employment, he says .
 Attempts should be made to remove as many of these imperfections in the market as possible, says author .
 This view however can be contested if we take social welfare of workers into account . This view is however, contested if it is taken into account. This view should be contested by the fact that social welfare is important to the welfare of the workers .
 Competing firms can compete either on the basis of reducing unit costs by lowering wages and labour standards or by pushing up productivity with innovations in technology .
 Even Robert Solow shows how labour market rigidity cannot be held responsible for increasing unemployment . Even Solow .
 Every one of the labour regulations or restrictions was intended to promote a desirable social purpose, says the government .
 The wholesale elimination of these so called ‘rigidities’ is neither desirable nor feasible . While that would be worth knowing but the fact remains that the wholesale elimination is not desirable or feasible .
 If labour market rigidity is more than a slogan, it must be incorporated into macroeconomic model building in the normal way we think about the determination of wages and employment in modern market economies . Moreover, if we think of rigidity in the labour market, we need to think about it
 Court judgements on the interpretation of the laws also vary by states . The laws vary by which states interpret their laws .
 The term ‘inspection’ has not been defined in any of the labour laws thus leading to multiple interpretations of what it could mean . For instance, the term 'inspection' is not defined .
 Unemployment benefits allow unemployed workers to reject vacant jobs in the hope of finding something better . Generous unemployment benefits let unemployed workers reject empty jobs .
 This ‘something better’ might include not working for a while and thus reduces an economy’s efficiency in terms of full utilisation of all its resources . The ‘better’ is ‘not working’ and thus reducing the efficiency of an economy . This
 Labour laws in India today are too voluminous and ambiguous to be effective . Labour Market Reforms in India are too complex to work on labour laws .
 This only promotes costly litigation and corruption in the labour department . This is not the only way to avoid costly litigation, corruption in labour department. This is the only solution to the problem .
 A simple concept of wage has as many as 11 definitions in the corpus of Indian labour legislation . A simple definition of wage is defined by 11 definitions .
 There is, therefore, a need to simplify, rationalise and consolidate different labour laws . There is a need for simplifying, rationalising and consolidating labour laws, says Mr Singh .
 The Ministry of Labour and Employment has been taking steps for the consolidation of the 44 central labour laws into 4 major codes for simplification and rationalisation .
 The draft code on Wages Bill 2017 was introduced in the Parliament last year . It is being examined by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour on Labour .
 The draft code on Industrial Relations Bill 2018 was recently sent to the cabinet for consideration . It will be tabled in the parliament after it is approved by the cabinet .
 A major goal of codification is to have common definitions of terms like wages, establishments, employee etc., as presently different terminologies and definitions are used in various labour laws . The aim is to codify terms such as wages, employment and establishments .
 It is believed that consolidation in a few cognate groups will ensure better enforcement and more effective compliance .
 Most economists agree on the need for simplification of the current labour laws . While there is severe contention about whether these reforms can affect employment, most economists agree that simplification is needed .
 Codification cannot be viewed as just a simplification effort. However, codification is not just a codification effort . Codification is codification of the U.S. Patent Patent System .
 It proposes several changes such as revision of the minimum wage, threshold of the number of employees in a firm for specific laws etc.
 The burgeoning employment in the informal sector necessitates regulation of the sector . The government has been criticised for not regulating the informal economy .
 The prevalent abysmal conditions of employment have made the modern informal sector competitive . Abysmal employment conditions have made it competitive, say experts .
 62 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 is inevitably caught in a conundrum of low productivity and low wages . In the absence of enforcement of even minimum labour standards, it is 62 . It is 62.
 Codification of labour laws was a major part of the currently ruling NDA party’s economic reform agenda . The NDA government has taken steps to improve labour laws .
 Several reforms already enacted by NDA-led state governments in areas of labour contractors and hire & fire flexibility . Several reforms have already been enacted by state governments .
 Government of Rajasthan, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh have made it easier for employers in the organised sector to sack workers . For example, employers in organised sector can now sack workers in India .
 One must be wary of such attempts at increasing labour market flexibility . However, one should be wary, one must say, of such measures .
 In September 2016, a massive nationwide strike caused major disruption to the economy . As one would expect, this was a massive strike . The economy was hit hard by the strike .
 Flexible labour markets adversely affect the interests and welfare of workers, says the study . The study concludes that flexible labour markets negatively affect workers' interests .
 Labour market institutions play a minor role, if any at all, in determining employment . Employment in the UK is a relatively small part of the labour market . The UK's employment market is a 'minor role' in the employment market .
 This weakens the case for the total removal of labour regulations, especially relating to lay-offs and retrenchments . The government is set to remove all labour regulations from the workplace .
 Barnes shows how the insecurity of employment and income that the deregulation of the labour market would engender would be politically unacceptable . Barnes also shows how it is politically unacceptable for politicians to tackle the issue .
 We must also realise that allowing more flexibility in hiring and firing, if at all necessary, has to be combined with a reasonable scheme of unemployment compensation or adjustment assistance 11.11.11 .
 An income security system, consisting of unemployment benefits for a specified period, provisions for re-training and active assistance for job search, must precede the grant of reasonable freedom to employers to retrench workers, the government says .
 Reforms to ensure income security instead of job security should be considered . Therefore, reforms should be made to ensure job security .
 India is among the lowest spenders on social security . Codification and consolidation of labour laws is desirable as long as it simplifies labour laws .
 Other problems such as insufficient access to credit and infrastructural deficiency should receive greater attention to achieve a flourishing manufacturing sector in the foreseeable future, to impede jobless growth in India .
 Assessing private sector contributions to job creation and poverty reduction . Assess private sector contribution to private sector job creation .
 A Quarter Century of Jobless Growth in India's Organised Manufacturing . A quarter century of jobless growth in Indian Organised manufacturing .
 Economic mobility is the notion that individuals can improve their condition in life through hard work and fulfil their aspirations . The concept of economic mobility is a fascinating one .
 Off late, mobility has been increasing in developing economies, but unevenly . Mobility has increased in developing countries, but has been unevenly unevenly distributed .
 We attempt to understand the factors that could possibly explain the differences in educational mobility in 34 developing countries . The role of institutions and policies in affecting the same is also being considered .
 It was found that institutional and cultural factors play an important role in explaining this . Institutional factors play a key role in changing attitudes to young people's views .
 Economic mobility across generations, also known as intergenerational mobility, is a key element of human progress . Economic mobility is also a key part of the development of the world's economies .
 It tells us to what extent children enjoy a higher living standard as compared to their parents . It shows how much children live on a higher standard than their parents, study finds .
 A society can be deemed more or less mobile depending on whether the link between parents and children’s social status as adults as adults is looser or tighter . A society is more mobile if it has a link between children and parents' social status .
 An individual’s wage, education or occupation tends to be strongly related to those of his/her parents . In a relatively immobile society, an individual's wage and occupation tend to be closely related to his parents .
 Education is a key dimension of human progress . Education mobility a key element of economic mobility . Education is an essential part of economic prosperity .
 Education mobility is an essential element of economic mobility . Economic mobility is understood in terms of well-being rather than income alone . Education mobility should be seen as an important part of economic prosperity .
 Education tends to be a strong predictor of lifetime earnings . Mobility in education is a key factor influencing income mobility . Education is a good predictor of life earnings .
 Economic theories predict that IGM in education and income in income are positively correlated . Economic theories say IGM education is positively correlated with income income . IGM is a non-profit educational institution .
 It depends on policy interventions and institutional factors of a country . And lastly, it depends on the policy interventions of the country .
 Sustainable and inclusive growth and public policy must help give scope to such aspirations . Sustainable growth and inclusion must be given scope for public policy to help . The world needs to be more inclusive and more inclusive .
 Evidence suggests that, in too many parts of the world, mobility poses a challenge . But evidence suggests that mobility is still a big problem in many countries .
 This concern is especially acute for developing countries as it is harder for them to move from the bottom to the top of the economic ladder . Developed countries are particularly at risk of falling out of favour in the global economy .
 Developing countries have fallen behind developed countries in mobility . Developing nations have increasingly fallen behind the developed world in mobility mobility .
 Mobility has improved in some developing regions, but declined or stagnated in others . Mobility has increased in some countries, but has stagnated or declined in others, experts say .
 IGM on average has improved across developing economies since the 1950s . But improvements are highly uneven and not evident everywhere . IGM has improved in developing economies but not everywhere .
 A breakdown of trends in the IGM between the 1950s and the 1980s cohort shows positive changes are largely concentrated in East Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Middle East and North Africa .
 Absolute IGM has declined in Eastern Europe and Central Asia and stagnated in Africa . In contrast, absolute IGM declined in Central Asia, Eastern Europe, Central Asia .
 There have been many studies highlighting the factors affecting intergenerational education mobility . Intergenerational mobility is a key factor in the education of children in the UK .
 The expenditure incurred by the government on schools and primary education has a positive effect on mobility . Similarly, the expenditure incurred on schools also has an impact on mobility.
 Early childhood care and education for the development of cognitive skills at later stages of life has also been recognized as an important factor . Early childhood education and early childhood care is also important .
 We have taken indicators like GINI index and poverty headcount ratio which show this relationship . We have shown that poverty levels are linked to poverty levels .
 Family structures differ in how children are motivated to learn, what beliefs they have and what goals they have, the goals they aim to achieve and in the means of learning . 67 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 is the year 67 children will learn from their families .
 Political focus should not only be on the design of adequate incentives in school and the labor market, but also on the formation of values and beliefs in early childhood . Since mobility and thus, equality of opportunity also depend on cultural aspects, the political focus should also be on schools and labor market
 Children from disadvantaged backgrounds can be motivated by the belief that they will have free choice and control over their lives and by a competitive environment . Children are motivated by believing they will be able to choose their own life .
 Children’s endowments at birth are influenced by a number of factors including nutrition, height and weight, basic healthcare and medical services, sanitation, safe drinking water and mother's health . Factors include nutrition and height, health, medical services and basic healthcare .
 This study uses the Ordinary Least Squares approach to understand the factors that determine upward educational mobility .
 Relative mobility measures the extent to which the educational attainment of individuals is independent of the education of their parents . Relative mobility is also another way to find out mobility, using the coefficient from regressions of children’s years of education on the education .
 Higher values of this regression coefficient indicate greater persistence, and hence lower relative mobility . We have taken data for the people born in 1980, for 33 countries from 1996 to 2016 .
 The variance inflation factor was very small indicating no presence of multicollinearity . This is the result of a very small inflation factor . The variance is very small .
 Ramsey Reset Test did not reject the null hypothesis at 10 percent significant level indicating no presence of functional misspecification in the model . The Ramsey test did not . reject the negative results .
 Jarque Bera test showed that the errors were normally distributed with the null hypothesis not rejected at 5 percent significance level . The null hypothesis was not rejected .
 The histogram of residuals bears a close resemblance to a symmetric, bell shaped distribution suggesting that the normality assumption is true . Along with this, the histogram . is close to a . symmetric distribution .
 Poverty headcount ratio shows the proportion of people who live below poverty line . The poverty headcount is based on the number of people living in poverty in the United States .
 The coefficient for it is positive and highly significant which depicts that as more people are below poverty line, any improvement in education will result in upward mobility . However, if the standard of living is very high in the first place then, any education improvement will have less potential for upward mobility,
 Hard work ratio is ratio of how much value low income group of people attach to hard work . Low income group is more likely to value hard work than high income group's value .
 In our model, the coefficient of hard work ratio is negative and significant at 10% which depicts that richer people value hard work more . The coefficient of work ratio in our model is negative .
 Free choice ratio refers to the liberty of children to choose a career path on their own . The coefficient is positive and significant in our model which shows that if children have more liberty to choose their future path then there will be a higher chance of upward mobility . For example, the coefficient is
 GDP per capita which is shown in the model is highly significant and positive which depicts that the countries with higher GDP have higher chances of upward mobility . The model shows that the higher GDP has a positive outlook for upward mobility in the future .
 Account ownership of the poorest 40% is positive and highly significant because it shows that if more of the people have access to credit then incentive to invest in child’s education increases . Account ownership is positive because of the fact that it is highly significant .
 The government policies and schemes will also have a positive effect on the upward mobility . Adjusted net enrollment rate is also positive and significant which shows that the government policies are also positive .
 Free choice ratio, hard work ratio retrieved from ile:///C:/Users/asus/Downloads//cultureasdeterminant. Culture as a determinant of intergenerational educational mobility . PISA Dependent variables are dependent on PISA dependent on free choice ratio .
 Kathrin Thiemann, 2016 73 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan – Through the Lens of Gender and Caste . The challenge of access to access to sanitation is not new to India .
 The country’s demographic profile and deep-rooted traditions of patriarchy and caste system are more complex . However, what makes this problem more complex is the demographic profile of the country .
 For years, access to sanitation facilities has been influenced by identities of caste, class and gender . Access to good quality sanitation facilities is influenced by identity, class, gender, caste and class .
 Discrimination and inequitable distribution have led to skewed growth and superficial, lofty statistics . Discrimination has led to inequities in the country's economic growth . Discrimination, inequity distribution have lead to skewed statistics .
 This paper seeks to analyse the implicit framework, implementation and limitations of the Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan – India’s largest sanitation project and movement – through the lens of gender, caste and class . It also seeks to examine the implications of the project through gender,
 JEL Classification: I14 1. Sanitation, India, Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan, gender, caste, class, class JEL . Sanitation is India's first sanitation project .
 The Swachh Bharat Mission was launched on 2nd October, 2014 by the Government of India, with an aim to eliminate open defecation by constructing community and household owned toilets . The aim is to eliminate the practice by constructing toilets all across the country by 2019 . The Sw
 The former operates under the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation and the latter under Ministry of Urban Development . The former operate under the same ministry of drinking water and sanitation .
 Government statistics show significant resource allocation and progress under the programme . Expenditure and outlays are significant resource allocations and progress has been made .
 As per 2018 Budget documents, the Central Government has spent more than 56,000 crore rupees under the programme . As per the 2018 Budget Documents, the central government has spent over 55,000 rupees .% of the spending has been done in rural areas .
 Central funding is supposed to be 75% of the total expenditure, with state governments contributing an additional 25% . The actual spending would exceed this amount as the central funding would exceed the actual spending .
 State governments can also generate funds over and above its minimum 25% share to make projects viable . State governments are also able to generate funds to make them viable .
 74 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 companies, especially under their Corporate Social Responsibility programmes, have also contributed to the funds, although there is no authoritative measure of this . 74 companies, such as 74 under their Social Responsibility programmes, also contributed .
 The rest of the world steadily works towards eliminating open defecation in India . The problem continues to persist in India despite efforts to eliminate it .
 According to the Swachhta Status Report, in rural India, 55.4% households contribute to open defecation . The report was published by the National Sample Survey Office under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation .
 The practice of open defecation is associated with several negative externalities causing a detrimental impact on health . The practice has a negative impact on the environment . Open defecations are associated with a number of health problems .
 Infectious diarrhea, malnutrition and stunted growth among children, reduction in India’s human capital are a few dire consequences . India's human capital is at risk from malnutrition, malnutrition, and malnutrition .
 A recent study conducted in five states of rural India found a large revealed preference for open defecation . This implies that people choose to defecate in the open even when other alternatives are available .
 Study reports that many people living in households with latrine access nevertheless defecate in the open as a result of cultural and behavioral norms, social norms, and infrastructural limitations of government constructed toilets .
 Central Rural Sanitation Program was launched in 1986 to improve sanitation coverage in rural areas . The first major Union Government program on sanitation was launched by Union Government in 1986 .
 Total Sanitation Campaign focused on information, communication and education with a ‘community led’ and ‘people centered’ approach .
 Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan is seen as the most ambitious sanitation project and movement in the country till date . And most recently, it was seen as a major sanitation project in India .
 Access to water and sanitation and the quality of these services is influenced by identities of gender, caste and class in our country . However, access to water is strongly influenced by identity, caste, class in India .
 We question and analyse how layered this access is and how institutions of patriarchy and caste system continue to affect the experience of certain sections of the population in negotiating access to sanitation .
 Women have to calculate, plan and limit one’s trips to the toilet on a daily basis . Imagine having to calculate and limit your daily toilet trips on the toilet .
 Closing times of public toilets for females are as early as six o’clock in the evening, subject to the whims and fancies of toilet attendants . Much of this planning is a consequence of closing times being as early .
 This leaves women with close to no alternatives other than heading to the fields to relieve themselves at night . This leaves them with no other options but to go to the field for the night .
 Reports suggest that the condition of the toilets is too deplorable, discouraging women from using them . Even in toilets that don’t close early, reports suggest that they are too dangerous .
 There are several disconcerting accounts of women keeping a check on what they eat at night .
 Some skip dinner and monitor their fluid intake in order to kill the urge altogether . This has adverse implications on their health, increasing the chances of suffering from chronic constipation, urinary tract infections, kidney stones and skin problems .
 Complications during pregnancy and in menstruation cycles are also common . Complications are common during pregnancy, menstruation and pregnancy cycles .
 Most women have faced harassment in some form or the other, which further diminishes their access to toilets and deeply impacts their psyche . Further, I contend that most women have . faced harassment .
 The infrastructure of the toilets or lack thereof worsens the situation making women vulnerable and easy targets . Moreover, the lack of toilets or toilets makes the situation worse .
 Weak structures, faulty design of cubicles, low walls, absence of latches and female attendants lead to the prioritization of sexual safety over physical health and well being by the common woman, plunging her in a vicious cycle .
 Historical and institutional discrimination and subjugation of certain classes led to their isolation in society . The social status of these classes has been described as 'isolated'
 Even today, Scheduled Castes households are located on the periphery of villages or cities . Scheduled castes are often located on periphery of village or city centres .
 This poses logistical constraints on water supply accompanied by high costs of building toilets . Water supply and high costs for building toilets are also a problem . The country's water supply has been hit by logistical constraints .
 It is delusional to deny the role caste ethos plays in access to sanitation in India . The role of caste ethos is key to sanitation access in India, says Ravi Agrawal .
 According to Census 2011, 7.94 lakh latrines exist in the country from which night soil is removed by humans . According to census 2011, Census 2011: 7,94 lakh of night soil are removed from the soil .
 This stems from the belief that sanitation is the work of the lower castes . This belief is said to stem from belief that it is work of a lower caste castes.
 Anand Teltumbde writes, “Indian culture, which is nothing but a caste culture, externalizes the responsibility of maintaining cleanliness to a particular caste.”
 More than untouchability, a caste ethos is pervasively reflected in the behavior of Indians . The caste ethos of India is reflected in its behavior, says author .
 Modi's cleanliness drive from Valmiki Colony actually reinforced the association between Valmikis and scavenging . He argues that it will never occur to Modi that his act of . beginning the cleanliness . drive actually reinforced . association .
 The use of words like spiritual, enlightenment and 'Gods' is deliberate and reaffirms the regressive and discriminatory belief that a person’s livelihood is pre-decided in accordance with his birth into a particular caste and class, perpetuating the principles of a dehumanizing caste
 It is unlikely to achieve the target of an ‘open defecation free India’ by 2019 with only an infrastructural push . Conclusion: It is highly unlikely to achieved the target with only a push from 2015 onwards .
 Merely providing toilet ‘access’ without promoting toilet use is unlikely to reduce open defecation drastically, says the study .
 Programs must concentrate on behavioral change, not just infrastructructual change . Programs must also focus on behavioral changes, says Dr. John Defterios .
 Interlinkages between sanitation, gender and sexual violence, caste, class and space must be understood and further explored in academic and social policy discourse . The interlinkages are also important to be understood in academic discourse .
 The gaps in the present infrastructure must be addressed in order to cater to the needs of different sections of society . Pregnant women, people with disabilities, elderly people, transpersons and women with menstrual hygiene requirements .
 Rethinking Governance of Public Toilets Lessons for Swachh Bharat from Hyderabad . Rethinks governance of public toilets in India . Lessons for swachh bahsai for Swashashah .
 Programmes Undertaken by Government of India to Improve Rural Sanitation . Government takes steps to improve rural sanitation .
 Studies show higher numbers of women in parliament contribute to stronger attention to women's issues . Women in parliament generally contribute to greater attention to issues such as women's rights .
 Women's political participation is a prerequisite for gender equality and genuine democracy . Women's participation is the fundamental prerequisite to gender equality, says Ms. Anna Urry .
 It facilitates women's direct engagement in publicdecision-making and is a means of ensuring better accountability to women . It is a tool to ensure better accountability for women .
 Only 22 per cent of all national parliamentarians were women as of June 2016, a slow increase from 11 per cent in 1995 . 11 women are serving as Head of State and 12 serving as Heads of Government .
 Women black to raise their voices those ideas in the political sphere . However, this is only something formal and in reality women black are able to voice their ideas .
 Female members of the parliament complain that whenever they want to say something or act out of the plan, which the powers of the country give them, they put their political career under a serious danger . Regardless the statistics, the rights of women politicians are violated here .
 The numbers are here to indicate only the formal part of the situation . Their actions are heavily restricted so, the numbers are only limited . The number of people who take part in the protests is limited .
 For many decades politics was considered a male dominated sphere where women had nothing to do . Women's rights have long been a problem for many of the world's politicians .
 Female participation in politics had specially enlarged in 1954 when the United Nations convention on political rights went into force . Women's participation in political politics was specially enlarged when the U.N. convention went into effect .
 Of course, increasing the rate of women’s participation is not, nor should it be, just a numbers game . This enabled women to gain equal rights to vote, hold an office and have an access to public services .
 It is also about ensuring that the voices of women who are represented are heard, and that their views and contributions are valued . It's also important to ensure that women's voices are heard .
 There are instances where responsibility for so-called ‘feminine’ portfolios, such as health and childcare, are allocated to female cabinet members . While responsibility for the more ‘masculine” portfolios, like defense and finance, is allocated to male cabinet members, such
 It's difficult to deny that getting an office in the political sphere for women is much more difficult than for men . After all the measures, WE STILL LAG BEHIND, we STILL lags behind, says Hillary Clinton .
 Statistics of women participation in politics state once again that women still remain underrepresented in this sphere . The reasons come from deeply rooted stereotypes which unconsciously reflect on today's situation as well .
 The obstacles women face constantly changes throughout the time but continue to create not fewer hardships for women . Because of lack of support, women continue to be underrepresented in politics around the world .
 Many women politicians from different corners of the world complain about getting sexist treatment from media which shows lack of respect towards their gender . Many female politicians have complained about getting sexism from media .
 The non-equal approach towards women brings lack of confidence among women and caused a huge gender gap in politics . Non-equal approaches to women have caused lack of trust among women, says Ms Gandhi .
 In this project we try to find the factors that affect the representation of women in parliaments all over the world . The project is based on a study of women's representation in the world's parliament .
 There are a variety of factors that influence women participation ranging from political, social and economic and legal factors . Women's participation in the U.S. is considered a form of formative adulthood .
 Worldwide, women constitute only 19.9% of parliaments, despite composing of just over 50% of the population . Women constitute just 19.7% of parliament seats in the world .
 Prior research has emphasized the type of electoral system, quotas, the economic affluence of a country, the timing of women’s suffrage, as well as the political culture of the country .
 There are three predominant systems: Proportional representation, Semi-proportional system and Plurality system . There are two predominant systems for representation in the United States .
 Theories suggest that women’s representation will be higher under a more proportional electoral system than under a less proportional electoral formula . Women's representation is more likely to be higher than under less proportional voting system .
 In the scholarly milieu, there is general agreement that electoral institutions are an important factor affecting the level of women’s representation .
 Multiple studies have consistently shown that women’s representation is higher under proportional representation than under a plurality system or semi-proportional system .
 Countries that have legally imposed quotas or in which several parties have implemented quota clauses are more likely to have more female deputies than countries where there are no quota clauses .
 This institutional factor, is seen as an efficient, but selective method of increasing women’s representation . There is a lot of variation in the implementation of these quotas across countries . The institutional factor is also seen as a selective method .
 Theory suggests that when applied more frequently by states or by the parties themselves, their relative importance with regard to women's representation should increase .
 A woman may achieve high levels of education but be reluctant to pursue a role in public life, such as in parliament . A woman's education means she may not be interested in a public role in politics .
 There are contradictory findings on whether the wealth of a country is an important factor in determining women’s representation . However, this statement lacks significant proof and thus there is contradictory findings, according to the study .
 Franklin states that female empowerment is a slow process . In his study of turnout rates, Franklin says that women's turnout rates are too low .
 During the first elections after gaining suffrage, women’s turnout rates were significantly lower than those of men . The first elections were held after women's suffrage gained the right to vote .
 The gap has decreased, as successive cohorts have grown accustomed to voting . However, the gap has been decreasing, with successive cohorts growing accustomed to it .
 According to Kenworthy and Malami and Matland, voting rights stand for the political empowerment of women . The same socialization process has occurred for women holding office .
 Theory states that the earlier women gained equal political rights, the earlier they could get involved in politics . The theory states that they could then get involved with politics .
 In the long run, this involvement should lead to women’s political empowerment and to more female deputies, says D.C. Rep. Nancy Pelosi .
 Research typically uses proxy variables such as region and religion to capture the effects of cultural and attitudinal differences . Cultural factors are hard to measure, such as cultural factors .
 Recent work by Reudin found that more direct measures of attitudes towards women held higher predictive power .
 Study uses the Ordinary Least Squares approach to understand the factors that determine the percentage of seats held by women in the lower house of parliaments across countries .
 The percentage of seats held by women in the lower house of the parliament across the 51 countries as of 2016 . As of 2016, the percentage of women in parliament in 51 countries was at the highest .
 A number of models were examined to understand the effects of various groupings of factors in determining political representation of women across countries .
 Only GDP per capita was found to be significant at the 5% level of significance . GDP was also found to have significant significance at 5% significance level .
 This indicates that socio economic factors alone do not have any explanatory power, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "Socioeconomic factors alone don't have any explanations for this"
 The second model included the political factors alone existence of gender quota, years since women suffrage and type of electoral system . The other model included existence of a gender quota and years since suffrage .
 The existence of quota and years since women suffrage were significant at the 5% level of significance and 10% significance . The type of electoral system at the 10% of significance was significant .
 It was concluded that socio-economic factors or political factors in isolation do not explain the dependent variable satisfactorily . Since the above two models had very low explanatory power, it was concluded .
 A combination of cultural factors and religion was needed to be incorporated in the project . The project was designed to incorporate both cultures and religion .
 In this model, existence of quota, percentage of female labour force, predominant religion and GDP per capita were taken . The model was based on the existence of quotas, quotas and predominant religion .
 Christianity showed positive impact on political representation of women and significant at 1% level . Christianity showed significant impact on the political representation in the U.S. Christian faith was significant at the highest level .
 Islam, did not have significance, but had a negative sign which complies with existing theory . Islam did have significance but had negative sign, according to existing theory. Islam was not significant enough to have significance .
 Percentage of female labour force had negative coefficient and no significance . But, on the other hand, percentage of female workforce had a negative coefficient . Percentage of women in the workforce had no significance, says study .
 Since the p value was found to be greater than 0.05, there is no heteroscedasticity . The p value is greater than that of 0.01 . Since that p is higher than 0 .05, the p is considered to be the highest level of heteros
 Since the p value was found to be greater than 0.05, we take the model to be correctly specified . Since the model was correctly specified, it is assumed that the model is correct .
 The correlation matrix showed a strong negative correlation between Islam and percentage of women labour . It also showed a negative correlation with the number of women working in the workforce .
 auxiliary regressions were run, where each explanatory variable was regressed on the remaining 85 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 ones . The results were analyzed using an analysis of 85 of the remaining remaining 85 equations .
 Percentage of women labour was taken as dependent variable, a high R2 value of 0.705, proving a correlation . Women's labour rate was 0.7% in the study .
 Taking Islam to be the dependent variable also gave R2 as 0.709 . Similarly taking Islam was also a dependent variable in the study .
 Both percentage of female labour and Islam is collinear with other variables . This shows that both percentage of women working in the labour force and Islam are collinears with other factors .
 Explanatory variables taken – GDP per capita, predominant religion and existence of quota . Explanation is based on GDP, population size, religion and quota .
 Christianity to be significant at the 1% level and GDP per capita at the 5% level . The existence of quota and existence of quotas is significant at 5% .
 The explanatory power hasn’t reduced after removing percentage of female labour . Adjusted R^2 was 38.73% and adjusted R2 was 43.6% .
 Since the p value was greater than 0.05, there is no heteroscedasticity . The p value is greater than that of the previous p value .
 Since the p value was greater than 0.05, the model was specified correctly . The model is specified correctly and the model is correct .
 Countries like United kingdom, Netherlands, Norway and Germany have gender quotas and have high representation of women in parliament than the countries like Bangladesh, India and China . The model confirms with expectations that presence of a gender quota has a significant, positive impact on political participation .
 Countries like Luxembourg, Japan and Switzerland could have an environment that better encourages women in political participation . GDP per capita too has a positive impact, meaning richer countries like Luxembourg and Japan could have a better environment .
 Christianity was found to have a highly significant impact on the participation of women in politics . Christianity found to be a significant influence on women's participation in politics. Christianity was also found to influence women's political participation .
 Most world religions maintain male social dominance within societal structures . It is observed that most religions maintain social dominance in society .
 They do not advocate for women emancipation in terms of complete equality . Women's rights advocate for equality, but not complete equality, they say .
 Most of the countries in this study had Christianity as its predominant religion were Nordic countries . The study was conducted in Denmark, Norway and Sweden .
 Nordic countries are world leaders in gender parity in gender equality . It is well known that Nordic countries have gender equality in the workplace .
 These countries have given abundant opportunities to women to rise to positions of leadership . Women in leadership roles in these countries have had opportunities to rise from poverty to success .
 The policies in these countries have made it possible for women to balance work and family by means of generous paid maternity leave and post maternity re-entry programmes . The policies are made possible by generous maternity leave programmes .
 Nordic countries have gender quota in boards of directors of companies too . Nordic countries also have gender quotas in board members of companies .
 Christianity to be indicative of Nordic countries and Islam as indicative of Middle East countries, the result can be fairly explained . The result is that Christianity is indicative of the Nordic countries .
 We could not find a strong and positive impact of percentage of female labour on political participation of women . But contradictory 87 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 to expectations, we could not see a strong impact on female labour .
 An R-squared value indicates how well the observed data, fits an expected trend . Limitations: Reasons for a low R^2 are cited as reasons for the low number .
 Low P values indicate a real relationship between the significant predictors and the response variable . Even when R-squared is low, low P values still indicate a relationship with the significant predictorors .
 In our model, we have variables which are statistically significant individually, which means we can infer a relationship between each variable and the dependent variable, despite getting a low R squared value . We have a model that shows the relationship between the dependent and dependent variables .
 The inference of an R square value depends on what you are trying to predict, what your predictors are, and how reasonable it is that you can predict that . The inference is based on the fact that the value is an 'R square value'
 Some fields of study have an inherently greater amount of unexplainable variation . Some fields have a greater degree of variation than others .
 Models where there are psychological, behavioural or social factors involved, it is difficult to explain all the variance because these factors are hard to predict and highly subjective in nature . There may be a large number of other factors at play, such as psychological factors .
 Having a low R-squared value when the independent variables are statistically significant, can still lead to important conclusions . Having a high R-Squared value can lead to an important conclusion, however .
 We have seen that the concept of UBI originated as a response to the massive job loss due to automation and the rise of artificial intelligence . UBI is a form of bi-human welfare that allows people to live a lifetime of their own life .
 India is trying to use universal basic income, though not entirely universal in nature, as an instrument for poverty alleviation .
 The word basic signifies that society expects everyone at the very minimum to earn and if they don’t earn it they are given money . UBI is the idea of a society where everyone has a pan card .
 Some people above a certain income pay tax, some below that income don't pay tax and some even below that don’t pay tax . Some people instead receive money through a negative income tax .
 One is that you believe that the economy is already at or near the PPC and that your economy at current levels of per capita income will achieve steady state . The other is that if you believe your economy is at or below PPC, the economy will reach steady state.
 The other is what I’ve described in previous writing as compensatory policy which is where targeted interventions come in . This is where the other is where compensation policy comes in, and where it comes in .
 It is similar to when you check into a hotel and the hotel promises you hot water and a clean room . It's similar to a hotel that promises hot water, clean room and hot food, but not hot water .
 If you don't get hot water the hotel pays you compensation for the inconvenience caused . However, if you don’t receive hot water, the hotel will pay you compensation .
 When you say that you will give someone money for being in poverty it means that you are compensating them after 70 years of independence . 20 years saw roughly steady growth for the fact that they are still in poverty .
 It carries the message that the only solution that exists is to compensate the people in poverty and that their problem cannot be solved and is an acknowledgment of failure . The only solution to the problem is compensation for the poor .
 There has been a lot of discussion about the NYAY scheme that the Congress is proposing during this year’s election season .
 The proponents of this scheme have been talking about how the cost of implementing the scheme are not as gigantic as they appear to be on face value . They say the cost is not as huge as it appears to be .
 The have claimed that the scheme will be launched in phases and even though pilots may incur a lot of cost, with subsequent phases of the scheme it will become self-financing in nature through the multiplier effects . The increase in the income of the poor will result in higher spending as one
 Simple economics requires you to look at the demand side and the supply side of the market . Simple economics involves looking at the supply and demand sides of the economy .
 One is to increase taxes but I want to know from where they will increase these taxes and what taxes you will increase . The other is to know where you would increase taxes and how you will do it .
 When you borrow more domestically, you adversely impact the income distribution . When the government borrows it borrows from banks and financial institutions, the government borrowed from them .
 Borrowing is bad for the income distribution because when you borrow from the rich to transfer to the poor you make the rich richer as you pay interest to them for the privilege of developing their own nation . That is my fundamental problem with financing through borrowing for it is only a loan from
 If you say you will finance it through an expenditure cut I want to know what expenditure cut will you undertake to analyse the multiplier effects . If you want to finance it, you need to look at the multiplier effect of the cuts .
 This is very different from the Keynesian balanced budget multiplier where you print money and you use that money to stimulate demand . On the supply side you often find excess supply but no demand. This is different from Keynesian balance budget multiplier .
 For example, a poor person is given some money. It is a reasonable assumption that he or she will buy food with that money . It is an assumption that the money will be used to buy food, rather than buy food .
 The price of onions will go up as more of the poor buy onions . If that supply doesn’t rise,then the price of onion will go higher .
 For higher income groups the elasticity of demand for onions is zero but for the poor person it is not . For higher incomes, demand for onion is zero, but for poor people it is zero . For the poor, demand is zero for onions .
 Unless, you can tell me the immediate supply response to the money given to the poor and the multiplier impact I cannot determine the gains, I can't determine how much .
 50% of the shirt I am wearing is made in India but it is an expensive Marks and Spencer’s shirt . Let's look at clothing .
 82% of Sarojini Nagar shirts are imported from Bangladesh or Vietnam . But if you go to buy a shirt, it's imported from either country .
 Indian state is moving from a development state to a compensatory state, says author . He says it is not a state unable to provide better education and other facilities that the poor need .
 NYAY is nothing but compensation for the failure to lift people out of poverty, says Nelson Mandela . "NYAY" is "nothing but compensation" for failure of lifting people from poverty, Mandela says .
 Even if it is being justified on the grounds of the multiplier benefits it might create, I need to know how this is being financed . If these benefits are financed through taxation there will be negatives . If financed through borrowing, if financed through expenditure cuts, I must know what the cuts will
 If the scheme will be financed by cutting expenditure on statues, then I have no problem . But if it will be funded by cutting spending on providing milk to children, I have a problem . If it is financed by reducing expenditure on providing children with milk, I'm worried .
 I am not clear about what the expenditure cut will be and I question whether the government will undertake the desired cuts . I'm not sure what the budget cuts will be, but I question the government's commitment to cuts .
 People have also stated that they will not be increasing taxes for the middle class but they will be doing away with non-core subsidies . Following up to that, people have also said that they won't be increasing tax for middle class .
 You can do away with the subsidy given to senior citizens, ex-army force personnel, children to go to school, women etc. You can also do away from the subsidy for senior citizens and ex-armed force personnel .
 There are many subsidies you can cut but whether they are core or non-core depends on how you see them . The subsidies are not core or not core, but they are important to the government .
 The point I am making is that subsidies are given for purposes other than poverty alleviation . The point of the point is that the subsidies are not intended to help people in poverty alleviated .
 When you say, you want to cut some subsidy you send the message that you prioritize poverty transfers rather than the subsidy . When you cut subsidies, it sends a message to prioritise poverty transfers, the government says .
 The biggest one was fuel subsidy that has been cut in very large measure . The biggest cut in fuel subsidy was the fuel subsidy subsidy .
 Another subsidy has been subsidy to art and culture through the financing of museums . Another subsidy is subsidy to arts and culture by museums .
 I can always find the money but when cutting the government states that no longer is that area a national priority, I can't find it . I can find money, but cutting government says it's no longer a priority, he says . He adds that cutting government will not be a national
 BJP’s national security manifesto promises a free hand to security forces to curb terrorism and extremism . BJP promises that they will speed up the buying up defence equipment .
 Modi has promised to alleviate poverty to a single digit within the next five years if he comes to power . At the same time, he has promised the poverty rate will be a single-digit within five years .
 What happens in defence is that we allocate money to buy something but we do not buy it . What happens is that . We allocate money for defence but not to buy it. We buy it, they say, but we don't buy it.'
 The defence budget is consistently and systematically on the capital side underspent and thusif you spend it, it is not a problem because that money was not otherwise available for poverty reduction . Defence budget is consistent and systematically underspent .
 At the level of policy, you are saying that we will not finance poverty reduction by cutting defence . At the time, you would not have been able to cut defence spending, you said .
 Green bonds in India have grown from a virtual nonexistence to a $7 billion market . Green bonds have grown to a global $7billion market .
 Green bonds can be a very important instrument in financing our sustainable transformation . I think it is essential to understand that green bonds are an important instrument . Green bonds will be used to finance the development of the country's sustainable development .
 I am very hopeful that green bonds will be a major way in which we will be able to get a better deal from global financial markets than we have been getting so far . Global financial markets put a premium on green and we should exploit that. I'm very hopeful of green bonds being
 Many countries are following the green route rigorously and there have been varied innovative attempts to establish green foundations globally such as the cap and trade emissions market .
 India is the first country in the history of the world to be asked to complete its development transformation without recourse to fossil fuels . The decision to go green in this country is not a decision we need to take because India is first country to do so .
 In the case of China or Australia, Australia or Japan, they first went brown, they completed their development and then they replaced brown with green . China and Australia are the first countries to go brown and then replace it with green.
 Green is efficient, productive and a better business case than non-green. Therefore, the impetus must be to understand that green is efficient and productive . Green is an important business case for the world, and it is a good business case .
 A house that conforms to green standards is cheaper to build and of a superior quality in terms of services it provides . For example, a house that conters to green standard is cheaper than a house .
 A house that is more long lasting and provides better sanitation is built much more cheaply by using green materials and building codes . A green house is built more cheaply with green materials, say experts .
 It is embarrassing how India mines its coal, says Ravi Agrawal . "We have open cast mines, people digging in with their bare hands, coal dust everywhere," he says .
 If we cleaned up that entire ecosystem, efficiency in coal efficiency in power plants would go up . Production and utilisation of power plants could go up in 2019, experts say .
 Policy decisions to go green must highlight how much efficiency do we get out of them . Therefore, policy decisions should highlight how efficient they can be made, say experts .
 Once we do that our internal rate of return will rise, IRR will rise and will help financing that too too . We will be able to raise the IRR of our own, and that will help finance that too. Once we get that, we will see a rise in our
 India is a low productivity country and going green will improve Indian productivity and be positive for the nation, says Ravi Agrawal . Going green will be a good thing for India, says Agrawala .
 "In that sense, we are in a very fortunate situation compared to nations that have already completed their development transformation," says President Obama .
 I do not believe that in either of these two years the government could not have moved towards those targets if it would have exercised political will . The government could have moved closer to those targets in the past two years if it had exercised its political will, says Simon Cowan .
 Farm loan wavers can be financed by increasing taxes or cutting expenditure elsewhere . Farm loans can be funded by raising taxes or increasing expenditure elsewhere, say experts .
 There is no reason to compromise the fiscal deficit target because if you do, you are effectively borrowing for these incremental expenditures . The U.S. is borrowing for incremental expenditures, the government says .
 What worries me is the administrative and executive capability in the Ministry of Finance . When the Finance Minister makes a statement in the Budget on the floor of the House and is forced to break his or her word, next year it reduces the credibility of the Finance Ministry and of India .
 For people who are so focused on maintaining Indian nationalism, pride and credibility, I find it surprising that they are ready to sacrifice credibility at the altar of convenience every year .
 An edited clip, which showed the very next ball going for a four, went viral on social media . Many suspect that he was involved in spot-fixing . The clip caused many to suspect that the next ball was a four .
 While it might be easy to say that those who earn little in comparison to their counterparts are most tempted to cheat, this hardly seems to be the case . Those earning little earn little compared to those earning more than their counterparts do .
 An athlete with a corrupt mind will always find ways to earn money, irrespective of how affluent he/she is . An athlete always finds ways of earning money regardless of how rich he is .
 Let us assume that you are one of the athletes participating in a race . We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we've seen this .
 You are confident that the other players are using performance enhancing drugs to win. You can be confident that they are using it to help them win the World Cup . You are also confident that other players using performance-enhancing drugs are also using it .
 Players cheat when they believe that their competitors are cheating as well as themselves . Thus, players cheat when players believe that they are cheating .
 Players know that the chances of getting caught by the administrators are very slim . Administrators themselves don’t have any incentives to punish the perpetrators . This is because the players know that they can't get caught by administrators .
 When a player is caught and exposed, the integrity of the sport or the tournament in question also comes under scrutiny . The integrity of a sport or a tournament also comes into question .
 This makes it difficult for the administrators to sell the sport to potential sponsors and the customers who buy the tickets for the games . It also makes it hard for them to sell their sport to the potential sponsors or customers .
 It is this money earned that funds the hefty compensations of the players and the administrators . After all, the money earned is used to pay players and administrators .
 To cheat and to let others cheat is in everyone's best interest . Hence, to cheat and let others cheated is in the best interest of everyone, says the author .
 Spot-fixing makes games more exciting for spectators, especially spot-fixers . Another reason for players to cheat is that it makes the games exciting for the spectators .
 Nail-biting finishes give more of an adrenaline rush than one-sided games to the viewers . Nail biting finishes attract more media attention and coverage .
 The Board of Control for Cricket in India has come out in support of Pant . Pant said that his comment was interpreted incorrectly out of context by many . Pant's comment was misinterpreted by many, says the BCA .
 The Netflix revolution has completely transformed India’s consumption of digital entertainment . Flashing placards displaying Swiggy or FoodPanda outside restaurants have become a common sight .
 Digitisation has touched our lives subtly in so many ways and this trend is here to stay . Digitising is a digital revolution in the digital world, and it's not going away .
 They hold the potential to bring about a paradigm shift in the way financial services are delivered, say experts . They say they could be used as a model for financial services .
 The Indian populace has been very receptive to the trend of digitization as evident by the smartphone explosion, increasing digital payments, expanding e-commerce market, rising consumption of digital entertainment and use of apps .
 This will influence consumers’ buying behavior as internet becomes their biggest source of pre-purchase research . The internet becomes a big source of research for consumers . Consumers will be influenced by the internet as they search for products online .
 This presents an ideal scenario for the growth of fintech firms in India . Fintech companies will be able to tap into the future of the country's financial technology sector .
 Many global firms like Google Pay, Amazon Pay have also entered the Indian fintech landscape . Fintech firms like Amazon Pay and Google Pay are also in India .
 Despite banks being omnipresent in urban areas, they are unable to meet the demands of the younger generation . The younger generation does not want to wait in queues at a bank and wants quick procedures on a fully automated digital platform .
 This has provided e-commerce firms the space to innovate and provide efficient financial services at lower costs . E-commerce has provided an opportunity to innovate at lower cost, experts say .
 India's inability to create functional banking infrastructure has been recognized as one of the impediments preventing rural – urban and regional convergence and the spread of financial services . Greater financial inclusion is one of India's core objectives of India’s growth agenda .
 Focus has shifted to digital modes for greater connectedness and to bridge this information divide . Thus, the focus has shifted on digital modes .
 To support this, the government rolled out its flagship Jan Dhan Yojana scheme . The government has rolled out the scheme to boost the economy .
 The National Payments Corporation of India was set up jointly by the RBI and the Indian Banks’ Association in 2007 to revolutionize the settlement systems and retail 95 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 payments .
 This has resulted in the evolution of the national payments interface and technology platforms . This has led to the development of national payments interfaces, says the minister .
 The number of fintech startups in India has exponentially increased driven mainly by venture capital funds and private equity investors . Fintech startup startups in the country have been driven by private equity and venture capital .
 Fintech firms are gaining ground and have higher outreach . This coupled with the growing telecom industry, plummeting data costs and greater use of mobile internet services has allowed fintech companies to gain ground .
 This has disrupted the traditional financial services market and most strongly impacted micro, small and medium enterprises lending . This has also impacted micro and small enterprises lending, it has been said .
 MSMEs generate more employment compared to any other sector except agriculture . India is a manufacturing hub for the first time in its history . MSME is key to making India a big manufacturing hub .
 Despite their heterogenous character, they face the common challenge of lack of access to institutional credit . Despite their diverse backgrounds, they are still struggling to find a way to get credit .
 MSMEs have started using digital platforms to search for business information . They use emails and WhatsApp for communication, make and receive payments and sell their products .
 GST has allowed MSMEs to create a database of transactions, bank account statements and tax returns which has increased their creditworthiness . GST has increased the creditability of MSME businesses .
 MSMEs are generally viewed as suboptimal borrowers by the traditional banking system due to incomplete financial statements, lack of any meaningful collateral and high cost of lending . MSME businesses are generally seen as sub-optimal lenders by traditional banking systems .
 MSMEs find long and tedious procedures, bureaucratic and opaque system, lethargic and unhelpful attitude of bank employees, short loan tenure and complicated rules are the major factors discouraging them from availing formal credit . MSMES find the long, tedious procedures and bureaucratic system,
 They largely rely on informal sources such as borrowing from friends, relatives, moneylenders etc. As a result, they rely on friends, family and relatives to make money .
 One of the most obvious advantages of digital lending platforms is loan approval speed . Digital lending platforms can be used to make loans easier to approve .
 The 3-1-0 model implies three minutes to decide, one minute to transfer the money and zero human touch is increasingly being advertised . The model is being advertised across the world as a way to save money .
 Digital lending firms are able to generate greater insights into borrowing behaviour . 96 ECOLLOQUIAL 2019 will use surrogate data such as telco and utility payments to identify borrowing patterns .
 Digital lending firms have leaner staff, efficient business models enabling them to enhance operational cost efficiency . Digital lending companies have leanier staff and leaner business models .
 Digital lending start-ups are using advanced tech like data analytics, artificial intelligence and blockchain to determine creditworthiness of potential borrowers . Lenders are using data analytics and artificial intelligence to determine the creditworthiness .
 Right now e-commerce digital aggregators are collaborating with banks and NBFCs to extend their services . But they have the ability to become standalone players . Right now they are working with banks to extend services but they can be standalone .
 India's startup ecosystem is becoming more sophisticated and expanding to tier II and tier III cities . With the addition of 1200+ startups and 8 unicorns that is a privately held startup that has crossed $1 billion valuation in 2018, India’s startup ecosystem has become more sophisticated . India
 The growth of incubators and accelerators like Microsoft accelerator and IIM Calcutta Innovation Park is giving startups the much-needed impetus . Growing network of seed and angel investors, government initiatives like tax rebates and Fund of Funds for Startups programme, are giving startups impetus .
 To prevent India’s demographic dividend from turning into a demographic curse, it is necessary to create a technologically abled workforce which holds a competitive advantage in global labour markets . India's demographic dividend is needed to prevent it turning into the demographic curse .
 India’s information technology abilities already hold significant power in the world attracting foreign investment . The country is known for its information technology capabilities .
 Digitisation and formalisation hold the key to catapult India into the future . India needs to digitise and formalise the use of technology .
 Fintech companies transform the financial services landscape in India . The battle for the Indian consumer is on the rise of fintech firms .
 A day meant to be as ordinary as any other, now boasts of a remarkable and instrumental judgement in its name . It is a remarkable day for the first time in its history .
 It is extremely unfortunate and inhuman to note that the answer to all the above questions remains a hard-hitting NO despite about eight months into the decision . The answer to the questions is still a hard hit NO despite eight months of deliberations .
 This alienation of an entire community is paradoxical to the healthy diversity we proudly claim, says the author of the book . This alienation is paradoxed to our healthy diversity, he says .
 Ironically, homophobia seems to be tagging along large, painful and inevitable economic costs with itself . The country and its seemingly “advanced” citizens seem to be completely unaware of this . Ironically, homosexuality seems to have a large economic cost .
 A majority of these are victims of multiple forms of social and other forms of discrimination . Discrimination in form of workplace harassment, unavailability of appropriate health care facilities and lack of equal job opportunities .
 About 92% of the trans people are not able to contribute to any economic activity, the Human Rights Commission claims .
 This social unacceptance is so deep rooted and pervasive that it fuels unfathomable amounts of brain drain and loss in the Indian workforce . It fuels a loss of productivity which would have increased the productivity of the country by manifolds .
 The country and its corporates are demanded to be more progressive and inclusive than they currently are . The country's corporates should be more progressive than they are .
 A handful of companies have taken into consideration the importance of certain rudimentary changes in their office environment . Companies have introduced ‘other’ as a gender option in policy documents, replacing the word spouse by ‘partner’, having gender-neutral washrooms .
 These policy and infrastructural modifications are a testimony to the company’s commitment to warmly host employees regardless of their sexual preferences . The company says it is committed to hosting its employees regardless .
 The stark truth is that a majority of organizations still deem the above changes unworthy, pushing the uncomfortable and dissatisfied workers to quit . The stark reality is that many organizations still consider the changes unworthy .
 23 transgender people in Kochi Metro Rail Ltd. were employed by the government of Kerala . 8 of them quit in the very first week of their job due to a menial pay and less than sustaining work environment .
 As claimed by The Wire, about 58% of transgender studentsdropout of school before class 10 . About 58% transgender students drop out of school .
 This naturally limits their skill building capacity in the higher earning ends . This limits them to the skills building capacity for the higher ends .
 A large chunk of the LGBTQ community relies on begging as their main source of income . Besides this too, a large part of the community relies heavily on begging . The LGBTQ community is also known to rely on begging to make money .
 Transgender Persons Bill 2016 criminalizes any form of begging by the community . This too has been complicated by the Indian Government by passing the Transgender Person Bill 2016 . The Indian Government has also passed a bill that criminalizes begging by transgender people .
 A polar opposite scenario is that of PinkWashing which means nothing more than using the the the LGBTQ community as a source of evergreen profitability for the corporate sector . Corporate sector shows their “support” to the community by launching rainbow products and simply reducing people to commodities .
 Activists claim this to be utterly selfish and unnecessary as the formers’ struggle are anything but a money minting machine for the corporates . Activists say this is a waste of money and unnecessary .
 The World Bank has claimed that homophobia is costing India an exorbitant $32 billion . Homophobia is costing the country $32billion, the bank says .
 The loss of opportunity for the community to grow and flourish is being lost at the expense of archaic mindsets and beliefs . The community is losing opportunity for growth and flourish .
 Lack of the provision of human dignity for the LGBTQ community is a boulder of shame that makes social and humanitarian progression a far-fetched goal for India . Lack of dignity for LGBTQ community makes social progress a far,fetched goal .
 Despite distinct female disadvantage in economics due to rampant discrimination and outright harassment, it is heartening to see the rise of an Emi Nakamura as a database macroeconomist or an Esther Duflo as a development economist .
 Undergrad econ girl students in India can check out on some stellar Indian names in economics such as Gita Sen, Seema Jayachandran, Gita Gopinath, Sonalde Desai, Rukmini Banerji and the like, for inspiration .
 Linda Yueh is a popular economic broadcaster and writer, apart from being an expert on China and macroeconomics textbook writer . She is also a popular broadcaster and author of the book under review .
 Initially, when I just read the Introduction and Epilogue, I did not feel like being drawn to the book . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a former journalist and author of his own .
 In-between 12 chapters, it was like having a blast, and a nightmare as well as having a nightmare . But as I read through the in-between chapters, the book was indeed like having to have a blast .
 The best part is getting to read about the life and times of the 12 great general economists . Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Alfred Marshall, Irving Fisher, John Maynard Keynes, Joseph Schumpeter, Friedrich Hayek, Joan Robinson, Milton Friedman, Douglass North, and Robert
 Economists have crafted the models to explain how the economy works . These economists have set the foundations of economics and have crafted models .
 She banks on the suitability of their insights for contemporary times . That is why she banks on their suitability to be relevant today .
 The second best thing about the book is getting to know how relevant economists and their theories are to the key economic challenges of our time, especially in terms of the backlash against the uneven gains from globalization or the distributional consequences of globalization .
 Linda is addressing the future speed and quality of economic growth from the viewpoint of economists by posing the contextualized questions as follows . In other words, Linda poses the questions to economists about the future of growth .
 That all the major economies are growing slowly today is captured by ‘secular stagnation’ with marked slowdown in productivity growth since the mid-2000s .
 Post-industrial nations like Britain and the U.S. are now attempting to roll back the deindustrialization process due to globalization . They are encouraging manufacturing and reducing the share of national output accounted for by services .
 Deindustrialization in these two countries for the past half century has been associated with trade deficits along with a loss of well-paid manual jobs and stagnant wages . In the U.S. and Canada, deindustrialization has led to trade deficits and job losses .
 The decline and fall of manufacturing in Britain and the U.S. has been the miraculous rise of Chinese manufacturing and economic growth on that basis .
 China has found the imperative to rebalance its economy through domestic demand boost in order to grow in a more sustainable manner . China reached the ‘middle income status’ in the early 2000s, but has found it imperative to . rebalancing its economy .
 China’s transformation into a large market based economy, still ruled politically by a communist party, would not have been foreseen by Marx . Marx, for whom communism and capitalism are an incompatible marriage, says Marx .
 Growing inequality that reflects the poor quality of growth, has been a common problem in the world . Growing inequality is a problem that reflects a lack of quality growth in the global economy .
 Growth mostly benefits the rich, who save more than they spend and spending, not saving, fuels an economic recovery . And it could be a reason for the slow recovery after the Great Recession of 2009 .
 Wages are not growing well despite productivity growth outpacing wage growth in a number of advanced economies in recent decades . Productivity growth has outpaced wage growth growth in some of the world's advanced economies .
 Since 2008, advanced countries have struggled to recapture pre-crisis growth trends . Inflation rates have slumped around the world, bringing many countries to the brink of deflation .
 The large build-up in public and private sector debt suggests that the global economic situation is ripe for the debt-deflation that Fisher described as the cause of the Great Depression . Fisher described the debt deflation that caused the Depression as a result of the recession .
 In post-crisis economy, interest rates are very low but not enough firms are borrowing to invest . Interest rates have contributed to the slow growth environment, says David Cameron .
 When monetary policy is impotent to boost the economy, fiscal policy a la Keynes is needed to increase investment and generate more growth . The UK's economic growth has been hit by a lack of investment in the past decade .
 The discussion on the above questions is at times complicated and difficult to understand and very controversial too, and may go above the heads of the reader . The discussion may go on for a longer than a longer time .
 The book is in this respect more suitable for reading by third year undergraduate and postgraduate econ students . Understanding of the issues raised in the book depends on more lucid descriptions of the same in the classroom .
 Linda has chosen the great economists who are mostly advocates of liberalization, globalization and privatization . Linda says she has chosen some of the greatest economists who advocate liberalization and globalization .
 She is disturbed by the emergence of the many losers due to globalization . She is herself in tune with them, but she is not happy with globalization .
 If human welfare is what we are after, growth is not the most efficient way to get there . Growth is not an efficient way of getting to human welfare, it's not the only efficient way .
 We can improve people’s lives right now, without any additional growth at all, simply by distributing existing income more fairly . We can also improve people's lives without additional growth .
 Decades of research in anthropology and psychology has told us that to most people what matters is having good health, intimate relationships, meaningful work, access to nature, time to spend doing what they love . Increasingly, an ecology that is stable and safe for themselves and their children .
 We should be saying goodbye to the economists who pontificate on export-led or domestic demand-led growth . We should also say goodbye to those pontificating on export led growth .
 Ernst Friedrich Schumacher was a German statistician and economist . Best known for his proposals for human-scale, decentralized and appropriate technologies .
 Published in 1973, Small Is Beautiful consists of his review and criticism of the classical ideas of economics . The book was published in 1973 .
 His main idea involves creation of sustainable equilibria, which involve human development and healthy growth patterns . The main idea is to create a sustainable environment for human development .
 Small Is Beautiful puts forward the revolutionary yet viable case for building our economies around the needs of communities, not corporations . Small is Beautiful argues that the economy should be built around communities, rather than corporations .
 Schumacher argues that the modern economy is unsustainable and that nature's resistance to pollution is limited . He argues that nature is limited to its ability to resist pollution from the economy .
 Scientists have warned of global warming and pollution day by day . This has become an everyday thing in our lives with scientists warning about global warming .
 Schumacher warns not to treat natural resources as ‘expendable resources’ as they are prone to depletion . Natural resources have to be conserved, says the former footballer .
 He believed that city's population should not rise above 500,000 . But we are now living in an era of megalopolises, with cities hosting millions of people, he says .
 Schumacher claimed that this would lead to the mutual poisoning of both urban and rural areas alike . Schumachers said that urban areas would be poisoned by urban areas and rural regions alike .
 Mass migration has resulted from mass unemployment in the hinterland, which is choking the ‘leading, modern’ cities . ‘Lead, modern cities’ have to face problems of slums and job creation .
 So many small firms now are under large corporations, but ‘small’ is still used to lend a homely character to the enterprise . ‘Small’ means ‘homely’ and ‘big’ firms are still used in the UK . So many
 Humans will always prefer economic systems that can be controlled, that provide space for human interaction; for leisure and fruitful work . But at the end of the day, humans will always want economic systems controlled .
 Small is beautiful is an idea that is still experimented with– some examples being cottage industries, MSMEs, self-help groups and local cafes . This is why in spite of the great ideas of capitalism in the current scenario, small is beautiful .
 Schumacher brings about an interesting idea of intermediate technology . The former Formula One racing driver has been in touch with the world for over a decade .
 One cannot deploy latest technology into inexperienced hands immediately that would only lead to more problems . One can only be deployed in inexperienced hands that would lead to problems .
 Developing countries needs to start with simpler models, so that people can learn and adjust to the mechanisms and move forward . Developing nations must start with simple models, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 We would have to ensure that people do not go into arms about getting ‘obsolete technology’ first and completely shun it, which is a probable outcome . However, we would need to ensure people don’t go to arms about . getting . ‘Obsolete technology
 He believed sharing of firms by both private and public parties would lead to removal of profit taxes, and creation of public equity . Another was sharing of companies by both public and private parties, he said . He said he believed that this would lessen the antagonism between the government and the private
 All these solutions seem excellent, but all can be undermined by corruption . Corruption is a very prominent force, corruption is a problem, says David Cameron .
 There are people and organisations who still try to make positive changes in the world . However, there are still people who try to change the world.
 There are still firms who have managed to balance control of power and freedom . Scott-Bader and the Intermediate Technology Development Group for instance .
 Mental illness is on the rise, with people committing suicides daily, or sinking into substance abuse . People commit suicide or commit suicide daily in the U.S. Mental Illness is rising .
 Modern organizations have stripped the satisfaction out of work, making the worker no more than an anonymous cog in a huge machine . Modern organizations stripped the job of work out of the satisfaction of work .
 All he wanted was people-centered economics because he believed that that would enable environmental and human sustainability . He wanted to focus on people's welfare and the environment, he said .
 Schumacher says we are still battling a lot of issues discussed by the late Formula One legend . Even after more than 40 years of his work, there are still many issues still to be tackled by Schumachers .
 It is imperative that legal reins be tightened, and fruitful public policy be laid out for greater welfare of people . Legal reins must be tightened and public policy laid out to greater welfare .
 The book remains a treasure trove of idealistic, romantic economic thought . The book was published in 1945 .