 Pacem in terris, putting war and peace in the context of solidarity with the poor and stewardship of creation, seems to fit perfectly within the spirit of Blessed John XXIII, whom this important conference wants to honor .
 The Pacem in terris appeared in the early 1950s and early 1960s . It was seen as a sign of the Church's desire for peace in the Middle Ages .
 The Pope's encyclical is published by Pope Francis, Pope Francis' successor to Pope John Paul II . Pope Francis says he is proud of the sources, unique perspective and perennial value of the book .
 Pacem in terris can assist us in our future peace-building, says Pope Francis . The encyclical will further the legacy of Pacem, he says .
 The Holy See has worked for decades with other governments to promote incremental disarmament and the banning of all nuclear weapons .
 He said that “The great problem confronting the world after almost two thousand years remains unchanged.” He added that the world’s ‘great problem’ remained unchanged.
 Men are either with Him and His Church, then they enjoy light, goodness, order, and peace . Men enjoy light and order, order and peace, says author .
 The National Catholic Welfare Conference, Inc., 2.65, published by Floyd Anderson, ed.65 . Vatican II, Sessions 1 and 2, was held in Vatican II II II .
 Pacem in terris was issued at a time when nuclear disaster seemed imminent . As all of you know, and as those of you who are about 60 or older vividly remember, Pacem was issued .
 In 1963, not yet two decades after the conclusion of the Second World War, the human family stood again at the brink of international war . Despite the pledged commitments of Nations to stop wars and to maintain world peace, the war was not over .
 Rival political ideologies had more or less forced the nations of the world into opposed political blocks that competed desperately for supremacy . Rival ideologies had forced nations into opposing political blocks .
 By erecting the Berlin Wall in 1961, the German Democratic Republic had completely cut off West Berlin from East Berlin and the rest of East Germany . The Berlin Wall was erected in 1961 by the Berlin Democratic Republic .
 The Eastern Bloc claimed that the purpose of the Wall was to protect its population from fascism . The Eastern bloc had claimed that it was protecting its citizens from fascism.
 The Berlin Wall served as a barrier to prevent emigration and defection of its suffering population . Yet, in reality, the Berlin Wall was a barrier for emigrants .
 The following year saw nuclear missile sites constructed in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt by the U.S. by the United States .
 The United States responded with an air and sea blockade to prevent nuclear weapons from being delivered to Cuba . The U.S. demanded that the Soviet Union dismantle the missile bases and take back all weapons .
 It showed how precarious world order can be in the face of opposing militarized camps based on rival ideologies . The U.S. has been in the midst of a tense world of tension .
 Pope John XXIII learned that an intervention of his might be welcomed . Fortunately, he learned that a pope might be welcome .
 He was trusted by Khrushchev, from whom he had received Christmas wishes the year before . He had received a Christmas wish from the former Soviet leader .
 The Holy Father made a statement on Vatican Radio that was published in newspapers all over the world . Pravda, the official newspaper of the Soviet Communist party, published the statement . The Vatican Radio interview was broadcast by Vatican Radio .
 As we come ahead in the years and decades, we find the same foundations of the Church’s interventions, says Archbishop of Cambridge . "As we come . ahead in years," he says .
 For instance, John Paul II exercised influence on ending the Cold War by speaking in Poland, beginning in 1979, of truth, human dignity and liberation of the spirit . For example, he spoke in Poland of truth and human dignity .
 While Archbishop of Cape Coast, I chaired Ghana’s National Peace Council . While Archbishop was Archbishop of Ghana, he chaired Ghana's national peace council . He says he is committed to peace in Ghana .
 "My beliefs in the deep yearning of all people for dignity, respect and peace were essential to how I led this group," she says . "I believe in the yearning for dignity and respect," she adds .
 We were involved in a wide variety of issues, but none more difficult than the tense national elections in late 2008 . We are happy to clarify that we are happy with the outcome of the 2008 elections .
 "We constantly brought stakeholders together for dialogue and kept communication lines open. We constantly bring stakeholders together to dialogue," she said .
 I have been assured that we played a major role in achieving social peace during this period. I have assured that . I have a major . role in . achieving social . peace during that period .
 The results of another mission, to Côte-d’Ivoire in 2011, were not positive .
 Pope Emeritus Benedict sent me there to express his “solidarity and that of the universal Church to the victims of the hostilities as well as encourage reconciliation and peace” Pope Francis sent me to the Philippines to express ‘solidarity’ with the victims .
 I therefore address a new heartfelt appeal to all the parties concerned, that the work of peace-making and dialogue be initiated so that further bloodshed may be avoided, says President Obama .
 A Pope or Cardinal is not exclusively a crisis-intervener on the world stage . However, they are not exclusively an interventionist on the global stage . The Pope and Cardinal are not always always involved in world crises .
 "A more typical role, and just as crucial, is to keep reminding the world of the deepest truths," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Pope Francis led the delegation of the Holy See to the UN in 2010 to discuss the Millennium Development Goals . He led a delegation to the U.N. to discuss achieving the goal of eliminating global poverty by 2015 . Pope Francis says he is committed to ending global poverty in 2015 .
 Some of the methods of the anti-poverty campaign tended to target the poor in ways that suggest that the solution to global poverty is to eliminate the poor . Curiously, some of the ways of the campaign tend to target those who are poor .
 We reminded the assembly that combating poverty requires investments in the resourcefulness of the poor . We made them protagonists in their emergence out of poverty, and not eliminating them .
 The poor need education to transform them from dependency to resourcefulness, says President Obama . The poor must be educated to transform themselves, says Obama .
 We often hear the word ‘peace’ spoken: we want peace within our family, our community, in society, among nations . Old Testament . We want peace in the Old Testament.
 The Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church has a beautiful section devoted to the nature of peace . Peace begins with its biblical aspects, and peace begins with biblical aspects .
 I invite you to study, reflect and pray about it, because it provides a keen presentation of the nature of peace and thus about what this Conference is addressing . The Conference is expected to be held in New York City, New York .
 Violence is caused by interpersonal and social relationships, and violence and peace are mutually incompatible . Violence and peace is mutually incompatible, the author says . Violence is a result of interpersonal relationships, not social relationships .
 Peace is not merely the absence of war but represents the fullness of life . It is a gift of God; and it involves obedience to His plan . Peace is the result of obedience to the plan of God .
 The promise of peace runs through the entire Old Testament . Peace is the messianic attribute par excellence, in which all other beneficial effects of salvation are included . Peace runs throughout the Old Testament, with all the benefits included .
 The Hebrew word ‘shalom’ expresses this fullness of meaning in its etymological sense of ‘completeness’ (cf. the word 'Shalom') The word means ‘fullness’ in the full sense of meaning
 Peace is a gift of God to all, because God loves all . Peace is God's gift, whether it is men of good will or men whom God loves, he says .
 8 Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church, Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace, 488493. But this gift comes to fruition, it becomes real, only for those who have the gift .
 Deeds of peace and not worldly weapons grace the escutcheon of King Jesus . "Not worldly weapons" are not weapons, but deeds of peace, not deeds of power .
 Peace does not belong to human nature as such, but under some circumstances, it can be a human experience to the degree that humans embrace this gift of God . Peace is defined and illustrated with the expression ‘men whom He loves’
 The coming of Jesus brings something into the world; something that is necessary because of our eternally fallen human nature . Jesus' coming of Christ is something that must be necessary for the world, the author says .
 This grounds the entire plan of human salvation as such and applies to all humans, not just to a particular chosen group of people . The plan of salvation applies to everyone, not only to a chosen group .
 Christ’s birth was announced not just to the Jewish people, represented by the shepherds who heard the angels, but to the entire world in the persons of the three Wise Men who came from other lands .
 One of the great lessons, if not the greatest lesson, that humanity learnt, especially from the world wars , was that safeguarding the well-being and interest of humanity, and especially peace, is the task of all . The world wars were the greatest lessons humanity learnt from .
 The League of Nations was developed as a fruit of the Paris Conference which ended that war . The League was developed after the First World War, after the war .
 It was the first international organization whose principal mission was to maintain world peace . The organization was established in 1945 . It was first organization to maintain peace .
 The League’s initiative reflected humanity's sense of brotherhood and its desire for peace . It failed to prevent World War II and safeguard the peace of the nations .
 The United Nations aimed to stop wars between countries, and to provide a platform for cooperation in international law, security, economic development, social progress and human rights . Inheriting most of the ideals and values of the League of Nations .
 The building-block of nation has persistently been a stumbling-block. But the building-blocks of nation have persistedently been stumbling-blocks.
 The humanly established order does not inherently promote peace, because nations compete . Nations compete, so nations must compete, the author says . The U.S. should not be allowed to interfere with nations' interests, he says .
 The sovereign nation considers the particular good of its own constituent citizenry to be a higher value than the common good of all . The sovereignty of the U.S. has been declared a state of war in Iraq .
 "Envy and greed and other base human tendencies have not disappeared, they are still present and they continue to motivate even what we call diplomacy and national interests," says President Obama .
 Such interests have a largely egotistic origin and lead to many of these consequences. Such interests lead to these consequences, the author says . Such interests can be traced back to their origins, he says .
 Pope John’s radical insight was to write about peace rather than about absence of war, and to address Pacem in terris to all people and only secondarily to all nations, he said .
 History showed him and has shown all of us the inadequacy of the humanly established order . History showed that he was not a good man, and history showed that .
 He expects the Church to be most acutely attentive, but he embraces all people in this vision . And although he expects the church to be attentive, he expects all people to be aware of his vision .
 Lumen Gentium: Only those excluded who exercise their freedom to choose cynicism, selfishness, and collaboration with Evil . This pan-human intuition of the ultimate common good can animate everyone .
 The pressing question now is the manner in which everyone of good will may make peacebuilding their own personal practice, rather than leaving it to a few in high office .
 Peace-understanding Pacem in terris was issued in 1963 when the Cold War was at its height . Peace Peace in Terris was a peace treaty between the U.S. and Russia .
 Although many of the problems of that period persist today, our context is different now in important ways, especially because of rapid globalization, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Our context in the world is very different now"
 The flows of information, services, innovation, hard goods, pollution, investment, diseases, displaced people, fashions etc. etc. are so global, so fast and pervasive, that no nation has the capacity to achieve common good on its own .
 This only reinforces the need for everyone to be the agents as well as the beneficiaries of peace . The need to be agents and agents of peace should be seen as a matter matter matter, says the author .
 The attainment of peace, according to the teaching of Pope John XXIII, is not essentially with reference to and by the observance of some institutional setup, like the United Nations and its declarations, however universally representative it may be .
 Peace on earth is achieved ultimately with reference to the truth about God and the observance of his established order that includes men and women and the human world . Peace on Earth is achieved in reference to God's established order .
 Its starting point is human being, humans created by God, endowed with dignity and bearers of rights and duties . Its core topic is human beings, humans .
 It is also the starting point for understanding the relationships among all people, with the purpose of assuring those rights for all . It's also the beginning point for assuring the rights for everyone .
 Blessed Pope John devoted the first section of Pacem in terris to the order that should exist among all people and thus first affirmed the nature of personhood . The first section was devoted to personhood, and the first was to order among people .
 "As such he has rights and duties, which together flow as a direct consequence from his nature," he said . "He has rights, duties and duties which flow together flow into his nature"
 "Inviolable" rights "inviolable insofar as they are inherent in the human person and in human dignity" Rights "demand their respect fully by all people, everywhere and for all people"
 No one can legitimately deprive another person, whoever they may be, of these rights, since this would do violence to their nature . Finally, these rights are inalienable insofar as no one can . legitimately deprive . another person . of these . rights, such as freedom of speech,
 Let us understand our right to peace and our duty to work for peace within these parameters . Let's understand that peace is a matter of life, not just peace . Let’s hope that peace can be achieved in peace zones .
 The Holy Father described the rights which belong to men and women by nature, by creation .
 Human beings have the right to live; to bodily integrity and to the means necessary for the proper development of life; and to necessary health and social services . Human rights have been established in the United States, the U.S. State Department says .
 Pope John affirmed as well that along with rights come duties, as a matter of natural law . Along with rights, as well as duties, he said, "alongside with rights comes duties"
 This gives rise to reciprocity of rights and duties between persons . Second, this gives . reciprocity between persons. Second, third, fourth, fifth .
 One person’s natural right gives rise to a corresponding duty in others of respecting that right . One person's natural right is a duty to respect that right, according to the law .
 We are not only called to claim our human rights but we are also called to respect the human rights of others . We are called to protect our rights but also respect others' rights, says Dr. David Cameron .
 St. Francis of Assisi – love for the poor – is love for peace for which truth is essential, and care for all of nature .
 He suggests a link between peace-building and bridge-building . Further, he suggests that peace and bridges should be built together .
 Pope Francis referred to his title of “Pontiff, that is, a builder of bridges with God and between people’s . Pope Francis refers to himself as a ‘builder of bridges’ with God, between people .
 Proper arrangements between nations and careful observance of others’ rights are essential in this globalized era, but they are not enough . Indeed, proper arrangements between nation and others are essential, but not enough.
 We must also build bridges of true dialogue and true fraternity if we are to build peace . We need to build bridges to build true dialogue, true fraternity and true dialogue . We must build bridges if we want peace in peace .
 At the Mass marking the beginning of my ministry, I greatly appreciated the presence of so many civil and religious leaders from the Islamic world, he says .
 We drew on Biblical sources to better understand its key ideas . Then we drew on its Biblical sources for better understanding of its ideas .
 Pacem in terris will be the legacy of the peace-building efforts . This led to several guides for our future peace-build efforts, which will be our legacy .
 May the risen Jesus bring comfort to the victims of natural disasters and make us responsible guardians of creation . May he bring comfort .
 Over lunch you will discuss Solidarity and U.S. Foreign Policy over lunch .
 As you savor your meal, you will also savor some of the tenets of Good Pope John’s teaching in Pacem in terris and the hints we have already seen and heard from Pope Francis that help us to be peace-makers, peace-builders, channels and
 I thank the Conference organizers once again, and all you participants, for this opportunity to enhance the study and practice of Catholic peace building .
 May the Holy Spirit assist us all to build pacem in terris, starting today and never giving up on this mission .