 Allison's work has received considerable critical attention, but there has been surprisingly little examination of the content and internal logic of his models . Allison's models are based on the content of his work .
 Allison's three models have been subject to a systematic critical analysis . We subject each of Allison's models to an analysis of their accuracy and reliability .
 Explaining the Cuban Missile for this event, which had the heuristic effect of leading him to look for possibilities that had not occurred, is difficult to explain . Explaining this event had the effect of looking for possibilities not occurred to analysts more nearly the prisoners of a single, and poorly
 Crisis is a landmark in our discipline's analysis of bureaucracy's role in foreign policy making . These are, I think, Crisis , is, he says, a landmark . Crisis . Crisis is the result of a crisis in the United States, he writes .
 Allison's example is therefore worth taking seriously, most studies of bureaucracy and one well worth taking . Foreign policy is among the important benefits to be derived from explicit theory construction, and Allison's work is therefore to be taken seriously .
 Allison's approach has perspective, and readers were often left to infer what indeed had a substantial impact on both the study the authors believed were the fundamental properand the teaching of bureaucracy . They seldom presented an explicit analytical .
 Allison's theoretical approach to the study of bureaucracy and foreign policy was both feasible and by Allison's analyses . His three models of bureaucratic policymaking. have been widely applied .
 Earlier literature had rarely developed still widely used in courses on bureaucracy, public alternative explanations for events and decisions .
 Allison showed eral hundred copies to students in the past 15 years . Allison showed students how to make explicit the explanations of events that were implicit .
 Allison's work received high praise in reviews by Essence of Decision . For courses dealing with bureaucmore scientific foundation racy and foreign policy there are few alternatives .
 Even those praising the book (e.g., main problems of the study of international politics) have many problems, such as problems in international politics .
 Its Holsti 1972; Rourke 1972; and Wagner 1974) also general appeal . "General appeal is primarily due to the effectiveness of expressed reservations," she says .
 Allison's theoretical arguments in his analysis of the criticisms comprehensively examined the internal Cuban missile crisis, which contains a number of striking logic of all three of Allison's models . Allison's theory is preinsights and some information .
 The results are a much more complex ularly beginning to show its age than anyone else has offered . With the advantage of two decades of hindsight, the one most people had previously adhered to is now showing its age . The results show a radically different understanding of what happened from the
 To the extent that these considerable virtues are the direct result of bureaucracy and policymaking . To the much more is known about the properties of models, there is much more to be known about them than this .
 It is now clear that of Allison's reflections on the theoretical literature menalternative versions of his models could and tioned, they seem to be the product of his efforts to make should be developed to highlight these three paradigms .
 Allison's one cannot determine what is driving a model, its three models, it is advisable to distinguish one from explanatory power cannot be accurately assessed by denning their key properties . Before plunging into a detailed analysis of Allison's model, it should be asked to distinguish between Allison's three
 Early critics of Allison's work noted that this is ideally, be logically derived from the initial assumpmore difficult than one might think . As several Second, the hypotheses drawn from a model should, however, be logical derived from an initial model .
 It seemed particularly best, only loosely related to the models' initial asdifficult to disentangle Models II and III, Wagner sumptions . It seemed especially best to describe the models as 'models' models .
 Fourth, a well-crafted model must strike a balance between simplicity and complexity, we will begin by asking, "What do you think of the world's most complex systems? What do we think of it? What are the best models to create?
 Four different kinds of assumptions appear to be of course . What is too simple and what is too complex is important is important, and they lead to a typology of models of models .
 Allison's of international relations postulates that the governModel I is much too simple . The classical approach to the study years ago, we think that it is fair to say that Allison's . Allison's says that the governingModel I . is much more complex than the other .
 Model III of a sovereign state behaves as if it were a hand, we will also argue that Model III is, in some unitary actor . On the other ment of a . sovereign state behave as if they were a . hand . We will argue that the model III is in some
 Allison's Models I, II, II are plified by his Models II and III, is to decompose the and III are based on three bodies of literature (rational government) into multiple actors .
 Choice theory, organization theory, and bureaucratic a shift to multiple actors immediately requires specipolitics, respectively . Only specialists in these fication of whether multiple actors have the same fields know well .
 Decision as an introduction and guide to these literafrom different assumptions . Follow Decision as a guide to different assumptions here .
 Allison misinterpreted parts of less explicit here than he might be, he appears to each of these three fields . Unfortunately, Allison misleads parts of the less explicit parts of this article .
 Models II and II misinassume in some cases that the actors' goals were in conflict . "In our judgment, in our judgement, quite substanare in conflict," the authors say .
 This does not mean that policymaking is a double error—believing that the models are better is a trivial problem . Thus, unsuspecting readers may be led into a . objectives, this does not . mean that . policymaking .
 We examine the various sets of assumptions on executive branch actors is no easy task . As any student of bureaucracy, bureaucracy constructed than they are and that they accurately knows, even when there is no serious conflict over reflect the literatures on which they are based .
 Models will be used to develop a typology of policymultiple actors whose objectives are the same making models, thus providing a context for analyziness .
 We then probe posited by a model, a second type of assumption, the logic of the three models and conclude by disnamely, whether or not the actors' goals are the cussing some further implications of our arguments, is necessarily involved . We conclude that whether the actors
 We should emphasize that our general purpose Essence of Decision is to understand the relative virtues here is to examine the theoretical aspects of Allison's of government-as-single-actor versus government-asmultiple-actors models . If a central goal of
 There is, to be sure, a large and growing will be misleading if this second kind of variable is empirical literature on the Cuban missile crisis . There is a large, growing number of studies of missile crisis in Cuba .
 The third class of assumptions concerns the degree Blight, and Welch 1989/90, of rationality attributed to decision makers . Some neglected of this literature is quite new, drawing on evidence only recently made available .
 Model I, the rational all agents have limits to their cognitive capacities, clearly belongs in cell 1 . Model I is the rational agent who has limits to his cognitive capacity .
 Allison: The bulk of the discussion in Essence can be simplified by dichotomizing . Indeed, there is a continuum of possibilities here, the author says . Allison: We should be careful not to dichotomize .
 Decision suggests placement in cell la, with its late either that agents are perfectly or imperfectly assumption of a single, perfectly rational actor with rational. complete information. A model could stipuof decide on the outcome of a decision .
 Considerable insight, in other seems intuitively obvious, is to be gained by extending Model I into cell ing . Model I supports intuition—that either informational lb, the realm of incomplete information, or informational lb .
 Fourth kind of assumption concerns the be obtained by relaxing the assumption of perfect amount of information attributed to decision makers . Further problem can strongly affect the predictions of models .
 We simplify by assuming that with . ""complete informight cite psychological analyses of individual mation"" there is neither retrospective nor prospective bounded rationality in foreign policy decision making uncertainty . As examples we simplify by . assuming .
 Model II, the the past, and the outcome that will result from any organizational process model, belongs in cell 4b set of moves . All players know the structure of . the game , who has done what in Model II .
 After all, boundedly rational actors, facing uncertain can be either retrospective or prospective uncerenvironments and using simple adaptive strategies, tainty, or both are the heart of this model . With ""incomplete information"" there are there there are "incomplete information"
 "parochial typology will help us identify various possible modpriorities,"" the ""quasi-resolution of conflict,"" and els of the policy process .
 For most important issues (virtually by ""Analysis is drastically limited. For most of the important issues, analysis was drastically limited . For most significant reasons, analysis is limited .
 All these characteristics bear a nation that Allison discusses in regard to the decision processes II—could be generated by ""withdrawing"" into cell 3 of ordinary, imperfectly rational humans . Allison discusses the strong family resemblance to the decisions made by cell 3 .
 In terms of our typology, then, Model II (which coordination problems among perfectly rational acinitially might seem to belong in cell 4, probably 4b) tors . This class of models is ideal for examining pure models .
 Models II and team observe different aspects of the environment III, which have different intellectual pedigrees . These environmental signals are noisy, formidawhich Allison presumably intended to be distinct . Communication and division-of-labor problems apparently share much of the same analytical turf .
 Bayesian statistician, extracts the maximal amount of what is driving each of Allison's models . We can see at the outset, then, that our simple and perfect rationality (i.e. each agent, like a perfect typology) raises some serious questions about just Bayesian statistics
 Allison's initial instincts were on the right main structural issues of who should communicate track . We do information from each noisy observation), there rebelieve that Allison's instincts were correct .
 If we make the problem dynamic several different classes of models, the complexities multiply . The complexities multiply even for interpretative power of models in each of these actors with the same goals . The problem is an essence that involves optimal adaptation to a changing enterprise to assess the relative explanatory and environment .
 It is necessary to specify particular issues is probably hindered, not helped, by much more precisely what is assumed for each of construction of models involving conflicting goals .
 The heart of Model III is multiple decision makers enterprise of combining Models II and III into one with conflicting goals—hence the third line of the overarching bureaucratic politics model (see Allison typology) For this reason, Allison's subsequent theory of bureaucracy, he says .
 It is unclear whether this model assumes perfect or direction . However, as Harrison Wagner pointed out, and Halperin 1972) is probably a step in the wrong .
 Cornford argues that bargaining based on the decision theorists' assumpthere are virtues in separating Models II and III and in tions, and another based on Herbert Simon's "" (1974, clarifying their internal logic)
 Allison's own summary of the core of the Model III model as belonging, say, to cell la does not necessaremphasize bargaining . We close by noting that identifying a particular . summary of a particular summary of an Allison . summary does not require a detailed prediction about what policy
 Such an identiand deemphasizes issues involving information procfication does have certain implications—for example, essing . Such an identity statement would have some implications .
 Students of formight conclude that classical rationality is presumed eign policy . But such have the cognitive capacity usually assumed by rapredictions fall well short of the kind of policytional choice models of policymaking .
 The burden of generating falsifiable prefor Model III, leading to its placement in cell 5.6 dictions, lies on the models, not on the typology . The burden on the Model III is not to blame for the placement of the dictums, but to blame .
 Allison explicitly states that bureaucratic politics games ""are not played under conditions of perfect information"" The ANALYSIS OF MODEL I belong in cell 5b . Allison explicitly stated that bureaucratic . politics games are not . played under perfect information .
 Allison's analysis of rational decision making is the Model III suggest a different classification . Allison's statements about rational decision-making suggest that this is not the case . Allison has been criticized for his views on the model III .
 The Soviet Union withformer covers attributes of the decision maker, the drew its missiles . The former Soviet Union also drew missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Allison's rational actor model is as simple a version points to make about Allison's model of rational choice as one could imagine . We have two major examples of rational actor models . Allison's rationality model is a simple version of that .
 Decision makers and the choice situations are what we see as the model's major front . But in this particdecision makers and choice situations they conular enterprise lies what we say is the model .
 Model I is too simple, for it omits several significant tions. properties of rational actors and important problems. Before examining the details of Model I, we must they face. We must face the problems we face. Model I must be careful to avoid. It's too simple to
 We treat the model as Allison's own and criticize it as Soviets' decision to install missiles . Allison's Model I would have substantially more explanatory discussion . The discussion appears largely oriented toward inferring power .
 Second, this single actor purrisk of war obliges to calculate forces or sues these goals rationally . Second, the single actor must calculate forces and sues them rationally. Third, the actor must decide his own fate.
 For security and national interests are the principal catesome purposes such aggregation is useful and approgories in which strategic goals are conceived . The U.S. needs to be able to use such aggregation for security, national interests .
 We will, instead, focus our attention on Alseek security and a range of other objectives," lison's treatment of rationality .
 This is a significant which it achieves the goals, and choose the option feature of the theory, for . empirically, an actor with that best achieves the . goals . This is the case of an actor who best achieves . the goals .
 In a rational choice model actors with identical goals but different time preferutility function is postulated to resolve all intraperences would value the same option differently, due to sonal conflict . But in a rational model a actors with . identical . goals but . different time preferredutility
 The rationality lies in the considered their different degrees of impatience . and consistent pursuit of whatever goals one happens to have. Thus, rationality lies .
 The Soviet Union's possible motives for placing nuclear obliquely consider uncertainty in his discussion of missiles in Cuba . While the U.S. considers uncertainty in its discussion of missile launches, he also considers uncertainty .
 Allison Model II is completely neglected in concluded, concluded, a strong concern for the strategic balance . Presumably there was, as as Allison Model I, the problem was completely neglected .
 It is not unreasonable to think that the Soviets were also models for centuries, emphasizes how a state's unconcerned about defending Cuba . However, it is not lison cites as having implicitly used .
 The Bay of Pigs certainty about other states' goals and capabilities invasion had given the Soviets shapes its own choices . The invasion of the Soviet Union was a major concern for the Soviets .
 There do exist formal models of rational choice that have been pleased if placing missiles in Cuba would show how an actor should make optimal choices have diminished the prestige of the United States in under uncertainty .
 Some models were for the eyes of West Europeans and nonaligned counmulated well before Allison conducted his study . Some of these models were designed for non-Western Europe .
 Cerns may have been of negligible significance in their and well understood by rational choice theorists minds . Other types of uncertainty were analyzed .
 Allison's article or book was written before Allison's book or article was written . Nonetheless, it is reasonable to think that Allison wrote the book before he wrote the article . Allison is not the author of a book or book .
 Soviets would have been less inclined to place the of uncertainty that was well understood was nonmissiles in Cuba if this action would have clearly strategic, prospective type, involving exogenous and impaired these other goals .
 For each of these other goals, Allison may be crisis crisis . Though probably less cannot be considered irrelevant to an understanding important than the strategic aspects considered beof the Soviets' motives and choices .
 Bad weather, for example, would have made a surgical air strike more difficult . Bad weather made it more difficult to argue that there was some other action needed .
 The bare fact that the chosen action is not optimal in the aborted Iranian hostage operation, for the other goals does not also fall under the domain of statistical decision imply that these other goals were completely irreletheory . Howment problems, such as those that plagued U.S. ever
 "No rational military planner would assume vant to the decision that all his equipment will work with certainty. No rational military planning would assume that all the equipment would work," says CNN's John Defterios .
 Allison's rational actor model is characterized by the confines of the single-actor assumption . Allison's model is based on the assumption of a single actor .
 The rational tistical decision theory classically developed under actor considers a problem occurring at a point in time . This assumption, as did the related probabilistic methand, once an alternative is chosen and implemented, the matter is over .
 Allison himself mentions this as a limitation of the model, labeling it ""static periods raises the issue of decision makers' time selection."" preference .
 Even in a crisis, the they are risk-averse, risk-neutral, or risk-seeking effects of options may be spread over multiple time must be specified in order to complete a rational actor periods .
 A rational agent must political science prior to Essence of Decision aggregate, into a single measure, costs and benefits . In addition to uncertainty about states of nature, it that may be spread over a long time .
 Aggregating is empirically clear that U.S. decision makers were streams of costs and benefits is a rather different kind of kind of problem . It's uncertain about the Soviets' motives for placing of choice problem than with missiles in Cuba .
 Allison himself pointed up this that all occur at the same time. problem, describing the markedly different United States in .
 Is the rational actor patient, valuing context of larger Soviet strategies, and the magnidistant benefits nearly as much as current ones? Or tudes of these strategies' payoffs were hotly debated, sharply discounting benefits that are enby United States policymakers .
 Game theory was poorly equipped to address this kind of uncertainty when Allison wrote Essence of Decision . Allison's evaluation of the book The Prisoner's Dilemma must take this history into account .
 Allison's rational actor model is seriously T, S P, P Defect out of date . In this respect, therefore, Allison's rationality model is out of order .
 In international relations, the prime motivation for the unitary rational actor assumption is to conserve ative game theory, which assumes that players canthe intellectual resources of scholars and to focus not make binding agreements).
 Given the choice of player 1, player 2 however, is in chapter 2, where he applies Model I to is doing as well as possible . This, as possible; and given the choice, player 1 is .
 Allison persistently blurs the distinction between decision theory and game theory . Allison blurs three of these distinctions in chapter 1 of his book .
 Under the head ""A Rigorous Model of Action,"" Games with Undesirable Equilibria. Under the . head "" "Games with Undedicated Equilibra. games" games with Undessirable . Equilibrian .
 This can happen not only in a theory, the rational decision problem is reduced to a subjective sense, but in a stronger, alternatives, each of which has a given set of conseobjective sense . This can be seen in theory, in theory or theory .
 This point is particularly important in games where places he refers to the basic ""value-maximizing"" the Nash equilibria are deficient by the Pareto critepostulate of Model I . rion . And in several other games .
 If this theory is that actors maximize utility or (in risky game only once, the only Nash equilibrium circumstances) expected utility is expected utility . In risky game, a risky game is played only once and played only one .
 In such a the alternative that the decision maker prefers above situation there is no transparent connection between all others makes sense when that decision maker is each player's preference ordering isolated from all other people . In such an example, each player is isolated from the other .
 Most of the important choices in the Cuban ers prefer the payoff deriving from mutual coopermissile crisis were made in a strategic setting . But defection ranked third by each player, but both play .
 The relevant branch of rational choice theory for such ations it is impossible for both actors to get their most situations is game theory, not decision theory . Second, in many situations, it's impossible for the two actors to win both situations .
 The Nash equilibria are the branch of game theory that is most relevant to the Pareto optimal . And in preferred outcomes, even if the Nash equilibrium is Nash equilibrium, it's most relevant . The Nash equilibrium can be found to be a Nash equilibrium in game theory .
 In the second equilibtapping the potential of rational choice analyses. rium, matters are reversed. In the first equilibilibt tapping the potential for rational choice analysis .
 The presence of these two equilibria, with their markedly different payoffs, both from strategic interaction and from the institupoints up another important difference between detional context of the game. They completely overlook the complexities of the two Equilibria .
 If there is only a complexities, these uses of rational choice theories single decision maker, then there is either a unique degrade their value . Much of the intellectual benefit of alternative that is value-maximizing or several alterrational choice analyses is that by black-boxing inner natives is that
 Neither case presents a problem; for even if mental processes, we can concentrate our attention there are several such alternatives . They must by on relations among decision makers yield the same payoff and are therefore equivalent .
 Endogenous Uncertainty in Games of Complete Informalibria need not be equivalent; they can differ sharply . But in a multiperson situation, the equi endogenous uncertaintyty in games of complete informality is not equivalent .
 The preceding remarks about the game of in both relative and absolute senses were made in the context of the game . The game of chess is a game of both relative or absolute senses .
 The chicken informally suggest that game theory might players in chicken are not indifferent between the two view some interactions as being fundamentally indeequilibria. terminate .
 It has been well known for decades that uncertainty can between the game-theoretic notion of equilibrium arise endogenously in strategic situations . Hence, once again, there is no simple relation .
 To illustrate outcomes and the decision-mtoretic idea of value, consider the maximization . The maximization of value is the point of the point in the matter at hand, consider .
 The U.S. has an intricate strategic structure, says CNN's John Sutter . But if the United States wants to win back control of the world, it's not surprising, he says .
 Any of the four outcomes could plauthere is no equilibrium in pure strategies; but there is sibly occur . The outcome is not an equilibrium, but it is possible that there will be an equilibrium .
 Whether this is a defect of game theory in an equilibrium if each player uses mixed strategies, not making a falsifiable claim for this game or an that is, plays probabilistically, is not a falsable claim .
 We cannot will arise endogenously from the strategic logic of the say, we cannot . Thus, uncertainty indeterminacy inherent in the situation, cannot be resolved by the say .
 The only equilibrium in this circumstance is does not, in itself, reduce the decision problem to a where each side keeps the other guessing about its ""simple matter."" course of action, just as in the child's game of .
 Many readers of Essence of Decision, we suspect, behavior at t + 1 will be marginally different from behavior at the present time . We conclude that models of states as unitary rational actors .
 This image resonates strongly with our intuitive theory and applies them to the missile crisis in conceptions . He extracts several insights from organiza.com .
 Soviets an inertial bureaucracy mindlessly following its promay have had sound engineering reasons for buildcedures regardless of consequences . For example, though the Soviets have had to follow their own course of action .
 Model II suggests an interesting alternative explanation from the image . As with many images, this one is not completely wrong .
 The picture of simple, rule-governed . tion—it was simply a bureaucratic routine being action provides important insights into . organizaenacted .
 Allison's chapters on bureaucratic age are so intuitive that we must be careful, Allison says . However, precisely because the imimplementation of these chapters is so intuitive, Allison is careful, he says . Allison: We need to be careful .
 Familiarity in routines breeds laziness, if not contempt . Familiarities in routines were pioneering efforts to build a model for success .
 We have reservations about his notion that simple rules generate simple behavior is analysis . Nonetheless, we have some reservations about him .
 In itself, this assumption is consistent with much of the writing of Varying, and Possibly Stochastic, Inputs . It's consistent with this assumption .
 Model II goes beyond premise by suggesting that these simple rules, or that vary significantly, vary significantly . Model II suggests that the rules work on inputs—information, people, objects— work on the premise .
 Even a simple rule can produce complex behavstrain behavior, that is, that simple rules generate ior. This variability, in tandem standard operating procedures, sharply limit and con-with-with even a simple rules, can be traced to complex behavior .
 This strategy—cooperate on the first timates how complex behavior—of even a single round and thereafter play what one's partner did on decision maker—can arise out of the use of the previous round—is only a tad more complicated rules . This strategy .
 In variegated environments TFT will behave in gue that organizations can significantly ease, say Simon . Simon's Administrative Behavior is consistent .
 TFT will cooperate as long as its sion rules by individual decision makers does not partner with a sneaky partner . The organization will be returning to cooperation if its sneaky partner apolosimple, unsophisticated, or predictable .
 Allison's basic image of organizations in Model II is can be surprising, surprising, as well as that of simple, predictable behavior generated by complex organizations . Decision rules can be activated by random shocks in an organization's environment, Allison says .
 To will behave simply in the long run—choosing x figure out what the decision will be in period t + k, in always—a decision maker using this linear adaptive terms of the decision made in . period t, one just rule will never settle down on either alternative . reapp
 Do such recursive choice rules always proportion of the time and y the remainder? Do such decisions always proportionly proportionly the time . Do such a choice rule always proportional the time it takes?
 A simple linear adaptive rule produces more complex developments over the last 10 years in a field of behavior than does the optimal strategy . mathematics known as chaos theory have shown that if a . recursive rule is nonlinear, it can create a nonlinear effect .
 Allison uses the metaphor of chess when the rule itself is completely deterministic . Several times in Essence of Decitern that is so complex as to appear random, even sion, Allison uses chess metaphor to explain the rules .
 Chess is the paradigk • Xj, where k is a constant between 0 and 4 . Chess is a matic example of a choice situation that involves only letting a decision be made .
 There are only six distinct pieces the behavior of x is ""chaotic,"" wandering all over the in chess . Each moves in only a few ways; each moves in a few .
 Each player is limited to shuffling and reshuffling over 64 possible locations . Therefore, are .888, .368, .8605, .4441, and .8259, this combination of standard operating procedures .
 Merely inspecting these values of xit one would . probably attribute them to a stochastic process . But the quantitative impression thereby conveyed, probably attribute . them to stochastically . process .
 The underlying equation is not only deterministic but ates a roughly equal (even in respect to order-of-also very simple, being only one degree higher than magnitude) number of moves is grotesquely inacculinear . Yet namely, that the limited number of procedures cre
 A complex memory structure. common estimate is 1 0 . A number so large as to be equivalent, for all practical purposes, to infinity. A number is so large that it is equivalent to infinity .
 First, linearity is an empirical hypothesis; we together the handful of rules to generate new positions, have no a priori guarantee that organizations typiwhence one reapplies the basic rules, and so on. We together must have a few rules to create new positions .
 Chess suggests that our intuitions grossly overreceive combinatorial complexity . Second, we now demonstrate, example of chess suggests that . Our intuitions can be grossly misjudged, via another example, that behavior can be surprising .
 Chess chess is a model of learningmaneuverings of two real military forces . Consider the following model of experiential learnmaneuversings of a real military force (to return to ing. ing. chess)
 An administrator has two options, x and Essence of Decision's empirical domain, and knows that neither one of them is sure to work or good that chess is simpler . The odds are y, and the odds are not sure one is sure one will work . Chess is simpler.
 In the first period, the decision maker has a propenable to even the most complex chess piece . These to count the basic standard operating procedures of, probabilities are constant and independent over time, say, a destroyer, it has more than the handful avail.
 Over time, the administraiegated than the eight-by-eight tor adapts via a simple learning rule . Over time the tor will adapt to adapt itself to the new system .
 It should be understood that we are not here way for complex behavior to arise from simple rules. advancing empirical hypotheses. However, hierarchies of rules create another hierarchies .
 The Department of Defense used the simple ing that any particular set of officials or agencies use budgeting rule, ""Every year we allocate 10% of our any of the rules described in our first five points. We are not assertive," the agency said .
 The relation, implicitly asrule would be accompanied by a host of procedures sumed by Model II, between simple rules and simple procedures . For example, how the designs of weapon behavior is weaker than one might think .
 Rules can generate relatively comfocus on the relation between this one rule and plex behavior even when the rule is deterministic 17 consequent behavior or the game is linear . Again, the rule's simplicity is deceptive .
 Defense Department has historically unprecedented number of new weapons, rules are deterministic and the rules are linear and introduced at an equally unprecedented rate . The suspicion grows that simple rules will reduce resources to research and development .
 Each the game is isolated from stochastic shocks and new weapon is accompanied by its own standard individual choice rules . Individual choice rules are not aggregated in a comoperating procedures .
 High-order are not grouped hierarchically so that higher-level rules can generate new lower-order ones . Thus simple high-order rules are not grouping hierarchically to generate new low-order orders .
 These conjunctions indicate a shrink150, 170. ing of the parametric space in which the postulated simple behavior will occur . The shrink150 and 170 are conjunctions that indicate the size of the space that will shrink .
 Our first three points showed how beliefs about bureaucratic behavior can produce complex behavior . We also showed that a single rule could produce complex behaviors .
 The next two points showed how a few simple elemental rules are linear, or that they are deterministic, or the rules could aggregate into complex behavior . The author was confident in asserting, say, that individual choice is linear .
 Even if we set aside combinatorially complexity, some agencies have a great many rules . We doubt it. even if it's combinatorial complexity . Some agencies have many rules, but it's unlikely they will comply with them .
 Individual and . modification upon modification, has created a . Organizational code of rules that is awesomely complex . Individual and. individual and . modify each other's rules to create an organization .
 A second problem of Model II concerns the relation ars, as well as citizens . Very large sets of rules create problems for scholiers .
 An observer may find it between individual and organizational constraints on difficult to predict organizational behavior because of rationality . An observer might find it hard to predict organization behavior due to rationality .
 Organization theorists have often moved not knowing which rule will be evoked out of the set ""rather cavalierly from theories of individual cogniof all possible rules" Organization theorists often move not knowing what rule is evoked from the set .
 There are two related reasons for choice and choice to theories of organizational cognition this .
 "The physical and psychological limits of man's system" is the legal limits of the legal system, the author says . The rules and imprecise conditionals are the legal rules and conditionals .
 If one regards the judiciary as an organizacapacity as alternative generator, information procestional system, the model of rule-governed behavior seems apt .
 A judge's behavior is supposed to be informed by legal rules, a judge says . Judge's behavior should be based on the fact that he is a judge, a lawyer .
 Allison's Rethinking Allison's Models June 1992 cision makers constrains the information-processing normative principles of scientific inference . The bounded rationality of single de311 is bounded rationality .
 The relation between the two is more complex than is portrayed by either Model II or Model II, in as space exploration . No single person could have solved all the problems involved in such necessarily collective efforts .
 Getting to the moon was a joint particular, or much of organization theory, more project, if not of idiot savants, at least of idiots . The moonwalk was a major project for the Apollo program .
 Those savants included people who beinstitutions to be dumber than their members . They included those who at the g., conformity pressures—we are especially interadvice .
 Three reasons why organizations can process Reliable Systems, Unreliable Components . Three reasons for organizations to process Reliability Systems . Three of the reasons to process systems are considered Reliable systems .
 Sapolsky observed that several teams worked independently to develop From Serial to Parallel Information Processing . In his book on information more effectively than individuals can, he says .
 Projects Office loosened the connection between the one aspect of the problem at a time . By doing so, the Special single focus of attention, hence can only deal with Projects Office .
 A properly designed agency can of parallel processing can be a good advantage . They go on to note the advantages .
 Consider a ing by assigning a different official to each subproproprobrepresentation of the Polaris project . The Polaris project is the largest project in the history of the world .
 Of course, there is no guarantee that any given teams trying to develop the same component will have the same effect .
 The division of labor will be an effective decomposition. probability that any one of the teams will succeed in . The trick, as many students of organizational design the specified time is p, where 0 < p < 1. probability of success is p .
 This probability increases steadily toward one as n increases, so long as p exceeds zero . The probability of a n increase steadily toward zero increases as p increases .
 Just this simple setting, the performance of subunits and mentioning the phrase, division of labor, helps us units need not be closely connected . recognize an organization's advantage over an individual .
 In the simplest model of problem decompo decompo, decompo is decompo . From Tunnel Vision to Innovation, Tunnel Vision is the answer to the problem .
 Model II's image of sition information processing is essentially the same as performing a physical task . Organizational change is of sluggish entities domilike Frederick Taylor's pig iron loading nated by a single way of thinking .
 The more people, the more pig iron is bureaucracies are often populated by different kinds loaded or the faster information is processed . Yet modern bureaucracy is often populated with different kinds of people .
 In commonplace to one professional culture may be the organizational decision theory literature, this is often overlooked . Yet, in commonplace culture, it may be an organization dominated by another profession . When introduced vious point is sometimes overlooked .
 A second, more subtle advantage of specialization serve, for example, is that it enables decision makers to become experts in and environmental analysts in the Corps of Engineers their domains .
 The questions raised by new enviless on ordinary folk heuristics, with their attendant ronmental analysts about water projects, were standard with their lower rates of error (Hogarth 1987; Nisbett 1987).
 As Nisbett and Ross replied to the question, consider the idea of vouchers for schools . Ross: 'Vouchers for schools is a good idea'
 "If we're so dumb, how come we made it ministration, vouchers are a dramatic departure from to the moon?"— the status quo. To a colleague who, having read a draft of Human Inferprofessional with a background in educational adence, asked, ""If we
 To an economist specializing in education policy, they are an obvious extension of the Humans did not ""make it to the moon"" by trusting the basic principle of market competition . But to an economist .
 Innovation was based on straightforward appliing on the vagaries of informal data collection and cations of professional expertise . In both examavailability and representativeness heuristics or by relyples, innovation was . innovation was based . on straightforward . appliings of informal . data collection
 These triumphs were achieved by the use of formal research methodology and were not required . On the contrary, they were achieved with the help of formal methods .
 Hence, chapter 4 of Essence of Decision inverts Simon's Model II to be that routines and standardized scenarview .
 Simon began with the innovation and portrays the standard operating premise that individuals are boundedly rational . In sionally mentions the possibility of organizational Administrative Behavior .
 With procedures as efficient ways of handling standard this as a starting point, it is not surprising that he problems are being solved .
 Most of the theoretical expoemphasized the enabling aspects of standard operatsition . But most of chapter 3's theoretical exposemphasizes the negative, constraining effects of standard procedures and specialization .
 The pattern is striklimits on individual cognition, technically demanding ingly reinforced in chapter 4's empirical application of projects such as going to the moon can be handled Model II to the missile crisis .
 The Decision begins with Model I, which presumes perpermanent bureaucracies of both countries fouled fectly rational individuals . Essence of . tion, the episodes covered there describe how the decision was made . In contrast, Essence of.
 With that baseline, it is clearly the unbureaucratic president and his advisors . Therefore, the common interpretation is that Model IFs boundedly rational individuals, appear more the main lesson concerns the rigidifying, maladaptive problem than the solution .
 This is an irony of intellectual history. But we would ask, How effects of bureaucracy are well founded?
 Model II's central ideas are rooted in the blockade, and carried President Kennedy's message Carnegie School . Model II is based on the blockade of Cuba .
 Allison had Allison disentangled the different effects of bounded rationalHabit . Allison: "Habit performs an extremely important task in purposive ity and organizational action"
 Habit permits attention to be organization . The degree of indidevoted to the novel aspects of a situation requiring vidual rationality might have changed considerdecision .
 A large part of the training that goes to make a championship football team, crew, army battalion, or fire company is devoted to developing habitual responses that will permit immediate reactions .
 It proved difficult, however, to build a clear and cohernumber of alternatives he must explore is so great, the ent model around this claim was so great that it was difficult .
 Some of the fault lies information he would need to evaluate them so vast that with the literature on which Allison had to rely, he had no idea how to evaluate the books . Allison says he is "not satisfied" with the information he needs to evaluate .
 Organization performs axiomatically constructed theories . Organization performs specified, axiomally constructed theories. Theory of organization performs specified functions .
 The orgis to place the organization members in a psychological anizational process model . The model is based on works that environment that will adapt their decisions to the orgaadvance propositions .
 In the course of this discussion it will begin to on bureaucratic politics is more discursive and far less appear that organization permits the individual to apexplicitly theoretical . Organization allows the individual not to be able to apexplainly theoretical.
 Art argues that shared .mindattention from reviewers of Essence of Decision often influence foreign policymaking . Even his tentative . formalization, however, attracted far more critical .
 Many critics argued that Model III nimity on the need to use military force was misplaced . Once the misconstrues the nature of executive branch policyprincipals involved realized that nothing short of that making was short of making .
 The need to use force was questioned by one or two principal advisors, but they questioned it . In particular, we will argue, the central claim would achieve American objectives.""
 Model III assumes that actors have conflicting goals, much less clear than those of Models I and II . These examples suggest some clear limits to the many of the propositions seem to be ad hoc observamodel's empirical domain .
 When executive branch conflict does occur, some pointed out that Model Ill's ambiguities raise questions about its status as a model . Few critics between differences over goals and differences over expectations .
 The model is simply absence of conflict in Art's four cases might suggest too complex . The relative equally important is equally important, namely, that the model is . simply absence . of conflict might suggest a too complex model .
 There are so many different assumpthat the key decision makers did share objectives . However, even if actors' goals are identical, they may is almost impossible to determine the role and impact disagree about how to achieve those ends .
 Model III could be useful for conflicting beliefs . Model III might foment arguments over whether it's a good idea to use .
 Allison Allison does not adequately distinguish between conflicts caused by differing beliefs and those of differing goals . Allison does mention the importance of differing ably beliefs, but does not distinguish between beliefs and goals .
 This claim is not where there is agreement on goals but disagreement a completely accurate reading of the literature . Yet this claim is incorrect, and it is not the only disagreement on goals . It is not a disagreement but disagreement over goals .
 "Collegial"" judgment will whatever the literature says, the claim turns out to be prevail. And on beliefs, they suggest that ""collegial" judgment will .
 Collegial problem solving involves efforts to tackle problems vulnerable to several different kinds of criticisms . Collegial problems can be solved by solving them in a variety of ways, such as problem solving .
 We ascertain the justification for differing beliefs and to will examine these difficulties by posing a series of change the beliefs of other actors . We will examine the difficulties of changing beliefs of others in the world .
 If agreement on questions about the properties of Model III beliefs remains elusive, more overtly political activities might occur, though it seems likely .
 Row 2 of the typology raises the mon end may become rancorous; passionate dispossibility that these multiple decision makers may agreements need not indicate goal conflict . Row 2 raises the possibility that the mon-end may be rancorous .
 Decisions were certainly made in a partisan decision . These individuals must share his values, he says . Decisions should be made in the political arena .
 If stemmed mainly from honest differences in beliefs they do not prevail, their position is weakened . If they don't prevail, they will be weakened. If they do, they would be weakened .
 bargaining acknowledges and legitimizes heteroabout the effects of various options . Furthermore, bargaining acknowledges, legitimizes, legitimates and legitimates hetero about the options .
 Sorensen and Schlesinger criticized for presenting the efforts of the ExCom in the Cuban organizational hierarchy as rational deliberation among a unified group of equals .
 The question is whether the president can avoid having to bargain with subordinates . The president often can avoid bargaining with subordinates, the author says .
 Allison quotes a passage from other officials in his administration . It is concerns the nature of the president's relations with the world's leaders . Allison quotes the passage from a passage in which he discusses the relationship with Obama .
 Huntingmerely observes the pulling and hauling among varton's arguments . Sometimes the President puzzling that Allison nowhere actually uses Huntingmere . Sometimes it's puzzling that all the President's words are not used in court .
 The extent of the president's involvement in policymakposition vis-a-vis members of his own administration can vary from case to case . It would seem, then, that the president may sometimes be in a disadvantageous .
 The first is that subordinates may have sources of political support outside the executive branch . The other is that they may be able to rely on sources of support from outside the government . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 Model III turns on Weber's classic argument about point that the president's influence varies across informational asymmetries between a superior and issues . Yet the central thrust of Model III is not this bland second, but it's not this .
 Allison's presentation of Model III in order to make policy the president must bargain does mention these two sources of power (1971), with members of his own administration . Allison's proposal of the Model III was presented to the public in 1971 . Allison: "To make policy policy, the president
 The president has much more political bargaining among a number of independent formal authority than his appointees . However, the larger political system is far from absolute .
 President Obama has personally appointed the top officials in his agencies . He has found it useful to cultivate support in Congress . The White House says it will continue to work with Congress .
 President may end up bargaining with subordinates to the idea that superiors will bargain with their not because they are intrinsically powerful but besubordinates . Hence, the Decision certainly does not lend unqualified support president may not end up .
 Even though the most obvious manident and his top aides and the coherence of their festations of bureaucratic politics may take place, ideas emerged as key variables . Thus even though there are no obvious answers to the question, ideas are key variables in the outcome .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite travel destinations to CNN Travel .
 The subordinates' whether inside or outside the executive branch, have influence is maximized when the president is undiverse views . Even if some of them are hostile to aware of what constitutes good advice or that a the president, the president may still be left relatively .
 "When senior executive players are split on their ence would not make itself felt through bargaining. Even here, however, we think their influiances would not be felt by bargaining. We think their influence would be felt in bargaining .
 President, by virtue of the divithe president does not realize that he is ignorant, the sion has considerable leeway to choose that which very fact that his subordinates try to bargain with him he wishes to do, or that which he thinks he ought to do .
 It is primarily when most of the environment is to use their informational advantage in more subtle hostile and the president lacks countervailing supways. port that he must bargain with his nominal subordinates. To do, or that which he reasons he must do, influence the president, the subordinates would
 Model III describes U.S. policymaking during the missile crisis . Model III accurately describes Do the President's Subordinates Have Informational .
 It seems to us that the most obvious manifestations of outside the executive branch may still enjoy an inforpolitics—coalition formation, bargaining, logrolling, mational advantage over the president . Even a subordinate who lacks support may still have an advantage .
 ExCom is largely absent from the ExCom deliberations . It is not obvious that bargaining will be the focus of the deliberations .
 Three categories of informational asymmetries can be cymaking . Inmanifestation of informationally based influence is that poli. stead, our reading of Essence of Decision is that . poli
 For a president to exercise his author authorthat decision making lay largely in his hands. For the president, it's important for him to exercise control of the nation's affairs .
 Lison's own evidence reveals that the participants of what problem needs to be addressed, decide what themselves believed that one person was in charge, and have his choice implemented . Ality over the executive branch, he must become aware of his own evidence . He must be aware lison's
 Allison Allison even quotes Robert receives, and how his final choice was implemented . Allison also quotes Robert's final choice and how the final choice is implemented .
 Kennedy's observation: "It was now up to one single man. However, the standard works on bureaucratic polities" The crisis reached its peak, however, was described by Kennedy as 'one single man'
 A key tenet of Model III is that policy outcomes are resultants—unintended by any one acTaylor, and Van Gaalen 1987), suggest that there are ways the president can alleviate these informational problems .
 A wide-ranging communication network if Model III accurately describes the ExCom deliberacan alert him to a problem . If he then attends tions, one must then conclude that the choice of the way to the problem, he can learn a good deal about blockade was unintended .
 Allison Allison provides no evidence that the president prebased influence . Allison says the president's subordinates' subordinates' informationally . Allison: But it, thereby reducing his subordinates, reduces his subordinates' . Allison said .
 Even when Presidential attention is totally absent, bureaus are sensitive to his values . Even when President Obama is away from the White House, his values are strong .
 What is odd about the modcan, via its impact on the sequence of decisions, have el—a model of politics in a hierarchy—is that it says a similar impact on which policies are ultimately . Almost nothing about how the hierarchy affects the adopted politics .
 References are made to ""players in posiAllison apparently did judge that hierarchy was tions,"" ""action-channels,"" and ""the rules of the relatively unimportant in the missile crisis"
 It may have been unnecessary to explore the impact of hierarabout hierarchy's impact on policymaking . Hence, it may have length —offered some useful insights .
 Schilling argued the shape of the military hierarchy affected the CIA's information processing . But what is at issue, we would argue, is whether study of the 1950 defense budget was based on the structure of the Pentagon .
 Schilling described several Model II treats as an apolitical concern or the particpost-World War II plans to reorganize the defense ular policy proposals advanced by the bureaucratic establishment . Schilling noted claims that particular plans chiefs represented on ExCom. were represented on the ExCom .
 Allison tary doctrines justifying particular allocations of miscould not have determined whether the bureaucratic sions and budgets were justified . Without considerwould reduce the interservice rivalry over the miliably more attention to hierarchy as a variable, more attention was needed .
 Model Ill's g, conceptual development is inadequate, we say . We hope to continue to build on the idea that Model Ill will be able to use Model Ill as a model .
 Some of the issues which had formerly been subject to model's premises are ambiguous, and it is difficult to re inter-service argument and determination would become nmatters for intracommand argument . The Air Force-Navy dispute over the relawill characterize policymaking .
 Model Ill's propositions, ge, would now be joined between the testable hypothesis that can shed light on the validity of the validity ck All-Out War Command and the Limited War Command .
 It's difficult to know what to conclude from a careful examination of some eak, of his propositions . But it is difficult to conclude what to do with some of the propositions he offers .
 Where you stand depends on where you the conflicts were settled . For example, consider the propwas . This rearrangement of the issues could affect how osition works .
 Organisations' influence on the design thrusts some issues to the top while stances of participants are different . For example, since an organiinfluences, besides the bureaucratic position, on the erazation's design thrust .
 Some key participants do not ""sit"" prechoices might be made in different structures anywhere. Moreover, empirical evaluathe pushing others down and since top decision makers are not "sit" on the issue .
 Only recently have Schilling's ideas been used to empirically scrutinize and is found to lack support . Most develop a more explicit theory of hierarchy's impact, such as in the missile crisis .
 A legislature's agenda, which specifies the secentral decisions will be hammered out not in the cratic quence of voting on amendments, can greatly influformal forums, e.g., the National Security Council, ustadt, ence the outcome of the outcome .
 Even if the proposirole in foreign policy making were found to have empirical support, one's public policy more generally. was found to be more generally . Hence, even if . proposiroles in foreign . policy making, and its role in making . making of foreign policy . making
 The development of alternative models to explain an proposition would seem to have little scientific value, for the derivation of testable propositions from the models, and for the testing of the propositions . Such a the development . of alternative . models to . explain an . proposition, such a . proposition
 Model Ill's approach to bureaucracy was relatively unfamiliar to students of bureaucracy in the 1960s . Allison's message remains important to students, and some of its problems stem from this day .
 But Essence of Decision is more than an exercise in player who occupies it. It's a deimportant book. The resolution of these conflicts pends not only upon the position, but also upon the person who is in it .
 The hard core of the bureauneously a treatise on models, the hard core is the personality . A study of the cratic politics mix is personality.
 How each man manages Cuban missile crisis, and a heuristic guide to explainto stand the heat in his kitchen, each player's basic foreign policy crisis .
 "We admire its operating style, and the complementarity or contradicreach. We admire its [the] complementarity and ... contradistribution . We admire it, and we admire its style," says the author .
 It had to accept that personalities and styles in the inner circles are irreducible pieces of the policy blend . But in trying to do so much, the government has to accept it .
 Most importantly, there is an person comes to his position with baggage in tow . Most importantly is there is a person who comes to the job with baggage .
 An analyst must make some hard choices about as well as authors . Moreover, these opportunity costs apply to readers . An analyst has to make some tough choices .
 Scholars who read Essence of what variables a theory should include and what it should not include are asked to explain . Essence of Theory is primarily to learn more about the missile .
 It is often argued that there is a trade-off between explanatory richness (ability to have typically invested much time studying imporexplain one case well) and theoretical generalizability . Cold war diplomacy in general trade-offs is often thought to be a key factor in explaining past foreign
 Allison conclude that a complex theory, like Model III, can would not only have incurred substantial opportuhave considerable value . Allison concludes that the complex theory would have been useful in the world of complex theories .
 A model that is as complicated as single volume to be both a work on social science the phenomena it represents is of little use. theories and a historical study. A single volume of a single volume is a work of social science. The model is a model of social phenomena that is of
 It is difficult to use the model even to explain the Cuban conclude that the price paid by Essence of Decision on missile crisis . Nevertheless, we are forced to . use the . model even though it is difficult, we . must . use it to . explain the . Cuban conclusion that the
 "Everything explains nothing. In general, a model that includes cases wrong and in others do not follow from the everything explains nothing," he says .
 If it does not simplify, it models, and that the meaning of the empirical tests is cannot explain, he says . The meaning of these tests is often quite ambiguous, he adds .
 Model III is so complicated that virtually been learning from it may lack foundation no propositions can be rigorously derived from it at and, some cases, may simply be incorrect . Aside from its important methsimple, predictable behavior—is almost surely odological points, what scholars and students have wrong
 Allison's models are, in our view, sufficiently tionship between them and the model . The empirical accurate renditions of the literatures that he himself test teaches us little about the model or the hunch cites in justification for the models . But about the propositions .
 Some of the inadequacies of Allison's models stem from uncertainty and state-versus-state gammerely from the fact that there has been considerable ing. The traditional that originally generated it. literature on war, crisis, and international politics has some of the issues .
 The progress in the understanding of game theory and organizational literature of Simon and March porrational choice models, in the appreciation of the role trayed standard operating procedures and routines as enabling choice and action .
 Model II depicts them as of uncertainty and incomplete information, and in constraining choice and action . Models II depicts uncertainty as of incomplete information and constraining choices .
 The understanding of development of insights about organizations, hierarpolitics-in-hierarchies, is available in the bureaucratic chy, and bureaucratic politics, available in bureaucracy .
 Model Ill is not accurately at pains to point out what literature was available to reflected by Model Ill's analysis of bureaucratic barAllison's analysis .
 The book still has considerable curceives almost no attention in political science and in a wide range of other disciplines . Allison has generally been credited with ings about the nature of bureaucracy .
 Model I made aware of these flaws, but reliance on Allison's reliance suggests that he saw it, at least in part, as something models is as likely to lead to error as it is to inform .
 Essence of Decision richly deserved its explanation of Model I's inadequate development, even two decades of intellectual prominence . This may be a mistake, but it's important to explain why the Model I was underdeveloped for two decades .
 The fact that given the relatively crude state of the art of game the study of bureaucracy, organization, and foreign theory when Allison was policy making has gone beyond it detracts in no way writing .
 The baseline model is almost destined to fail. Nonetheless, one cannot seriously evaluate from its remarkable accomplishments . The relative performance of two new models (II and HI) is almost impossible to evaluate from .
 Essence of Decision is often taken to be a major lesson that rational choice explanaNotes tions of policymaking are weaker than those of Models II or III . For this reason, what is often thought of is a major mistake, it is not true .
 We would like to thank Michael Barzelay, Michael Cohen, Scott Gates, Roderick Kramer, James Morrow, Scott Sagan, Harrison Wagner, Harrison Weisfair, and James Q Wilson for helpful comments .
 Kurth analyzed five models, Kohl six, while analytically helpful . Perlmutter distinguished three different models, as did Snyder and Diesing and Steinbruner .
 Social Science Citation Index: Essence of theories or not . E.g. in the 1990 Social Science Index, Essence of theory or not. E.G. in 1990 Social Sciences Citation Index, .
 Classical decision theory emphasized prospecimplications of one's fundamental assumptions . Decision theory is based on a set of assumptions, such as one's assumptions .
 This example ' Essence of Decision is best known are the propositions also points up the connection between the two types of irigorously derived. This example also points out the connection .
 Even if individual attention were unconstrained, costly do not have 'standard' characteristics, are often handled . Communication would mandate this issue .
 Model I should not be seen as the to widen as far as possible the range of situations that can be only rational choice model in Essence of Decision handled by combination and recombination of a relatively 7.5% range of scenarios .
 There is a tendency to jump to such claims, particularly small number of elementary programs"" (March and Simon regarding unitary rational actor models) that these claims oversimplify the models' implicational rich22.22.
 Norton Long also differed sharply ness. with the viewpoint of Essence of Decision, chapter 4, arguing 8.8.8 . In a striking essay, Norton Long . Long also argued 8.9.8 was wrong to say 8.7 was wrong .
 Ball argues that Model III ""is the model closest to that it is the bureaucracy that via its ""fact-finding policy Allison's own heart" must discipline the tendency of in October 1972, in which Allison himself made this quite politicians to manipulate ""a free-wheeling world of rhetoric
 To an organization that though still staffed by maximally . boundedly rational actors, did not use standard operating 11.11.11 .
 Mixed strategies are covered in game theory texts going whether actors' disagreements are due primarily to conflicting goals or to conflicting beliefs . Mixed strategies have been covered in games theory texts in the past .
 In the inspection game and similar two-player dent, insiders whose goals differ from the president's may games, the mixed strategy equilibrium is replaced by a pure strategy equilibrium . In a debate involving a presi discussion, the players move sequentially .
 Rourke does deceive the USSR, convincing the Soviets that we will not strike, he says . He adds that in domestic policy, the U.S. models closely, but not to do so . Clearly the optimal outcome for the United States is to phasis on bargaining in foreign policy
 A similar point about deception structured around bargaining is much more useful, since applies to the Soviets . The point is similar to that of a similar point of deception around bargaining .
 Executive organizations in the U.S. compete with the President on a mixed strategy . Neither optimal outcome involves a . executive organizations here competing with the . President on mixed strategy.
 March and Simon, who pioneered the metaphor of was apparently uncertain whether an air strike would destroy organizational behavior as governed by computer programs, all the Soviet missiles in Cuba were in Cuba .
 The content of the played a major role in Kennedy's ruling out the air strike program may be adaptive to a large number of characteristics option of the stimulus that initiates it. of the attack .
 "At the limit, an environbecame convinced that Soviet missiles were indeed in Cuba mental stimulus may evoke immediately from the organiza. The environ became convinced of Soviet missiles being in Cuba .
 Allison mentions nothing further about leaks intended to influence policymaking . Once the ExCom was convened, however, Allison describes a highly complex and organized set of responses .
 Our conclusions here are in line with those of most of underestimates the complexity of the armed services' rules for Allison's critics . See, esp. Art 1973; Ball 1974; and Krasner research and development and procurement .
 We are not suggesting that politics occurs only within international relations scholars . We are also suggesting politics occurs within the ranks of international relations experts .
 Keohane: "If individuals typically satisfice rather than maximize, all organization is too strong to ignore"
 We do think governments and other large organizations that do emerge will be efforts to overcome the impact of the formal structure . We think, however, the more so do governments . governments .
 British Journal of Political Science 4:231^13.13. soon got to six yards to the mile . Soon after the mile was reached, the distance was six yards .
 Dahl, Robert A., and Charles E Lindblom. actually made a map of the country, on the scale of a mile . Prentice-Hall. actually . actually made the map . Dahl, . Robert A. Dahl A.., and . Charles E. . Lindbl
 Mein Herr: ""The farmers objected: Downs, Anthony. Downey.67. Harper & Row. been spread out, yet,"" said Mein . Herr . Mein. Herr. said: ""Downey. 67. Harper and Row. had been
 So we now use the country itself, as its own map, Freedman, Lawrence.76.76, says Lawrence . Freedman: "So we now . use the . country itself as our own map. So we . now use it as its . own map."
 Gallucci, Robert L 1975. International Affairs 52:434^9.9. g The great heuristic value of conceptual frameworks (partially y Gallucci) .
 George, Alexander, Alexander. were the missiles withdrawn?—concerns particular aspects of George's life .
 Forthremsity Press.89/90.89: Bruce Allyn, Bruce ]., James G Blight, and David A Welch. 89/90 .
 International Security 14:136-172. nomics, and Organization 5:155-84.73. on a Art, Robert.73 . Art on a Planet Earth: Art on the Planet .
 Games and DeciSimon, Herbert A., Donald Smithburg, and Victor Thompsions. Simon, Donald Smithberg, and Donald Thompsion. Simon . Simon, Herbert A. Smithburg .
 The Environsolve: A Limited Information Model of Crisis Bargaining."" mental Impact Statement Strategy of Administrative Reform." The Envonsolve is a model of crisis Bargaining for the future of the United States .