 After the failed 'Bay of Pigs Invasion', the USSR gained trust and support from Fidel Castro, Cuban leader, by supporting Cuba with their communist regime . The USSR gained the support of Cuba by supporting its communist regime in Cuba .
 Khrushchev secretly installed missiles in Cuba, and when U.S. spy planes found missile construction zones, President Kennedy imposed a blockade surrounding Cuba .
 He threatened the USSR that if any missile was launched from Cuba then the U.S. would attack the USSR . He also demanded that the USSR remove all of their weapons from Cuba .
 Khrushchev knew the consequences of sending the ships there; a nuclear war that could destroy the whole world . Middle Khrushvic knew the . consequences of . sending the . ships there .
 He turned the ships away to avoid further conflict and to avoid hot war .
 Kennedy took away the naval blockade/Cuban quarantine line on 25th October .
 The next day Khrushchev sent a letter proposing to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the U.S. promised/guaranteed not to invade Cubathis released some tension between the two countries .
 Khrushchev demanded the removal of U.S. U2 spy plane from Cuba in October . Second, more tough, letter was received demanding removal of United States . The U2 plane was shot down over Cuba and Khrushchchev wrote a tough letter .
 Khrushchev appeared to be weak and a laughing stock amongst communist politicians as, the removing of missiles from Turkey, were not made public at the time . It appeared as though Kennedy had won conflict as Khrushche had been humiliated . The Russians were seen as retreating from circumstances that they
 Its purpose was to allow leaders of the two countries to communicate directly, efficiently and quickly in the case of another crisis . Its purpose is to ensure that the leaders of two countries can communicate directly and efficiently .
 He had done nothing for the Berlin Wall and the Bay of Pigs incident had been a disaster, he said . He said: "He had done . Nothing for him. He had nothing to do for him."
 There were under the impression that Khrushchev could take advantage of this inexperienced, young man . There were also the impression he was taking advantage of the young man.
 Detzer, a United States historian, is the author of "The Brink" Detzer . Detzer is a U.S. historian and author of The Brink .
 He does not publish a book for the purpose of glorifying his nation . However he does not published a book to glorify his nation, he says .
 Both nations agreed to stop producing nuclear bombs unless the technology became outdated . Cuba Missile Crisis occurred during the Cuban-American standoff .
 This was another treaty designed to ease the tension, which suggests Detente was working effectively and acting as previously designed .
 This build up of agreements lead to a rapid improvement of relations between the two nations . This build-up of agreements led to the development of bilateral relations .
 Khrushchev wanted to make people realize the change he tried to make to the USSR . He wanted people to know that Stalin's rule was over . The USSR under Khrushchev and Brezhnev was under the Soviet Union .
 He needed initiative and independence for his economical reforms and to get this independence he needed to tell the truth about what Stalin did during his regime . He said: "He needed initiative ... for his economic reforms"
 There have been a number of sanctions which have taken place . Arab Israeli conflict has been the focus of the conflict .
 Before Hamas were is power the Palestinians were still receiving aid and money . However once Hamas got into power everything changed . This is because of the fact that before Hamas was in power they were still getting aid .
 There was little the Western powers could do to stop the Hamas group, writes Peter Bergen . This was because of the aims and ambitions of the group, he says .
 This banter also shows the Cold War developing as it is obvious to see that relations are deteriorating between the two superpowers .
 Even if attacked first, the U.S. could respond with such force as to cuase great damage to the attacker . That is, even if attacked, the United States could response with great damage .