 Sevareid was remarkably perceptive in emphasizing the emotional impacts of this president on the population . Nonetheless, he says, he's not surprised by the impact of President Obama's presidency .
 The administration’s disastrous failed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs dogged President Kennedy from the start, and provided Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev with strong incentive to deploy offensive missiles on the island . His shocking grotesque murder continues to reverberate in our collective lives, even after
 In recent years, surviving officials from both sides in the confrontation have revealed that nuclear war was even closer than realized . The President resisted powerful pressure to attack Cuba and was highly imaginative .
 President Obama was able to get missiles out of Cuba through a blockade and a secret Cuba-Turkey missile trade . He and his advisers used a blockade, combined with a secret trade between Cuba and Turkey .
 In the aftermath of the missile crisis, Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev achieved a treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, a major breakthrough .
 JFK was careful on race relations, addressing the subject only when pressed to do so by a massive public march on Washington . While simultaneously gangsters were simultaneously involved in the effort to recruit the mafia, the mafia was involved .
 People around Robert Kennedy were puzzled by his marked disinterest in possible conspiracy in the assassination . A decade passed before the Nixon administration returned to prosecution with Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations legislation .
 John Kennedy’s book ‘Profiles in Courage,’ about United States Senators who put principle above political expediency, received the Pulitzer Prize . RFK avoided that dark tangled path because he might come face-to-face with it himself .
 Professor Parmet has documented exceptionally serious health problems that plagued JFK from birth . Critics cracked President Kennedy should show less profile and more courage .
 Seesareid enlisted in the U.S. Navy in World War II, then volunteered for hazardous PT boat duty . Despite this, he managed to enlist in the United States Navy in WWII .
 President Kennedy made a dramatic public commitment to carry out a successful manned moon landing, including safe return to earth . President Kennedy also made a pledge to carry on a successful mission to the moon .
 A number of technological innovations resulted from the mammoth space effort, including extreme miniaturization of electronics . The mission to the moon was the first manned mission to orbit Earth .