 We are reproducing the letter as it was abridged by the editors of the Times and run in its letters column Saturday, December 2 . We are also reproducing it as it's run in the letters column .
 The Militant had planned to reproduce Lipscomb's article in this issue as well, so our readers could examine the entire record and make up their own minds . The article was published in this edition of this issue .
 Mary-Alice Waters is the editor and author of the introduction to The Bolivian Diary of Ernesto Che Guevara, published in a new translation by Pathfinder Press in 1994 .
 The Episodes is Guevara's account of major military battles and political events through which the leadership of the Cuban revolution was forged in the course of the popular war and mass uprising that brought down the U.S.-backed dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista .
 It was a news account by Jon Lee Anderson, identified by the Times as a journalist working on a biography of Guevara to be published by Atlantic Monthly Press .
 Mario Vargas Salinas had revealed what was done with Guevara's body in October 1967 following his capture and murder by the Bolivian army in a CIA-organized operation .
 Vargas said he participated in dumping bodies of Guevara and five other slain guerrillas into mass grave . Vargas says he dumped the bodies in a mass grave under the airstrip in the town of Vallegrande on October 11 . Two days later, Gue
 Anderson wrote a relatively straightforward article echoing none of the long-standing stories about alleged divisions between Guevara and Cuban leader Fidel Castro . Anderson: "I'm not going to sugar-drama. I'm just trying to make a point"
 Guevara, with Castro's agreement, resigned his government, party, and military posts in Cuba in order to return to South America to help advance the anti-imperialist and anticapitalist struggles that were sharpening in several countries, especially in the continent's Southern
 Guevara spent most of the last half of 1965 in Africa aiding the national liberation movement in the Congo . After several intermediate stops, he returned to Cuba in December .
 There he prepared to leave for Bolivia within a few months to lead a guerrilla movement . Bolivian, Cuban, and other volunteers were fighting against that country's military dictatorship .
 Guevara was in Bolivia from November 1966 until his death 11 months later . He spent 11 months in Bolivia, Bolivia .
 In October 1965, Castro released a letter Guevara had written to him . Castro released the letter in October 1965 . Castro's letter was released a few months later .
 Guevara said that "other nations of the world summon my modest efforts of assistance" Castro read the letter in full to a rally that was broadcast over Cuban television .
 "I have always been identified with the foreign policy of our revolution, and I continue to be. I have always be identified with foreign policy," he says .
 Despite Guevara's letter, the falsifications about his political divergence with the leadership of the Cuban revolution continued to be spread . The falsifications continued to spread .
 Waters says hearsay fell on fertile ground among liberals and middle-class radicals who had turned against the Cuban revolution by the mid-1960s . Waters points out in a portion of her letter not printed by the Times .
 With Guevara's capture and murder in October 1967, enemies of the Cuban revolution seized the opportunity to stoke these lies . The U.S. government and Cuban allies seized the chance to attack these lies.
 The regime's story that Guevara had fallen in battle was already coming unstuck . But several weeks later, as the regime's . story . had already come unstuck, Ovando took a different tack . Ovando: "The truth is that it is a lie"
 He presented the first in a string of self-serving accounts of alleged 'final conversations' with the captured communist leader .
 At the same time, Ovando continued to insist that Guevara had died of battle wounds . Ovando said Guegara died from battle wounds, but insisted that he died of wounds .
 Guevara had been shot through the heart the day after his capture . This lie was rapidly exposed as news leaked out from the autopsy that Guevedara had died . Guevenara was shot in the heart .
 Thomas Lipscomb was incensed that lies that had been fertilized for years had simply been disregarded by journalist Jon Lee Anderson in his dispatch on General Vargas's revelations . Thomas was evidently incensed .
 The Times editors, true to their 35 years of support to overturning the socialist revolution in Cuba, gave Lipscomb a prominent spot in the Sunday ""Week in Review"" to rectify this oversight .
 It is the kind of ""run-it-because-I-say-so" hack work that must irritate at least some of the more conscientious professional copy editors at the Times .
 Lipscomb then enumerates the allegations refuted by Waters in the accompanying letter . Waters has refuted all of the allegations in the letter .
 Waters' letter to the New York Times was abridged by the Times . Waters's letter was published in New York City, New York, on October 1 . Waters has been critical of the Times' treatment of her letter .
 First was the decision to print it in the Saturday edition, rather than the Sunday ""Week in Review"" where Lipscomb's article had appeared . The article was printed in the Sunday edition of the Sunday's "Week in review"
 The Sunday Times has a substantially larger circulation than either the weekday or especially Saturday editions . It is regularly bought across the U.S. and around the world by readers who don't follow that paper on a daily basis .
 The Sunday Times is most widely known for its editorial and letters pages . And the ""Week in Review" is among the features for which the Sunday Times has been known .
 The Times editors carefully changed each of Waters's references from ""Castro"" to ""Mr Castro"" and from ""Lipscomb"" to "Mr Lipscomb" The editors removed each and every sentence by Waters that called attention to their failure to observe even the most minimal standards of
 Militant readers can see that sentence, but that sentence was dropped from her letter . But that sentence has been dropped .
 Waters added that a new English edition of Guevara's Episodes, of which I am the editor, allows readers to check the facts for themselves . Waters said: "A new English version of Guesvara" will be available in the next edition .
 At the same time, the Times's lapse in copyediting brought to light a useful revelation about the publishing history of Guevara's diary .
 James, who died a year ago, was a U.S. journalist who for a time was editor of The New Leader, a pro-State Department magazine .
 It is possible, even likely, that he actually did edit Che's diary, perhaps under the aegis of institutions beyond Stein and Day itself . It is also possible that he edited Che's journal .
 Lipscomb's article in the ""Week in Review"" undoubtedly know who edited the Stein and Day edition, and under what auspices . Those in the Times management who, upon request, placed the article, in the New York Times, undoubtedly know .
 Gay Talese recounts how the Times stopped a preinvasion story by reporter Tad Szulc on the planned 1961 assault . The story had been scheduled as the frontpage lead the following day .
 Talese: Dryfoos ordered the story toned down, moved to a less prominent place on the page, its headline minimized, and its headline minuted . Dryfoo: "Any reference to the imminence of the invasion eliminated" Talese says Dryfos ordered
 Many men accepted it on the simple theory that what appeared in The Times must be true, and this blind faith made monks of many men on The Times . They accepted it, they said .
 There had been Timesmen who were less than truthful, or truthful in their fashion, or not truthful in the journalistic sense, which is a truth that is limited but verifiable . The Timesman was not truthful, but truthful in his fashion, he said .
 Or they had perhaps been too truthful, so controversial as not to be in the national interest or the newspaper's interest, which was often the same thing . Or they were perhaps too truthful .
 The next year, in October 1962, the administration of President John Kennedy photographically confirmed the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba . October 1962 `missile crisis'
 The Cuban government agreed to this installation earlier that year in face of Washington's escalating aggression . Cuba agreed to the installation earlier this year .
 Washington had implemented its Operation Mongoose campaign of terror against the Cuban people and their leaders . The Cuban people were targeted by the U.S. government .
 Large-scale preparations for a U.S. assault aimed at crushing the revolution had already been set in motion by the Kennedy administration .
 Previously secret documents have been released by the U.S. government . All this has been confirmed by previously secret documents released .
 In October 1962, the National Security Council was meeting long hours in secret in secret to discuss what course to take . In light of its information about the Soviet missile sites, the White House was meeting in secret .
 They eventually settled on an armed naval blockade of Cuba and put the United States military on nuclear alert . The U.S. military was put on a nuclear alert in Cuba .
 Kennedy administration officials asked Reston to hold story in the ""interests of national security,"" and Reston agreed . Government documents and tapes declassified in recent years show that news of the discussions was leaked to Reston .
 The following day Kennedy called the editors of the Times and the Washington Post, telling them not to go into print with what they knew, and neither did so . Kennedy himself called the New York Times and Washington Post editors the next day . Neither did .
 Cuban government published correspondence between Castro and Khrushchev in 1990, 1990 issue of Granma Weekly Review in Spanish, English, and French .
 Waters's letter was rejected by the Times, and the falsifications by Burlatsky remained unanswered . Yet, the Times rejected Waters's request .
 The Times editors' abridgment of the letter submitted by Waters is their deletion of the final sentence of a short quotation from a 1987 interview by Fidel Castro with Italian journalist Gianni Mina . The third point worth noting is the deletion of a quote from the interview .
 Lipscomb: Key question is how much support Fidel Castro really gave to Guevara's Bolivian expedition . Castro's words by Castro seem relevant to the matters under dispute .
 Felix Rodriguez, the CIA officer who by his own account issued the order to kill Guevara, has also written his version of a supposed final conversation with the revolutionary . Rodriguez is also a CIA officer .
 Rodriguez, using the name Fe'lix Ramos, was on the scene in La Higuera and Vallegrande directing the operation in October 1967 . He was photographed standing beside Guevara shortly before he was murdered .
 Rodriguez is the Cubanborn son of a wealthy family who went into exile in Miami following the 1959 victory over the Batista regime . Rodriguez was born in Cuba and moved to Miami after the revolution .
 Fidel Castro had once been thrown into jail by Batista, only to be subsequently released . Fidel Castro was once thrown in jail, but later released . Castro had been imprisoned by the Batista government, but was released .
 Rodriguez claims he ordered Bolivian soldier Mario Tera'n to shoot Guevara not ""in the face, but from the neck down" Rodriguez claims that when the regime in La Paz decided to shoot him, he ordered him to do so .
 Rodriguez's account, of course, is no more reliable than that of several Bolivian army officers . Rodriguez: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm sure something will happen here"
 Even this professional CIA killer and liar, however, apparently concluded he could not credibly quote Guevara saying he felt betrayed by his long-time comrade and fellow communist leader Fidel Castro .
 In fact, Rodriguez's entire account has been repudiated by Captain Gary Prado, the Bolivian officer who captured Guevara . Lipscomb falsely attributed this statement to Rodriguez to Captain Prado . Rodriguez's account of his alleged talks with Gueevara has been
 Read the interview with Cuban Brigadier General Harry Villegas that is quoted by Waters and that appears in this issue of the International Socialist Review supplement to the Militant .
 And buy some of the books and pamphlets on the Cuban revolution and on working-class politics that are advertised on these pages .