 Find and explain TWO other pieces of evidence in the source that prove that this was a top-secret telegram . Find out what evidence proves to be a top secret telegram, explain .
 Using the information in the relevant sources and your own knowledge, write a paragraph of about EIGHT lines explaining how superpower conflict over Cuba brought the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 .
 The following source is an extract from Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs that was published in 1970: We welcomed Castro's victory, of course, but at the time we were quite certain that the Bay of Pigs invasion was only the beginning .
 "It was a great victory for us ... a success without having to fire a single shot," says Luis Suarez . Suarez: "It's a great win for us. It was a success"
 A term applied to all of the Spanishor Portuguese-speaking nations south of the USA . Source is an extract from the speech that JF Kennedy delivered on 22 October 1962 .
 These long-range weapons of sudden mass destruction constitute an explicit threat to our peace and security, says President Obama . The U.S. should not underestimate the threat posed by these weapons, he says .
 All ships bound for Cuba ..., if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, will be turned back . The U.S. will turn back all ships bound to Cuba .
 "We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in the Berlin Blockade of 1948," says President Obama . The U.S. has been in the grip of a crippling economic crisis since the fall of communism .
 The photographs were analysed by military intelligence experts who immediately confirmed that the sites were bases for medium-range ballistic missiles . Military intelligence experts analysed the photographs to confirm that the missiles were used to launch missiles .
 This is a telegram sent by the Soviet Ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, to the USSR Foreign Ministry in the Kremlin on 27 October 1962 . The telegram was sent to the Soviet Embassy in Washington by the then-Ambassador in Washington . It was sent by Anat
 A telegram was a telegram sent by telegraph and then delivered in printed form like a letter . The telegram is a message sent by the telegraph then delivered to a newspaper or a family member .
 In the following source the telegram has been deciphered, translated into English and shortened . The telegram was sent to the White House in 1945 .
 Kennedy said he realized he realized that he had different approaches to solving the problems . Kennedy said that it was not likely that we could convince each other. Kennedy said: "We have different approaches and it's not likely we could convinced each other."
 R Kennedy: "We need 4 to 5 months. I think that in order to withdraw these bases from Turkey,” R Kennedy said, “we need 4-5 months.” Kennedy said .