 Curriculum FET TELEMATICS HISTORY 2018 GRADE 12 TERMS 1 – 3 PAPER 1 Cuba THE ORIGIN OF THE COLD WAR CONTAINMENT AND BRINKMANSHIP: THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 1962: SOURCE-B
 U.S. spy planes observed weapons in Cuba in 1962 . The crisis began in August 1962 . September 11, 1962 .
 Major Heyser took an aerial photograph from an American U-2 spy plane on 14 October 1962 . The photograph was taken from a U.2 spy aircraft .
 A historian would consider the information in this source useful when researching the deployment of missiles in Cuba . Explain to what extent a historian would use this information to help research the deployment .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine , reckless and provocative threat to world peace and stabilize relations between our two nations . The Soviet Union was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Explain the concept of the blockade in the context of the deployment of missiles in Cuba . Explain the idea of a blockade in Cuba in context of a missile deployment there .
 State any two steps Kennedy claimed he would take after detecting Soviet missiles in Cuba . State any TWO steps that Kennedy claimed to have taken after discovering Soviet missiles . State what you would do if you detected Soviet missiles? State any of the steps Kennedy said he would have taken in Cuba?
 Comment on why Kennedy decided to address the American public on 22 October 1962 . Use the evidence in the source and your own knowledge to comment on the events .
 Source 1B supports the information in Source 1C regarding the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Explain how the evidence in 1C supports the idea in 1B .
 This was the name given to the Second Five-Year Plan, starting in 1957 . The plan was given the name 'Second Five-year Plan' by the British government .
 In a Commune, peasants lived in barracks, ate in canteens and gave up their small plots of land . The Commune is a commune where peasants live in barracks .
 These targets were extremely high and people were often too scared to argue with them . The targets were often very high and often people were afraid to argue against them .
 The steel produced in the backyard furnaces was of very poor quality that it could not be used . Nobody had the expertise to run them properly, for example, the steel .
 In 1962 Deng Xiaoping and Liu Shao qi took over the running of the economy and transformed it . In 1962 the two men took control of the country's economy . Deng Xiaop and Liu shaoqi transformed the economy .
 They allowed peasants to have their private plots of land again so that agricultural productivity could increase . They for example, let peasants have their own plots of . land again . Agricultural productivity could also increase .
 Deng Xiaoping and Liu Shao qi were removed from office. Many were tortured and killed . Deng Xiaopao was forced to step down from office . Many of those removed were tortured, killed .
 Law and order virtually broke down between 1966 and 1968 . Many CCP leaders were arrested and sent into the countryside to work as Peasants . Many of them were sent to the countryside .
 Mao announced that the Cultural Revolution was over, but it took years to bring everything back to normal in factories, schools and farms . Mao announced it was over but years later brought everything back in factories and schools .
 The implementation of Mao Zedong's policies, the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, was a dismal failure . Mao's policies were a failure in China's economic and political policies .
 Use relevant evidence from 1958 to 1969 to support your line of argument . Find out what happened in the 1960s and '60s .
 Neo-colonialism paradoxically paradoxically Africa with its rich resources enriched foreign powers in a one-sided relationship with former colonial powers . Africa's rich resources enrich foreign powers . Democracy A political system in which all citizens are free to elect representatives .
 FNLA and MPLA begin guerrilla campaign to overthrow Portuguese colonial rule in 1961 . FNLA began guerrilla campaign in 1961 to overthrow colonial colonial rule .
 Zaire sends armoured cars, paratroopers and infantry battalions in support of the FNLA with the motive of ensuring a pro-Kinshasa government . Zaire also sends armoury cars and paratrooper battalions to support the rebels .
 UNITA manages to capture five provincial capitals in South Africa . Together with South Africa, UNITa managed to capture South Africa's first provincial capitals . The party was formed in the 1980s .
 The source below is an extract from a letter dated 26 January 1975 . SOURCE 2B The letter contains an extract of a letter from the author of the letter .
 It was written by the leader of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola, Agostino Neto . Neto was visiting Dar es Salaam .
 The MPLA requested two forms of assistance that the Cuban government requested from the government . The State of Cuba has not responded to the request . State of the State requested the assistance .
 Cuba's involvement in the Angolan Civil War is an important part of the history of the Cuban government in the conflict . Cuba was involved in the war between Angola and Angola .
 Explain why you think Black Consciousness activists decided to carry this poster .
 South African apartheid was met with intense international resistance in the 1980s . PW Botha's attempts at reforming the system of apartheid were met with international resistance . The clenched fists 15 The broken chain .
 Critically discuss the various forms of resistance that international anti-apartheid movements used to ensure the ultimate downfall of the apartheid regime in the 1980s . Critically consider this statement with reference to the various ways of resistance used to achieve the ultimate defeat of the regime . Criticise
 Candidates need to explain how PW Botha's attempts at reforming apartheid were met with intense international resistance from anti-apartheid movements .
 Candidates need to argue how the international resistance led to the downfall of the apartheid regime in the 1980s . Candidates must argue how international resistance helped bring down apartheid regime .
 Explain to what extent political leadership and commitment by key South African role players paved the way for the birth of a non-racial democratic South Africa in 1994 . Explain how political leadership helped pave the way to South Africa's birth of democracy . Tell us what happened to the South African political leaders
 Candidates must explain to what extent political leadership and commitment of key South African role players paved the way for the birth of a non-racial democratic South Africa in 1994 .
 PW Botha's attempts at reforming the system of apartheid were met with intense international resistance . His attempts to reform the system in the 1980s were met by intense international opposition .