 The Castro-led revolution in Cuba was the Cuban revolution in 1962 . The film was shot in the U.S. United States USA . It was made in Cuba in 1961 .
 Film opens with bongo drummer playing and other Cuban musicians playing instruments while dancers in fetching costumes dance and enjoy themselves . Film opens .
 Scene shifts to view from water of Havana skyline and then to automobile traffic on a busy street in a commercial district of the city . Scene shifts from view of water to view of automobile traffic in Havana .
 View of water rushing into the irrigation ditches and entering the area of crops . View of the water coming into the area .
 Open-air market filled with fruits, vegetables and other agricultural products . Shoppers at open-air markets filled with all kinds of fruits and vegetables .
 Fulgencio Batista y Zaldívar is seen next to his wife, Marta Fernández Miranda, as they cast ballots in 1952 Presidential election .
 Members of Fidel Castro's resistance movement are seen silhouetted against the sky, as they walk, carrying arms, in the mountain regions of Cuba . Next, members of the resistance movement were seen silhouetting the sky .
 Castro's men move through the rugged mountain terrain as shots are fired . Castro's troops are seen moving through the mountain terrain in the mountains .
 Scene shifts to a public square in Havana as it fills with people celebrating the downfall of Batista on 1s of January, 1959 . Scene shifts from Havana to Havana .
 The crowds cheer him wildly. as the hero, and liberator of the Cuban people . The crowds cheered him wildly .
 Castro promises land reform, land reform and the rights guaranteed under the Cuban Constitution of 1940 . Castro addresses the crowds from a balcony .
 Manuel Urrutia was named President of Argentina on January 3rd, 1959 . He was the first President of the country to be elected .
 In Washington,DC, he is seen placing a memorial wreath at the Statue of Abraham Lincoln in the Lincoln memorial .
 Speaking from a podium, in English, he states emphatically that he is not a communist . He says: "I don't want to be a communist. I'm not a socialist. I don't think I'm a communist"
 Castro is seen later, back in Havana at a large political gathering, where he and Che Guevara engage others in publicly broadcast discussions and debates . Castro is later seen in Havana, Cuba, engaging in public debates and public discussions .
 Communist propaganda seen dominating papers and magazines at a news stand . Communist propaganda was seen dominating newspapers and magazines .
 Anastas Mikoyan, vice-prime minister of the Soviet Union, visits Cuba soon after the Castro revolution . The Soviet Union visited Cuba in 1962, October 16 .
 Fidel Castro welcomed in Havana while refugees stream into Miami . Batista's son gets into a scuffle at the Florida Airport . The Cuban dictator's son got into a fight with the Cuban dictator .
 Rebel leader Fidel Castro in Havana, Cuba after taking power following fall of Batista government in January 1959 . Castro took power in 1959 after the fall of the Batista . Castro's government was overthrown in 1959 .
 Refugees of the Batista government and anti-Castro Cubans stream into Miami to escape reprisal in Cuba . Cubans are fleeing the government of Batista and the Cuban government .
 The son of exiled Cuban President Fulgencio Batista gets into a fist fight with an anti-Batista Cuban at the Florida Airport . The fight was caught on camera at the airport .
 Castro with fellow rebel Celia Sanchez who serves as his private secretary . Castro's private secretary is also his secretary .
 Cuban revolutionaries Fidel Castro, Ernesto Che Guevara, Camilo Cienfuegos and their men in 1959 . Cuba date: Cuba Date: 1959 Duration: 1 min 20 sec .
 Cuban people come out onto the streets to celebrate the fall of President Fulgencio Batista . Cuban people celebrate the end of the Batista regime .
 They break and burn the belongings of the Batista government, raiding government buildings and burning government material . They burn government material and break government buildings, raid buildings and burn them .
 They attack buildings and casinos run by Batista loyalists . They attack and destroy buildings run by loyalists run by the Batista government .
 Castro names Manuel Urrutia Lleo as the President of the Provisional Government of Cuba . Castro names him as the president of the provisional government .
 The number '26' for the 26th of July Movement is painted on people's foreheads, helmets and clothes .
 Castro with his bearded anti-communist rebel commander Camilo Cienfuegos at the podium . Castro was the leader of the anti-Communist rebel movement .
 Rebels on trucks and tanks pass through the crowd as they cheer and welcome them . Rebels on tanks and trucks are seen in the crowd cheering as they pass through them .