 This addendum consists of 11 pages . GRAAD 12 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 NOVEMBER 2011 ADDENDUM .
 We welcomed Castro's victory, of course, but at the time we were quite certain that the invasion was only the beginning and that the Americans would not let Cuba alone . "At the time, the thought kept hammering away at my brain. We welcomed it, but one thought kept
 "It would gravely diminish our stature throughout the world, but especially in Latin America," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to go to the United States," he says .
 If Cuba was to fall, other Latin American countries would reject us, he says . They would claim for all our might, the Soviet Union hadn't been able to do anything for Cuba but make empty protest to the United Nations .
 We had to think up some way of confronting America with more than words, he says . The logical answer was missiles, he adds .
 I had the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba without letting the U.S. find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them . I had an idea to install the missiles without the United States finding out they had been there .
 We agreed to remove our missiles on the condition that the president gave us his assurance that there would be no invasion of Cuba by the forces of the United States ... he gave in . It was a great victory for us … a success without having to fire a single shot," he said .
 JF Kennedy, President of the USA, delivered a speech on 16 October 1962 . The speech was part of a speech that JF JFK delivered on October 16, 1962 . Kennedy was president of the U.S. at the time .
 In this address he talks about the Soviet Union's deployment of missiles in Cuba and how the government intended to deal with the crisis . He also discusses the Cuban government's response to the crisis in Cuba .
 The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere . These long-range weapons of sudden mass destruction constitute an explicit threat to our peace and security . I call upon the Soviet government to halt this offensive build-up, writes David Cameron
 I have instructed a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba, says President Obama . The Cuban government has banned all military equipment from entering Cuba .
 All ships bound for Cuba …, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back . The U.S. will turn back all ships bound to Cuba if they contain offensive weapons .
 "We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in the Berlin Blockade of I948," says President Obama . The U.S. has been in a state of war with the Soviet Union in the past, but has
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to abandon this course of world domination, and to join an historic effort to end the perilous arms race and to transform the history of man .
 The missile sites were dismantled and with them went Khrushchev's prestige in the Soviet Union . The missile site was dismantled along with the missile sites . With them went the prestige of the Soviet Soviet Union in the world .
 Khrushchev showed equal statesmanship, restrain and firmness to Kennedy throughout the crises . Khruschev showed equally statesmanship to Kennedy .
 He did not mobilise Soviet troops, as Kennedy had done with his own . His message to Kennedy showed his coolness as well as courage, says historian .
 This source highlights socialism and self-reliance in Tanzania under Julius Nyerere's leadership . SOURCE 2A highlights socialism in Tanzania as a socialist state .
 Nyerere's vision of a future Tanzania was of a prosperous, self-reliant and classless society, he says . He says his vision of the future Tanzania would be a prosperous and selfless society .
 Tanzanian socialism was to be based on local resources rather than imported, high-tech industrialisation . The country was to focus on local .
 The country's main banks and foreign-owned capitalist companies were to be 'nationalised' that is, taken over by the state on behalf of the people . The state was to take over the banks and capitalist companies .
 A 'Leadership Code' banned political leaders from accumulating private wealth . Political leaders were banned from accumulating wealth . The code also banned politicians from accumulating money .
 The main emphasis of government was on rural development, leading to self-reliance . Rural development was the main focus of government .
 Nyerere proposed the gathering together of Tanzania's mass of small remote rural settlements into larger, more effective villages . The idea was proposed by the former president of Tanzania .
 This would make it easier for government to provide better roads and rural markets combined with agricultural advice and improved technology . It would make the government easier to provide rural markets, rural markets and agricultural advice .
 Better water, health and education facilities could also be provided more efficiently to larger, centralised villages .
 A vital aspect of 'ujamaa' was the promotion of the 'African socialist' principles of communal labour for the benefit of the community . 'Umaa' is a form of 'African socialism' that promotes communal labour .
 Nyerere believed it would increase agricultural productivity, enabling communally cultivated fields to produce a surplus for sale to the towns or for export . Applied to the new large villages it would, Nyereerere hoped, increase productivity .
 The sources below consist of viewpoints on how Nyerere implemented his policies . SOURCE 2B The sources are based on viewpoints from Nyereerere .
 Both these viewpoints are taken from The State of Africa by M Meredith . M Meredith.
 Between August and November 1974, millions of people were moved in a dictatorial manner, sometimes overnight, onto waste land that they were expected to turn into villages and fields .
 During the month of October the country seemed to be emerging from some national disaster, with huts made from branches and foliage stretching in untidy rows beside the roads .
 Martin Meredith gives his opinion on the outcome of the villagisation programme . He gives his view on the success of the programme .
 Food production fell drastically, raising the spectre of widespread famine . The shortfall was made up with imports of food, but the country's foreign exchange reserves were soon exhausted .
 Nyerere's ujamaa programme made it dependent for survival on foreign handouts . Far from helping Tanzania to become more self-reliant, it has made it more dependent on foreign aid .
 Throughout the summer of 1963, civil rights protests continued to grow, with marches, sit-ins and picket lines across the country .
 President Kennedy decided to ask Congress to pass a civil rights bill . The bill would put an end to segregation in America .
 On the night of 11 June, the President appeared on national television to talk about justice and civil rights . President Obama appeared on television to discuss the issue .
 Although the proposal was not as wide-ranging as he had hoped, it was a step in the right direction . The proposal is not as far away as he'd hoped .
 Medgar Evers was a leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People . He was shot dead by a white man in front of his house in Jackson, Mississippi .
 The source below focuses on the march to the Lincoln Memorial for jobs and freedom held on 28 August 1963 . SOURCE 3B The march was held on August 28, 1963 . The march to Lincoln Memorial was held in honor of jobs, freedom .
 An estimated quarter of a million people marched from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial on 28 August, 1963 . The march turned out to be both a protest and a celebration of the civil rights movement .
 The heavy police presence turned out to be unnecessary, as the march was noted for its civility and peacefulness .
 The march was extensively covered by the media, with live international television coverage . The march took place in London, London and New York .
 The entire civilrights struggle needs a new interpretation, a broader interpretation, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The entire civil rights struggle needs to be given a new meaning," he says .
 The following is part of the evidence that Steve Biko gave at the Black People's Convention and South African Students Organization trial in May 1976 . SOURCE 4A
 Taken from I Write What I Like – A Selection of his Writings by S Biko . Biko was born in 1964 and died at the age of 50 .
 I think basically Black Consciousness refers itself to the black man and his situation, and I think it refers to two forces in this country . The black man is subjected to both forces in the U.S. and the black woman .
 The black man in himself has developed a certain state of alienation, he rejects himself . He attaches the meaning white to all that is good, because he associates good and he equates good with white .
 This arises out of his living and it arises from his development from childhood. This is not only his living, but it is his development, his development as a child .
 When you go to school for instance, your school is not the same as the white school, and ipso facto the conclusion you reach is that the education you get there cannot be the . same as what the white kids get at their schools, and that's not true .
 Gertrude Fester was interviewed by the author of the book, "Gertrud Fester" Fester: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to make it happen"
 Feeling inferior because you are black is something that takes a very long time to get rid of . Feeling inferior due to a lack of respect for black people is hard to overcome, says CNN.com .
 Perhaps being out of South Africa and mixing with other people in another country helped me value myself for what I am. Perhaps being in South Africa helped me to value myself, she says .
 Black Consciousness Movement helped a lot too. And participating in the Black consciousness movement helped too too too .
 Through it I came to understand that there was nothing wrong with me because I'm black. Through it, I came out of the house to say 'there is nothing wrong' with me .
 The project was introduced by S Biko in order to make the ideas of Black Consciousness more practical and achievable . The project is based on the idea of Black consciousness .
 History of Fifty Years of Independence (London; J Ball, J Ball) Puckrein, G 1993. History of 50 years of Independence . History of British Independence .
 The Civil Rights Movement and the Legacy of Martin Luther King Jr . Ross, S. Ross, 2001. Ross. 2001. The Civil rights movement and the legacy of MLK Jr.