 Notes on National Security Council Meeting July 20, 1961 . General Hickey presented the annualreport of his group .
 President asked if there had ever been made an assessment of damage resultsto the U.S.R which would be incurred by a preemptive attack . General Lemnitzer stated that the assumption of this year's study was asurprise attack in late 1963, preceded by a period
 The President asked for an appraisal of the trend in the effectiveness of the attack . General Lemnitzer replied that he would also discuss this with the President .
 President posed the question as to the period of time necessary for citizens to remain in shelters following an attack . GeneralLemnitzer added a word of caution .
 During the early 1960s the intercontinental ballistic missile introduced the world to the possibility of instant total war . June, 1993*******
 Thirty years later, no nation has yet fired any nuclear missile at areal target . Thirty years after the first nuclear missile was fired, no country has fired a nuclear missile .
 Orthodox history holds that a succession of defensive nuclear doctrines and strategies worked, almost seamlessly, to deter Soviet aggression against the United States and to prevent the use of nuclear weapons .
 Virtually nothing in the public record suggests that high U.S. authorities contemplated a first strike against the Soviet Union, except in response to Soviet invasion of Western Europe .
 The main documented exception was the Air Force Chief of Staff in the early 1960s, Curtis LeMay, a seemingly idiosyncratic case . But beginning in 1957 the United States military did prepare plans for a preemptive nuclear strike against the U.S.
 Some high Air Force and CIA leaders believed that a window of outright missile superiority, perhaps sufficient for a successful first strike, would be open in late 1963 .
 It describes a meeting of the National Security Council on July 20, 1961 . The meeting was held in Washington, D.C.
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff, the director of the CIA, and others, presented plans for asurprise attack . At that meeting, document shows, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs . The document also shows that the CIA director and others .
 Kennedy was asked questions about timing and effects of the effects . They answered some questions from Kennedy about timing of effects, and further information .
 Claims of a ""missile gap"" favoring the Soviets had given the Democrats a critical election theme . The meeting recessed under a Presidential injunction of secrecy that has not been broken .
 Intelligence based on satellites launched in August of 1960 challenged the campaign assessment and public view . But as Richard Reeves has recently written, intelligence based on satellite imagery soon challenged the public view.
 The United States had beaten the USSR to an operational ICBM and enjoyed clear, and growing, numerical advantage . The U.S. had won a clear numerical advantage over the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy was quickly convinced of this truth, which was further confirmed as new satellites brought back new information . We were far ahead, and our military planners knew it, he says .
 Later in 1961, a National Intelligence Estimate showed only 4 Soviet ICBMs in place, all of them on low alert at a test site called Plesetsk .
 Kennedy faced his first nuclear-tinged crisis, which erupted over Berlin in July of 1961 . Byfall, Defense Undersecretary Roswell Gilpatric was to acknowledge in a public speech that USforces were vastly superior to the Russians .
 The July 20th meeting took place under conditions of unusual tension . The Berlin Crisis took place in a tense atmosphere of tension .
 Three months earlier, Kennedy had suffered the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion and his loss of confidence in both theCIA and the Joint Chiefs .
 One month before, he had been shaken by his Vienna confrontation with Nikita Khrushchev . One month after, he was shaken by the confrontation with Khrushchchev .
 The Soviets threatened to turn control of access to WestBerlin over to the East Germans, and to conclude a separate peace treaty with that satellite state . Secretary of State Dean Rusk opposed negotiations with the Soviets until the last moment .
 Dean Acheson had prepared a paper arguing that Krushchev will be deterred only by a US readiness to go to nuclear war rather than to abandon the status quo .
 Schlesinger advised caution . While not directly challenging Acheson, heencouraged him to produce an unsigned memo critical of his stance .
 The paper hinges on our willingness to face nuclear war, he wrote . In a passage especially pertinent to the larger issue, he said: "The paper hinges"
 The Pentagon should be required to make an analysis of the possible levels and implications of nuclear warfare and the possible gradations of our own nuclear response . You are entitled to know what concretely what nuclear war is likely to mean .
 It is possible that the decision to bring the Net Evaluation to Kennedyoccurred in response to the raising of these concerns . The Net Evaluation will take place in Kennedy .
 Declassified only in June of 1993, it has not previously received any public attention . This would be the first one given to President Kennedy and his advisors .
 Lemnitzer then cautioned against putting too much faith in the findings since the assumptions might be faulty . Lemnitz then cautioned that the assumptions may be faulty in the study's findings .
 President receives a qualified estimate of 2 weeks from a member of the subcommittee . The President receives an estimate of two weeks .
 The official record of this meeting remains secret . So far as we know, the official record remains secret.
 The excellent ForeignRelations of the United States, volume XIV, ""Berlin Crisis 1961-1962,"" published in late 1993, makesno mention of the crisis .
 Kennedy's personal reaction to the meeting has been reported . The President was displeased by the meeting, according to reports .
 Kennedy received Net Evaluation, an annual doomsday briefing analyzing the chances of nuclear war . Kennedy received the Net Evaluation . Kennedy was the subject of an annual briefing on nuclear war risk .
 Numerous other accounts of the meeting exist, though they do not refer to it by name ordate . Numerous other apparent accounts exist, but they do refer to the meeting .
 As UnderSecretary of State Roger Hilsman wrote in 1967: "As the intelligence community looked at their estimates in 1958, 1959, and 1960, they saw a missile gap developing that would come to a peak about 1963"
 Hilsman does not say explicitly that the estimated missile gap was in America's favor . What he does say explicitly is that the estimate is in the U.S. favor .
 TheSoviets had virtually no operational ICBMs in 1961, a fact known to U.S. intelligence atleast by the end of 1960 .
 Dean Rusk describes the meeting as an ""awesome experience"" in his memoirs, As I Saw It, published in 1990 . Rusk says the meeting was an 'awesome' experience .
 President Kennedy clearly understood what nuclear war meant and was appalled by it . President Kennedy was appalled at the threat of nuclear war . He was appalled that nuclear war was possible .
 1961 briefing convinced usthat a nuclear war must never be fought . If any of us had doubts, that 1961 briefing was convinced .
 Rusk does not say that the problem of a ""stable deterrent"" in 1961 did not lie in aninsufficiency of American missiles . Rusk says the problem in 1961 was not a lack of missiles, but a shortage of missiles .
 It lay, rather, in the need for the Soviets to develop sufficient ICBM forces, to deter us. It lay in rather than deterring us, it lay in need for ICBM force, says David Cameron .
 Rusk goes on, with comments that appear almost anguished, and for which his own account of the meetinggives no apparent rationale:...the United States has never renounced possible first use of nuclear weapons . Rusk: "The United States ... has never . renounced
 U.S. committed to a second strike only after receiving nuclear weapons on our own soil . Ipersonally think that the United States is committed to the second strike . I think that this is only after we have received nuclear weapons .
 Under no circumstances would he have participated in an order to launch a first strike, he says . The possible exception was a massive conventional attack on Western Europe, he adds .
 The July 25 Speech on Berlin was very much in the air that week . The speech was delivered in Berlin, Germany .
 A document of the time indicates that Kennedy's nuclear thinking was actually taking -quite the Cold Warrior, but at the same time far removed from pre-emptive strikes and the inflexible all-out attack envisioned by the Joint Chiefs .
 This is a paper entitled ""Nuclear Strategy in the Berlin Crisis,"" by the economistThomas C Schelling, which was sent to Hyannis Port over the weekend of July 21, 1961 and which made a ""deep impression"" on the President .
 Schelling presented arguments for a capability to wage limited nuclear war . Schelling: Role of nuclears in Europe should not be to win a grand nuclear campaign .
 The cumulative impact of this diverse advice can be seen in Kennedy's televised address to thenation on July 25, 1961 . Kennedy's TV address was broadcast on July 26, 1961, at 8pm ET .
 He asked for increased military appropriations and called out 150,000 reserve personnel . The president also asked for more military appropriations .
 A symbolic column of soldiers was sent through to WestBerlin, and a fallout shelter program was undertaken in the U.S. The wall was allowed to remain intact in 1961 .
 With Burris memorandum, the reasoning behind the fallout shelter program now begins to fall into place . With the Burris memo, the rationale behind the program is now falling in place .
 As a civil defense measure against a Soviet nuclear attack, the flimsy cinderblockshelters were absurd . Americans were told to build were absurd.
 Radiation drifting thousands of miles after a U.S. pre-emptive strike on the Soviet Union . But they could indeed protect those in them, from radiation drifting .
 The military continued to press for a rapid build-up of strategic missiles . Yet, the military insisted on the rapid development of missiles .
 Curtis LeMay asked for at least 2400 Minutemen . Thomas Powers of the Strategic Air Command had asked for 10,000 . Curtis Le May asked for more than 2,000 Minuteman .
 The Single Integrated Operating Plan was a recipe for blowing up the world, whether in a first or a second strike . All were to be unleashed in a single paroxysmof mass annihilation .
 All agree that the current strategic war plan is dangerously rigid and, if continued without amendment, may leave you with very little choice as to how you face them . If continued continued, you may be left with little choice .
 We believe that you may want to raise thisquestion with Bob McNamara in order to have a prompt review and new orders if necessary .
 Kennedy and McNamara eventually imposed a limit of 1,000Minuteman missiles . The limit angered the Chiefs, angering Kennedy and his Defense Secretary .
 Burris memorandum may help explain the military's drive for a vast U.S. nuclear build-up, despite the fact that America was already far ahead, and the resistance from JFK and Namara .
 U.S. nuclearsuperiority so complete that a first strike might be successful . First strike might not have been successful . United States has no nuclear capability .
 American nuclear superiority might then be so complete, that rogue elements from themilitary and intelligence forces, seeking to precipitate an American first strike, might not fear Soviet retaliation .
 The Soviet strategic missile threat consisted of a few token ICBM deployments whose unreliability was so great that it was uncertain exactly whom they threatened . In marked contrast, the Soviet strategic . missile threats consisted of . a few . token ICMB deployments . It was so unreliable 
 Soviet long range bomber forces consisted only of 100 Tu-Bears and 35 May Bison . The range and flight characteristics forced them to fly at medium and high altitudes .
 Kennedy resisted strong pressures to test this advantage in October of 1962, as he might have had to do, had he agreed to launch bombing raids on the Cuban missile installations .
 If the situation continues for much longer, the President is not sure that the military will not overthrow him and seize power, he says .
 The American military could get out of control, Khrushchev said . Khrushchchev's memoirs were published in the 1960s . The remarks were published at the time of the Soviet Union's assassination .
 The Net Evaluation calendar of 1961 implied that the period from Cubato Dallas and just after was, perhaps, critical to the survival of the world . Looking down the road, the Net Evaluation Calendar of 1961 indicated that the . period from . Cubato . Dallas and . just after, perhaps
 President faced an excruciating choice -to strike first, or to give up ""victory"" during the last brief moment in all history when it could conceivably have been won . We cannot say whether Kennedy believed the Net Evaluation calendar .
 By November of 1963, the potential for ""heightenedtensions" leading to uncontrollable pressures to strike first had indeed been reduced . The potential for 'heightened tensions' was reduced .
 The Soviet Rocket Forces did evidently shut the window, building ICBMs more rapidly than the United States could target them . The Soviets also improved their submarine force .
 One meeting, even in the White House, does not establish that first-strike was in fact the nuclear policy of the U.S. The meeting was held in the early 1950s .
 Kennedy's recorded response, however, indicates his personaldetermination, shared by his civilian advisers, that it never become so . Kennedy: "It never became so. It never become that. That's what I say."
 First strike plan had authors close to decision center, Burris notes says . But we do know, from Burris's notes, that a first strike plan was likely to be approved .
 Kennedy's actions and Johnson's eerie remark are consistent with the possibility that the calendarand risks of a first-strike window remained in the minds of both men as late as November, 1963 . The fact that first- strike planning got as far as it did raises grave questions about the Cold
 Surely it is now time to declassify all records on this and related history. Surely it should be declassified .
 Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years, NewYork: Random House, 1988. Choices about the bomb in the first 50 years, New York: RandomHouse, 1988 .