 Castro declared officially that he joined the Soviet bloc after the Bay of Pigs, he put this obligation on his father’s shoulders . Castro put this responsibility on my father's shoulders, he said .
 A Soviet commander in Cuba, acting without authorization from Moscow, shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the American pilot . Savranskaya: October 27, l962 goes down as the most dangerous day in human history .
 Hershberg: Soviet submarines around the blockade equipped with nuclear torpedoes . “Also, by Oct., we’ve learned, you had Soviet submarines . Also, by . Oct., you had . Soviet submarine around the . blockade equipped . with nuclear . torpedoes, Hers
 Premier Khrushchev has sent a message to President Kennedy today,"" he said . "Premier's message has been sent to the president," he said. President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba in return for promise . Kennedy refused to put that in writing . In return, he promised not invade Cuba, although he refused .
 Kennedy was rational, Khrushchev was rational and Castro was rational . Kennedy was a rational person . He was rational in the world . He is rational now .
 In the spring and summer of l962, the Soviets were receiving lots of intelligence that the United States was preparing another invasion .
 Savranskaya: “The Soviets were in love with the Cuban Revolution. They were genuine folk heroes in the Soviet Union.” She said .
 Khrushchev: "All the Soviets, from the top to the bottom, wanted to help the Cubans fight against possible American invasion"
 Another U-2 accidentally strayed into Soviet territory in the Far East for a couple of hours . By Oct. 1962, Soviet submarines were around the blockade equipped with nuclear torpedoes .
 He also agreed to withdraw the U.S. nuclear missiles in Turkey, but refused to disclose that .
 Both sides blinked. But to see it as one side giving up isn’t correct.”’s.’
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara told filmmaker Errol Morris in his award winning documentary, The Fog of War . McNamara: “At the end we lucked out. At the end, at the end .