 The commanders-in-chief of the U.S. Navy and the United States Air Force are directed to position thier forces to execute the first stage of the airstrike, and ready themselves for a full-scale invasion .
 Cuban President Dorticós calls upon the United Nations to condemn the U.S. trade embargo against Cuba . On October 8, 1962, Cuban President Dorticos calls for U.N. to condemn trade embargo .
 Near the end of his address, Dortic´s declares, ""If we are attacked, we will defend ourselves. We will defend us," he said .
 In the early morning of October 14, 1962, a U-2 spy aircraft flies over western Cuba, revealing MRBM sites in Cuba .
 Kennedy learns about the data collected on missile deployments . Two days later, Kennedy learns of the data .
 The United States government discusses several options from a surgical airstrike on the missile bases to a full-scale invasion . The U.S. government discusses possible options from an airstrike on missile bases .
 On October 16, 1962, the United States Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee concluded that there is no evidence that nuclear warheads are present in Cuba . The committee concluded that the missile installations do not appear to be operational .
 In fact, no SS-5 missiles were ever shipped to or located in Cuba, although this was denied by U.S. officials during the crisis . This is despite this being denied by United States officials .
 The Pentagon says it has no information regarding nuclear missiles in Cuba . No emergency military measures are being implemented . Two days later a Defense Department spokesperson publicly states that no information is being given regarding the missiles .
 U.S. diplomat to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, aggresively protests to his boss that the blockade is invalid . Stevenson cites analogies to a new Berlin wall, and point out the United States nuclear missiles already operational in Turkey and a naval base already inside of
 Kennedy and Lovett decide Adlai Stevenson is not capable of handling negotiations at the United Nations and should be assisted by John McCloy . Stevenson's protest produces strong reprimand, and on the following day Kennedy and Robert Lovett decided to withdraw .
 A nuclear warhead storage bunker is identified at one of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time . The bunker is located in a bunker at the site of one of Cuba's largest MRBM facilities .
 U.S. spy agencies do not detect whether warheads are actually in Cuba at any time, however, the ExComm believes it prudent to assume that they are .
 The National Security Council proclaims to the International community what will happen to ships who do not abide by the U.S. military blockade of Cuba .
 Any ships who refuse to be boarded will have a shot fired across their bow . Any ships that refuse to board will be hit with a shot across the bow .
 On October 22, 1962, Soviet Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is arrested in the Soviet Union . He is the son of former Soviet Union President Vladimir Putin . He was arrested in October 1962 .
 From April 1961, Penkovsky has been a spy for British and U.S. intelligence services . He provided material on Soviet military capabilities, including important technical information .
 The U.S. State Department informs its NATO allies about the Cuban missile crisis, and the aggressive military options it has plans to pursue . On the same day the United States State Department tells NATO allies the crisis .
 SAC initiates a massive alert of its B-52 nuclear bomber force, ensuring that one-eighth of the force is airborne at all times . SAC: SAC begins massive alert to ensure that one in eight of its nuclear bombers is airborne .
 All aircraft, both on the ground and in-flight, are armed with nuclear weapons . The U.S. Air Force says all aircraft are equipped with nuclear arms .
 17 times more nuclear weapons are ready to drop on Cuba than all of Cuba has . The U.S. has nuclear missiles in Puerto Rico and nuclear capable bombs in Guantanamo Naval Base, Cuba, all ready for use .
 At this time, the United States has a total arsenal of 27,100 nuclear weapons, while the Soviet Union has 3,100 nukes . The U.S. has more than 27,000 nuclear weapons .
 U.S. military forces worldwide go to DEFCON 3 and encourage all NATO forces to do the same . United States military forces around the world are encouraged to go to deFCON3 .
 President Kennedy addresses the U.S. public for the first time about the crisis later in the day, in a televised seventeen-minute speech . Kennedy said that the United States will not permit any offensive military equipment in Cuba .
 The Cuban government places its entire armed forces on their highest alert status . In response to U.S. threats of war over Cuban armaments, Cuban forces are placed on highest alert .
 The entire civilian population is armed and ready to fight ""to the last person"" in defense of Cuba . Cuba's military is ready to defend the country's borders, says the Cuban government .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union hitherto refuse to make any attempt to forcibly prevent the flyovers . The flyover is an extraordinary further effort towards peace, Cuba and Soviet Union previously refused to make an attempt .
 In the early morning of October 24, 1962, Soviet ships en route to Cuba slow down, alter or have reversed their courses . Soviet ships were traveling to Cuba when they were attacked .
 Sixteen of the nineteen Soviet ships en route to Cuba when the U.S. military blockade was announced, reverse course and are returning to the Soviet Union . 16 of the 19 Soviet ships were on the way to Cuba .
 Only the oil tanker Bucharest continues toward the military blockade line . Only the ship Bucharest is heading toward the line .
 At 8m., the United States detonates a hydrogen bomb on Johnston Island . The U.S. detonates the bomb at 8m.
 Khrushchev responds to Kennedy's demands as aggressive and unreasonable . Kennedy's demand was met with a refusal to accept the demands . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 U.N. Acting Secretary General U. Thant calls for voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba . More than forty non-aligned states, privately calls for the suspension of the military blockade .
 The United States military increases its alert posture to DEFCON 2 for the first time in history . The U.S. is pushing Mankind Toward the Abyss of a World Nuclear War . U.N. military is on alert for the second time in its history .
 On October 25, 1962, the aircraft carrier USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail attempt to intercept the Soviet oil tanker Bucharest . The two aircraft carriers were involved in the sinking of the Bucharest oil tanker .
 Khrushchev responds to and agrees with the proposal of peace . The U.N. agreed to suspend all arms shipments to Cuba . The Soviet Union agreed to the suspension .
 Kennedy refuses to respond to the request of lifting the military blockade . Kennedy, on the other hand, refuses to answer the request .
 U.N. General Secretary tells Khrushchev to keep his ships out of Cuba . U.S. military blockade was the first response to U.K. demands from the United States .
 CIA sabotage team caught before its attack by Cuban Committee for the Defense of the Revolution . CIA team in Cuba caught trying to destroy Matahambre copper mine .
 The Lebanese freighter Marucla is the first ship to be boarded by the warship USS Kennedy . The U.S. Navy boarded the ship in the early hours of the attack .
 President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes the military blockade by itself will not force the Soviet government to remove the missiles from Cuba . Only an invasion or a nuclear deployment ""trade"" will succeed, Kennedy says .
 Kennedy agrees to increase the frequency of low-level incursions over Cuba from twice per day to once every two hours . After discussing the airstrike option at some length, he agrees to apply further pressure .
 Kennedy orders the State Department to proceed with preparations for establishing a government in Cuba after an invasion of the country . Further, Kennedy orders preparations to establish a government after a Cuban invasion .
 Aleksandr Fomin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States, desperately arranges a personal meeting with the State Department correspondent for ABC News, John Scali . Fomin meets with Scali at the request of the State Dept.
 "war seems about to break out," he asks Scali to contact his ""high-level friends" in the State Department to ascertain if the United States has any desire to solve the situation peacefully .
 Khrushchev publicly reaches out again for peace, composing a ""very long and emotional"" letter . The letter was written by Robert Kennedy, a friend of the late Soviet leader .
 Be Sensible — We Want Peace John Scali tells Dean Rusk and Roger Hilsman of Aleksandr Fomin's proposal . Fomin proposes a proposal to create peace in Russia . Scali: "We want peace. We want to make a difference"
 Khrushchev's letter suggests that Fomin's personal message was initiated by the Soviet government . Fomin offered that the Soviet Union remove its missiles under United Nations inspection in return for a U.S. non-invasion pledge .
 Anatoly Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy meet at the Soviet embassy . Unknown to any of the ExComm members, the two men meet later that evening .
 Dobrynin repeats that if Soviet nuclear missiles are intolerable in Cuba, then U.S. missiles are also intolerable in Turkey . Dobrynins: If Soviet nuclear missile is intolerable, then United States missile is also intolerable .
 Robert Kennedy phones the president, and returns explaining the President is willing to negotiate . Robert Kennedy calls the president to explain the President's willingness to negotiate with the Soviets .
 Fears continue to ride high in Cuba as United States naval vessels continue their military blockade and aircraft continue low-altitude flights all over the country .
 Fidel Castro orders Cuban anti-aircraft forces to open fire on all U.S. aircraft flying over the island . Fidel Castro was unable to bear the continued harassment . The Cuban leader ordered the attack .
 Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev asks Castro to stop being defensive . Castro tells him he is going to protect his country from an imminent U.S. invasion . Castro says he will protect Cuba from the clearly imminent United States invasion .
 The U.S. Air Force determines that 1,190 bombing sorties will be carried out in their first day of airstrikes against Cuba . The United States Air Force will carry out more than 1,000 sorties against Cuba on the first day .
 The CIA reports that three of the four SS-4 MRBM sites at San Cristóbal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande appear to be fully operational .
 United States spy agencies continue working around the clock, around the world . U.S. agencies continue to work around the globe .
 A U-2 spy plane flies over the Eastern Soviet Union in what the State Department would explain as a ""routine air sampling mission" The State Department says the mission was a routine air sample mission . The U.2 pilot radios for F-102 fighter aircraft to ""escort
 At the same time, Soviet MiGs takeoff in response to intercept the U-2, which immediately turns and flies out of the Soviet Union . The incident occurred in the early hours of September 1, 1983 .
 Eisenhower promised Khrushchev after the Soviet Union shot down a U-2 plane on May 5, 1960 . This act was a direct violation of what Eisenhower had promised . Eisenhower had been promised to the Soviets after the shoot down .
 It should be noted that the Soviet Union never flew any of its military aircraft over the United States . This military incursion was far from last United States incursion over Soviet Union .
 A U-2 plane flying over Cuban airspace is shot down, killing its pilot . The plane was shot down in Cuban airspace, killing the pilot .
 Soviet generals order the anti-aircraft batteries to desist . After the success, the Soviet general orders the operation to be stopped .
 The next 4 F8U-1P's to fly at a low altitude over Cuba are shot at with anti-aircraft weapons and small arms . The F8P's will be shot at by Cuban forces during their flight over Cuba .
 One aircraft is hit by a 37 mm anti-aircraft weapon, but manages to limp back to its base . One aircraft was hit by the 37 mm weapon but managed to limp to a base .
 Kennedy begins replying to Khrushchev's request for peace, sending out U Thant to talk to the Soviet government for him . Kennedy begins to respond to the request of peace with a message of support .
 Kennedy says there had been definite plans to destroy any SAM site that shot at U.S. planes over Cuban airspace . Not this time, Kennedy says, not this time .
 McNamara argues that the Jupiters in Turkey should be removed, but only as a prelude to a full invasion of Cuba . Maxwell Taylor forwards the JCS recommendation simply to initiate the airstrike and invasion plans and plan for a nuclear war . State Department drafts a letter flatly
 Kennedy agrees to ignore Khrushchev's proposals for removing U.S. missiles in Turkey . Kennedy agrees only to respond only to the October 26 letter . Kennedy agreed to the letter, and to ignore the proposal .
 Kennedy has Dobrynin told that if the Soviet Union does not remove its missiles, the U.S. will attack Cuba . The United States would attack Cuba if it did not remove the missiles .
 The group secretly concedes that U.S. nuclear missiles must be removed from Turkey . But this should not be made public to save face, they say .
 Khrushchev's demand that the U.S. remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey, on the border of the Soviet Union . Fomin and Scali meet again, the latter of who is outraged by Khrushchen's demand .
 Fomin urges restraint and caution, patiently assuring Scali that the Soviet Union was being completely forthright and honest . Fomin: "The Soviet Union is being honest and honest"
 Kennedy: U.S. would not make deals to remove nuclear missiles from Turkey . Kennedy tells Dobrynin that the United States will not make any deals with Turkey . The United States would not negotiate with Turkey, Kennedy says .
 Fidel Castro agrees to the request of the United Nations to stop building Cuban missile sites, so long as U.S. also agrees to end its military blockade . Castro: U.N. must end military blockade of Cuba . Castro says he will stop building missile sites in Cuba if U
 U Thant informs Adlai Stevenson that Soviet representative Zorin refuses to adhere to the U.S. military blockade . U. Thant: U. S. military blockade is a violation of international law .
 On October 28, 1962, the United States sends instructions to its NATO allies that military actions to attack Cuba are imminent . The U.S. sent the message to NATO allies on that day .
 A new message from Khrushchev, broadcast on Radio Moscow, effectively ends the missile crisis . Khushchev's message was broadcast by Moscow's Radio Moscow . The message effectively ended the crisis .
 In Havana, Fidel Castro, who was not consulted or informed of the decision beforehand, is outraged . Fidel Castro is outraged that he was not informed or consulted beforehand .
 Kennedy orders that no further incursions over Cuban air space take place on this day . Move for the removal of all IL-28 airplanes in Cuba in Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff update their plans of a military invasion of Cuba based on new reconnaissance . They determine whether tactical nuclear weapons should still be used in Cuba . Cuba's nuclear weapons are being dismantled .
 Soviet missiles are being dismantled and shipped out of Cuba . When this has been completed a United Nations team could be sent to Cuba for ""on-site"" verification .
 U.N. deal set by the United Nations was that if the Soviet Union stopped its arm shipments to Cuba, the U.S. must stop the blockade . The Soviet Union went a step further and removed its nuclear missiles from Cuba . The United States ended its blockade of Cuba in
 President Kennedy orders that the U.S. military blockade around Cuba stay in effect . He orders new low altitude reconnaissance flights over Cuban airspace .
 U Thant explains to U.S. representatives that they must fulfill their agreement and end the military blockade . Thant: U. Thant says U.K. must fulfill its agreement to end the blockade .
 The U.S. refuses to allow Cuba to remove missiles from the island . The United States says its blockade will end only after all missiles have been removed from Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff decide that if U.S. attacks Cuba, they will use tactical nuclear weapons . Joint chiefs of Staff say they would use nuclear weapons if they attacked Cuba .
 Anatoly Dobrynin brings Robert Kennedy an unsigned letter from Premier Khrushchev spelling out the terms of the arrangement . Robert Kennedy's former pledge that the Jupiter IRBMs will be removed from Turkey is recalled .
 Robert Kennedy refuses to respond immediately, and the next day entirely disagrees with any written agreement involving the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Robert Kennedy refused to comment on the agreement .
 On October 30, 1962, U Thant and his aides meet with Fidel Castro, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós and Foreign Minister Raúl Roa . Shortly after his arrival in Havana, U. Thant met with Castro, President Os v. Dort
 New demands for verification include on-site inspections by United Nations personnel, aerial inspections by U.N. reconnaissance planes, and verification by the International Committee of the Red Cross .
 Castro rejects these proposals, explaining that the U.S. and U.N. is trying to manipulate the situation . Castro says the United States and United Nations are trying to manipulently influence the situation in Cuba .
 Khrushchev insists that the United States comply with its agreements, and lift the military and economic blockade of Cuba . The United States withdraws from its base in Guantanamo, Cuba .
 In regards to United States nuclear missiles in Turkey, Robert Kennedy tells Ambassador Dobrynin that day "You asked me about missile bases in Turkey" Robert Kennedy says he was responding to a question about the missile bases .
 Task Force W is told to temporarily halt its terrorism against the Cuban government . Task force W has been in operation for almost a year . Task Force has been fighting the government in Cuba for almost two years .
 CIA operatives in Cuba are disgusted by counter-orders within the U.S. government . They send a message to Attorney General Robert Kennedy to verify that continued missions are in order . Despite this order to halt, a new mission is dispatched by William Harvey .
 Kennedy angered to learn that CIA missions are continuing . Kennedy chastises Harvey and asks CIA Director McCone to terminate the operations .
 Three of ten sabotage teams of six terrorists each have already been dispatched to Cuba . Despite this, three of 10 sabotage teams have been dispatched for Cuba .
 On November 8, one of the teams successfully carries out its assigned sabotage mission, blowing up a Cuban factory . The mission took place in Havana, Cuba .
 On October 31, 1962, Fidel Castro, Dorticós and Roa meet with U Thant for the second time during his stay in Cuba . Fidel Castro met with U. Thant again during his visit to the country .