 This lists the logos of programs or partners of NG Education which have provided or contributed the content on this page . Program Killing Kennedy logo Twitter Facebook Pinterest Google Classroom Share to Microsoft Teams .
 Before reading, ask students to identify what problem President Kennedy faces in this scene . Ask the remaining students to listen to identify the problem .
 Explain to students that they will be acting as Kennedy’s advisers during this 13-day period . Explain to them that they are acting as advisers during that period .
 Tell students that President Kennedy had several options in responding to the threat posed by the placement of missiles on Cuban soil . Tell students about President Kennedy's response to Cuban missiles .
 Use the discussion to prompt students to include all of the options listed below . Use the comments below to suggest students should include all the options .
 Newly placed missiles in Cuba made little strategic difference in the military balance of power, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Send a message to Castro to warn him of the grave danger he, and Cuba, were facing . Send a video of the danger he was facing .
 Use the United States Navy to block any missiles from arriving in Cuba . Use the U.S. Navy to . block any missile missiles arriving from Cuba .
 Kennedy encouraged dissent among his advisers after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . Explain to students that after the failed invasion, JFK encouraged dissent .
 Kennedy wanted his advisers to tell him if an idea was bad, Kennedy said . He did not want ‘yes men’ to help him make decisions, he said .
 Members of Kennedy’s staff who disagreed with the action refused to voice their negative opinions, not wanting to criticize the larger group . Explain to students that during the Bay of Pigs invasion, members of Kennedy's staff did not voice negative opinions .
 Kennedy altered his leadership style, wanting to explore all options before making a decision . After this failure, Kennedy changed his style of leadership style .
 List of pros and cons for the group’s policy choice . Visual aid—on poster paper—to present pros, cons to the class . Divide the class into groups and assign one policy option per group for further exploration .
 Distribute a T-Chart to each group and instruct them to use it to make a pros/cons chart . Use the chart to create a pros and cons chart .
 Distribute poster paper and markers to each group to develop a visual aid that will identify their policy option as well as the pros/cons of that option .
 Acting as EXCOMM, students present their policy arguments and the class comes to consensus on one response . Students present their arguments and come up with a consensus .
 After groups finish drafting their pros and cons with visual aids on poster paper, have each group present their policy and its accompanying pros, cons . The policy is then presented to each group on a poster paper .
 After each group presents, students may ask questions about the group’s policy and thinking . Students can also ask about the groups' policies and their thinking .
 Have the whole class summarize the presentation by determining the most significant pro and con for the policy . Have a whole class discuss the policy proposal . Have the entire class discuss what they think the policy should be .
 After all groups have presented, have students discuss all the options that were presented . Have students discuss each other's options in order to reach a decision .
 Project these points in a PowerPoint presentation or write them on a piece of poster paper . Use these points to help students understand each other's issues in advance .
 After the blockade, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy . Kennedy was visiting the Soviet Union at the time of the blockade .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles from Cuba if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba and to eventually remove missile missiles from Turkey . The United States agreed not to remove the missiles if it was not invaded by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Have students respond to the following questions, supporting their responses with evidence from the activity . Use the questions to help students understand the content of the activities .
 Required Tech Setup: 1 computer per classroom, Projector, Speakers Plug-Ins: Flash Physical Space Classroom setup .
 This activity is extremely student-centered, involving small group work and student-led discussion . Grouping large-group instruction is required .
 Following the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Fidel Castro, the communist leader of Cuba, became convinced that at some point the United States would attempt to remove him from power .
 He grew increasingly defiant of American policymakers and courted the leaders of the Soviet Union to bolster the strength of his small island country . As a result of the U.S. policy, he became increasingly defiant .
 Castro eagerly accepted Khrushchev’s offer, believing nuclear missiles in Cuba would deter American aggression . Castro believed nuclear missiles would deter U.S. aggression and secure Cuba's safety . The Cuban leader accepted the offer .
 President John F Kennedy demanded that all nuclear missiles be removed from Cuba and blockaded the island to prevent further deliveries of nuclear warheads . Kennedy also blocked the island from delivering nuclear warheads to Cuba .
 During the 13-day standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, the world teetered on the brink of nuclear war . The standoff lasted between 13 days and 13 days .
 Soviet Union is a large northern Eurasian nation that had a communist government . Soviet Union was a communist state of Soviet Union .
 In Step 2, if students brainstorm other feasible options, you may choose to incorporate them into the activity at your discretion . Tip: If students brainstorm ideas, they may include them in the activity .
 This activity is extremely student-centered, involving small group work and student-led discussion . Tip: This activity involves small groups of students .
 For more information on establishing procedures for these types of activities in your classroom, please refer to the Other Notes in the Preparation section .
 The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots to CNN iReport.com . Visit http://www.dailymailonline.com/Travel next Friday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 When you reach out to them, you will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource . You will need to contact the resource providers by emailing them with details .
 If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer . Media assets are downloadable from the viewer .
 Text Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service . Use this text to help students with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 President Gerald R Ford could take measures to alleviate the crisis . They research possible measures he could take to alleviate it and distill them to key points .
 He collects data and assembles real-time maps that help local relief organizations deliver aid to disaster victims . The maps are used to help local disaster organizations deliver relief aid to victims .
 United States presidential inaugurations are celebrated in many ways, with some standard traditions . Inauguration Day is the day when the nation's president takes office .
 Students read and annotate a briefing about the energy crisis of the 1970s . Students identify stakeholders in the United States energy system in 1975 .