 1962 was the year that Hollywood screen goddess Marilyn Monroe died and Tom Cruise, another future screen icon, was born . Her Majesty The Queen HONORARY JOINT PRESIDENTS H M LORD LIEUTENANT OF DEVON .
 In the autumn of 1962 a deadly game of nuclear chess was being played out . But in the autumn, 1962, the deadly game was still being played .
 During one week, while two world superpowers wrangled over missile bases in Cuba, the world held its breath and prayed that neither player would make a final, fatal mistake . The world held their breath as the world hoped neither player made a final mistake .
 As early as 1960 Cuba, and its controversial Prime Minister Fidel Castro, had aligned itself with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro was prime minister of Cuba in 1960s .
 America found evidence of Soviet missiles being placed in Cuba on 31 August 1962 . The missiles were placed by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 American President J F Kennedy ordered U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba on 9 October, and on 14 and 17 October missile sites were discovered . Missile sites were found in Cuba .
 American spy planes confirmed put U.S. cities within range of a nuclear attack . What they confirmed put United States cities for the first time within . range of nuclear attack. What the American spy .
 By the 22 October 1962, President Kennedy had rejected the option of an immediate military strike . He announced that he would place a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of more missiles and other deadly cargo .
 He also demanded that the Soviet Union dismantle and remove the weapons . The Soviet Union also demanded the weapons be removed .
 USSR leader Khrushchev claimed the missiles were in Cuba for the country’s own defence . On the 23 October USSR leader claimed the missile was in Cuba's own defence.
 Days of diplomatic moves and counter-moves followed, with the world following every move with frozen fascination .
 Khrushchev suggested that he would consider removing the missiles provided the US promised not to invade Cuba . Then on 26 October he suggested he would remove the missiles if the U.S. promised to stop invading Cuba . The missiles were removed from Cuba .
 On 27 October there was also talk of trading off U.S. missiles in Turkey against Soviet missiles in Cuba . On that day a U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba . There were also talks of trading U.K. missiles with Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy wrote to Khrushchev saying he would not invade Cuba provided the Soviet missiles were removed . Kennedy also said he wouldn't invade Cuba if Soviet missiles removed from Cuba . Kennedy said he would only invade if missiles removed .
 Khrushchev promised to dismantle the Cuban bases under UN supervision . After a nail biting weekend, on Sunday 28 October 1962, the agreement was reached .
 On the 45th anniversary of the Cuban Crisis, 10 Group Newsletter No 52 July 2007, carried an article on the crisis which gave a general account covering the period from mid to late October .
 This account, on the 50th anniversary of that traumatic time, seeks to explain steps taken by the British Government, the RAF and the Royal Observer Corps .
 V bombers were to be dispersed to widely scattered dispersal airfields . The plan was agreed to alert the deterrent, followed by dispersal of V bombers .
 The agreed acceptable policy was only ever to use nuclear weapons in retaliation . However, the UK Government considered the acceptable acceptable policy only ever used nuclear weapons against retaliation .
 The C in C Bomber Command would assume responsibility for launching an attack only in extreme circumstances .
 Macmillan agreed, in the early Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Soviet 1960s, to the building of an alternative seat of Government outside Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at the of London .
 This was built deep underground beneath the Cotswold at the height of the friendship . It was a closely guarded secret since, if discovered, would be a prime target for Soviet missiles . It would be, at the time, a closely of the Cuban Crisis .
 The 185ft dish antennae at Jodrell Bank telescope near Manchester was temporarily handed over to the RAF in an attempt to track any possible incoming Soviet missiles . Unknown to the public the giant 185ft antennae was handed over by the RAF .
 Early warning system at Fylingdales, Yorkshire, was not due to become operational until 1963 . This was because the new early warning system was due to be operational in 1963 .
 The Jodrell Bank move was in effect a desperate stop gap measure and would only give the RAF minimal response time . The RAF was forced to withdraw from the RAF in order to save the RAF from being hit by the financial crisis .
 The Chiefs were told that any U.S. invasion of Cuba would not take place until after 29 October 1962 .
 At this stage Macmillan was just hours away from calling a crucial cabinet meeting that would have taken fateful steps towards nuclear war and dispersing central government to its secret bunkers .
 By 1547hrs on the 28 October, the number of aircraft armed with nuclear weapons and ready to go was increased . The number of nuclear weapons was increased by the end of the day .
 The V Force was not dispersed to their designated airfields . Macmillan did not want to highlight attention to possible pending military action .
 Senior Officers were brought to ‘stand by’ but were told not to inform middle or junior ranks of the situation . Senior officers were told to 'stand by' but not to tell middle and junior ranks .
 At RAF Marham, West Norfolk, three Valiant Squadrons came under the control of Commander Europe and therefore under the direct orders from American General Landon .
 A total of 24 Valiant bombers were each armed with two American nuclear bombs . The aircraft were placed back under RAF Bomber Command control after the war .
 The flashpoint for triggering WW3 came on 26 October 1962 when Soviet submarines carrying nuclear tipped torpedoes were heading towards Cuba . U.S. ships were ordered to track the submarines and the United States was alerted .
 Missile bases at Feltwell and Driffield were indeed brought to within 7-8 minutes of firing . Missile bases were brought within 7 to 8 minutes of being fired .
 V bomber force air crews in East Anglia and Lincolnshire ordered to 15 minutes readiness . Air crews in the region ordered to prepare for 15 minutes .
 At RAF Coningsby and Wittering, aircraft were at times at ‘cockpit readiness’ with each aircraft loaded with free fall thermonuclear weapons, route and target information .
 The civil population were, by and large, unaware of the pending Cuban Crisis . Civil population were unaware of Cuban crisis .
 Home Office did nothing to activate Civil Defence Plans during the Cuban Crisis . Only rudimentary plans existed to protect the population during the crisis .
 No steps were taken to warn the public or initiate evacuation from prime target areas such as the V bomber and Thor missile sites . No steps taken to initiate evacuation of prime targets .
 Government did not even activate the large Civil Defence organisation despite having some half a million trained volunteers . Civil Defence was not activated despite having a large number of volunteers .
 It is now clear that this policy was adopted so as not to cause public panic . Macmillan in particular did not want to alarm the British public . It was adopted to not alarm the public, and not to alarm them .
 Britain’s deterrent forces were poised on an unprecedented level of war readiness . But the Civil Defence Organisation was not brought to any form of readiness .
 Warning and Monitoring Organisation were informed of possible action . But this alert was not passed downwards . It can be assumed that the very senior officers of the U.K. were informed .
 None of the 95 ROC posts in Norfolk and Suffolk were brought to any form of readiness . Areas considered to be prime Soviet targets were not brought to a readiness .
 RAF and USAAF bases and Thor Launch Pads were located . Yet this was where important RAF bases were located.
 None of Lincolnshire’s 55 ROC posts were activated yet this was home to many V bomber bases . Lincolnshire is home to a large number of V bombers . None of the 55 posts was activated .
 In short there was no alert to call out the ROC volunteers in October of 1962 . In October of that month, there were no alerts to alert the military in October .
 Even if this callout had happened, there is some significant doubt whether the Corps would have been able to perform the nuclear task .
 The ROC took on the nuclear role on 4 April 1955 and ‘Fallout Training Instruction No 1’ was issued on 19 September 1955 . ‘FTC instruction No 1' was issued in September 1955.
 Fallout training commenced immediately although posts and Ops Rooms did not have any protected accommodation . Fallout training began immediately but training did not begin immediately .
 For several years from 1955, nuclear and aircraft recognition training took place side by Thor missile on the launch pad side . Thor missile recognition training also took place on launch pad .
 Between 1955 and 1958 the ROC Gazette The Thor had a range of 1500 miles . It contained training articles on nuclear warfare, the dosimeter and the radiac survey meter .
 Aircraft recognition was still the main thrust for even the forward thinking ROC Gazette . But aircraft recognition still was still a priority for the Gazette .
 Recognition Journal was much slower in producing articles on nuclear warfare, understandably concentrating on aircraft recognition lessons . The Recognition . Journal was slower to produce articles about nuclear warfare . Aircraft recognition .
 Almost immediately after taking on the nuclear role, the ROC held nuclear training exercises . The ROC has been accused of using nuclear weapons in the past .
 The first nuclear exercise called ‘Cloverleaf’ was held on 7/8 April 1956 . A further 26 nuclear exercises were held in the period up to October 1962 .
 The exercises were called Treble Chance, Vigilant, Dutch Treat, Four Horsemen, Night Bird, Cloud Dragon, Dust Devil and Signal Fire . They were called a variety of names like Treble .
 Exercise ‘Observe Wun’ was held on 9 October 1960 . Observe series of exercises were a feature of ROC life for many years .
 At first there was little nuclear equipment, no underground posts or controls, and unlike the former aircraft exercises the nuclear version was almost totally synthetic . The nuclear version of the exercise was almost completely synthetic .
 In the period 1955 to 1962, there were little or no alert procedures nor any ‘Transition to War’ plans . Also in the period 1950 to 1962 there was little or not alert procedures and no 'Transitions to War' plans .
 No callout exercises like ‘Fandango’ were ever held in that period . The Corps had no idea how effective any personnel callout would be . The callout exercise was never held .
 The post nuclear building programme commenced in September 1956 . The plan was to build 1563 underground bunkers for posts and provide 31 protected or semi protected Ops Rooms or Controls .
 The building of protected accommodation appeared to be somewhat piecemeal with some posts being built early and others being built much later .
 By October 1962 twelve ROC Ops Rooms had still not been provided with their protected accommodation . The ROC was still not provided with its protected accommodation by October 1962 .
 Only 19 fully protected ROC Ops Rooms were available as at October 1962, some 61% of the total required . Only 19 of the ROC ops Rooms were fully protected .
 Ops Rooms at Norwich, Colchester and Lincoln all had protected accommodation by 1961 . In retrospect, it is noticeable that in the prime target areas of East Anglia and Lincolnshire, the Ops Rooms were the most protected .
 Out of a total of 1563 posts requiring underground bunkers, some 1136, or 73%, had been built by October 1962 . Some 1136 of the 1563 required bunkers were built by that date .
 A significant number had only been in existence for about a year so limiting the value of training . But a significant number of the players had only only been there for a year .
 Scotland alone had 84 posts without bunkers, Wales had 45 and Northern Ireland 42 . Scotland had a total of 84 posts with no bunkers .
 This does not mean that ROC personnel could not be trained in nuclear procedures since this could still be done in their old aircraft reporting Ops . The construction of F1 Post in 7 Rooms, Post, or town/village training room .
 Group Bedford in Bedford in the late 1950s. have been somewhat unreal and lifelike training could not be provided. But this environment would have been much more realistic .
 It is now clear that the seriousness of the Cuban Crisis was told to only a few of very senior officers in any service . It was kept from the British public at large almost totally .
 The cause of the conflict was over 6000 miles away from the UK, a global war could have affected the country . Although the cause was over 6,000 miles away, the UK was at risk .
 Groups were not informed, no callout was ordered nor was there any increase in general ROC readiness . Groups not informed .
 Many older members feel that they came within 24 hours of being called out for real . Any evidence for any plans for a full scale Corps callout is difficult to find .
 More than one observer can remember being told to tell their employers that they may have to leave their place of work and man the ROC in an emergency .
 Whether that was due to any order from above or was instigated at a person’s own evaluation of the situation is hard to judge . It's not clear whether it was a result of an order from the above .
 The book 'Attack Warning Red’ does not even mention the Cuban Crisis and Group Routine Orders . Journals and other ROC publications for the period are also illusive on the matter .
 In No 11 Group Truro, on the 1st October 1962, Vivian Green took over from the well informed Obs Cdr Boret . Vivian took over as the Obs Commander of the No. 11 Group .
 GROs for October and November 1962 contained large sections on ‘Security’ and ‘Safeguarding Technical Equipment’ but no mention of the Cuban Crisis . GROs also contained sections on 'Security' and 'SAFeguarding' Technical Equipment .
 In the Christmas Message December 1962, by the ROC Commandant, Air Commodore C M Wight-Boycott CBE CBE, DSO, came the first official acceptance that the Cuban Crisis had occurred .
 A few personal memories by former members of the Corps at the time of the Cuban Crisis go a long way to explaining the atmosphere in the U.S. military .
 Lawrence Holmes was a Ch/Obs of 8/J2 Farnsfield Post in Nottinghamshire at the time . He recalls that they had only just received their underground post a year before the crisis . Lawrence Holmes recalls that the post had just received its underground post .
 People generally knew about the Cuban Crisis but thought it was a long way away and would not affect them . People thought the crisis would not be affected by the crisis .
 "No real callout plans were made. Certainly no personal items were packed in anticipation of a callout," said staff member .
 I have no recollection of any orders or advice coming down the chain of command from HQROC to Groups and to my Group Officer, in the weeks and days before the crisis . I'm not sure if any of the advice was given to groups or officers in advance of the crisis,
 I had only been married for two years, bought our first house and was studying hard to be chartered mining surveyor . I had many more things on my mind than even even the Cuban Crisis .
 Cuba was, in their estimation, was a distant island in the Caribbean of no importance . Cuba was not considered an important part of the Cuban people .
 The St Columb Post members commented on the Cuban situation as a crew and I made sure that our callout arrangements were updated and understood . The St. Columb Post crew was updated with the latest information .
 I was working at F J Reeves Builders Merchants at Redruth and our typist had a brother on one oil tanker in the Caribbean area and her father and another brother were on another tanker in same area . Her father was on one tanker in Caribbean area .
 She was very emotional and we listened avidly to the news on the radio each time it was on . We listened to her 'emotional' and 'very emotional' news stories .
 Graham Cook and his father were both serving in 12 Group ROC Secondary Ops Room in Gloucester attending exercises at other centres where required . Graham Cook's father was also serving in the Gloucestershire military .
 The personnel on the ground were not alerted or called to a state of readiness in any way, so far as I know . The personnel in the ground did not have to be alerted or alerted, says CNN's John Sutter .
 That doesn't mean that there was no discussion behind the scenes, or that prudent action was not taken . That does not mean that . There was no . discussion behind scenes, and there was . prudent action .
 In fact I can remember preparing a duty roster that could have been used for at least two weeks . In fact, it could be used for a couple of weeks . I remember preparing to prepare for a two-week period of duty .
 A final further lesson from the events of 1962 was the conclusion that “A crisis comes to a head in a matter of hours rather than days,’s conclusion . ‘If the Corps ever had to stand to, there would be little warning.’ If the Corps
 We hope you will agree with the new look, design and content . It received the whole hearted approval of the Committee .
 The National Committee had no hesitation in adopting it as the Official National ROCA web site with immediate effect . The National . Committee had 'no hesitation' in adopting the site .
 Mick has agreed to become the ROCA Web Master to administer and update it on our behalf . Mick is also delighted to announce that Mick will be the Web Master . Mick has also agreed to be the web master to administer the site .
 There are a number of pages that contain confidential contact details and information for members only . Contact details are confidential .
 Contact your Group Secretary for the new password to access the pages of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of events in the news you need to follow .
 To keep the pages closed to the general public please DO NOT publish the password in newsletters or articles that are likely to reach the public domain .
 Please include the site address in all future headed papers and letters and letters . Send your photos and letters to the editor of this week's featured news stories .
 In your comments and feedback do kindly remember Mick has worked very hard from a standing start to design this for you in his own time . Mick has only very basic IT knowledge .
 It is an evolving site please let Mick or your Area Reps have constructive feedback and suggestions for any other items you would like included .
 Roy McDowell used his initiative to set up the original site that he ran so successfully and tirelessly on our behalf for the past 12 years . The National organisation would not have developed this site without Roy . The original site was set up by the National organisation .
 Mick and the national committee are also indebted to Roy for the support that he has given us in the development of the new site . Mick and Roy are also indebted to Roy for his support that has given them the support they have given us .
 We had used the hotel for a reunion some 17 years ago so this was a return to slightly familiar territory . The hotel was used to host a reunion 17 years later .
 The norm was for people to attend from Friday afternoon until Sunday morning and dinner bed and breakfast was provided . Bed and breakfast were provided .
 The hotel had not changed all that much since 1995 and there was a slightly tired look about the place . The ROCA was well used by coach parties on a 4 or 5 day break .
 The bedrooms were very acceptable, food good and staff very friendly . But the bedrooms were not acceptable, and staff were friendly .
 Lawrence Holmes attended on the Thursday and he was surprised to meet in the same hotel that evening Rose Mason from 10 Group . Rose Mason met Lawrence Holmes at 10 Group. Holmes attended the Thursday .
 Rose didn't realise that the ROCA Reunion was being held that weekend at that hotel . Rose did not realise that she was in attendance at the hotel at the time .
 She was there on a 4 day break with a friend and was to leave on the Friday morning . She was due to leave Friday morning for a 4-day break .
 Friday was meet and greet time and after dinner in the aptly named ‘Jenny’s Restaurant’, people gathered for the first official meeting .
 Many people had taken prizes for the Friday evening raffle and there were 56 prizes . There were a staggering 56 prizes for people taking part in the event .
 Of special interest was a display of pieces of different granite which could be used for the proposed ROCA Stone at the National Memorial Arboretum . The proposed stone will be used in the National Museum of Natural History .
 After the welcome by national Chairman John Sharpe the raffle was held and due to the large number of prizes this took some time to sort out . After the event the crowd were given a welcome by the national chairman of the Raffle .
 This was the first time the ADM had been held in conjunction with the Reunion and it was a marked success . The ADM was held at the end of last year's Reunion .
 On Saturday afternoon people were free to see the sights in Manchester or simply stay in the hotel and take advantage of the leisure facilities . People were able to enjoy the sights of the city on Saturday afternoon .
 Neville Cullingford held an Airborne Headaches Competition in the afternoon . For the aircraft minded, there was also a competition for Airborne Headsaches .
 On Saturday evening it was the Gala Dinner in the Lancashire Suite followed by music with Graham Clark .
 President Cliff Spink was present and as always he made a point of going round everyone to say ‘hello’ and be updated about the ROCA in the various parts of the country .
 A guest at the dinner was Air Vice Marshal Michael Jackson, Trustee of the Bury St Edmunds Guildhall Restoration Project . Michael Jackson was a guest of the dinner at the Guildhall .
 Chairman John Sharpe gave a short speech to the assembly . Cliff Spink also addressed the assembly in his usual sparkling way . Chairman Sharpe also gave a brief speech .
 The Gala meal was poor and not as good as the standard dinner on the Thursday and Friday evenings . On the down side the Gala dinner was poor .
 Cliff Spink presented the President’s Certificate to John Shere of 7 Group . Mick Marks also of . 7 Group was presented with a new Trophy for all his hard work over the years and also setting up the new ROCA web site . Cliff and Mick Marks presented with
 John Shere was presented with his Certificate by President Cliff Spink . Shere received the award for his efforts to win the award .
 After the formal proceedings, members chatted or danced for the remainder of the evening .
 However, the national committee had a meeting as did the Heritage Team . The Heritage Team held a meeting on Monday night .
 Overall the Reunion 2012 was what might be described as a standard reunion, hotel could have been better . Manchester is still a long way north for most southern attendees .
 The experiment worked well and undoubtedly all future ADMs will be held in conjunction with the Reunion . The experiment was successful and will continue to be successful .
 This year there were no resolutions so the meeting was expected to be somewhat short . This year's meeting will be the first of the year for the city council .
 The room was well filled with 37 Group Delegates, national committee members and also ordinary members of ROCA attending the reunion .
 Justin Keeble Secretary of the new Colchester Group ROCA was present for the first time . He was joined by the Colchester group's secretary of secretary of state . The group is the first of its members from Colchester to Colchester .
 Lawrence Holmes thanked Jenny Morris for putting forward 10 Group’s views at the ADM 2011 in his absence .
 John Sharpe said that the national committee had met 4 times in the year 2011 . National membership stood at 1897 including full, associate and honorary members .
 The national standard was paraded on 11 occasions at various venues from St Clement Danes to St Peter Port Guernsey . The standard has been paraded at 11 venues across the island .
 The 25th anniversary of the ROCA was celebrated at the National Memorial Arboretum . Capitation fees were kept at £2 for members and £1 for associates . He also said that capitation fees remained £2 .
 There was an excess of expenditure over income of £280 and assets totalled £8342 . Excess of expenditure was £280, but assets were £8343 .
 Individual items were fairly normal with committee expenses on the low side . Committee expenses were also low .
 The new Heritage cost items totalled £478 (over the last two years this was £1161) Diana warned that heritage expenditure was likely to increase . £2600 had already been donated for the new ROCA Stone at the NMA .
 Air Marshal Cliff Spink had now been our President for 17 years and he has agreed to continue for another year . The Hon Vice Presidents Norman Greig, Hilary Daniel and Joyce Shrubbs have also agreed to extend their terms .
 In the Area Reps item, MET Area had John Millidge and there was a vacancy, in SOU Murray Whitcher was re-appointed and in SCOT Mary Bruce was appointed .
 John Sharpe appointed as national Chairman and Murray Whitcher was appointed as Vice Chairman . Diana Mothersole was Treasurer, Les Mitchell was Membership Secretary, Joyce Shrubbs was Keeper of the Standard . Les Mitchell also appointed as Membership Secretary and Deputy Keeper .
 Mick Marks then gave an update on his work in connection with the formation of the new ROCA web site . Mick Marks also gave a brief update on the new website of the organisation .
 Mick had constructed the new site from scratch and all input was to be in PDF format . Mick had built the site for the first time using a PDF format instead of a PDF file .
 He said he was willing to run the new site for a maximum of three years . He said it would be open to the public for three years, but that he would only run for three .
 The cost of running of the new site would be about £30 pa . It would be paid for from national funds .
 There would be a private part on the site where a password would be needed to enter . A private part of the site would also need a password to enter.
 There would be links to the old ROCA site, the Heritage site and the ROCBF site . The site would be linked to three sites, including the heritage site . There would also be links between the Heritage and the site .
 Edwina Holden then gave a report about the Heritage Team when members stood at the front of the hall for all to see .
 Members present were Edwina Holden, Simon Craine, John Shere, Paddy Malone, Justin Keeble, Cheryl Stewart and Cheryl Stewart . Roy McDowell was also present .
 The HT had been formed a year ago and was anxious for any ideas from Groups about heritage matters .
 The heritage web site was operating well and was going from strength to strength . It was going to be operating well .
 Edwina as Archivist was always ready to receive items of ROC memorabilia . She always received items of memorabilia from the ROC .
 She also pointed out that the HT do not claim mileage or hotel costs when attending venues . She also said that she also does not use mileage or hotels to attend events .
 John Simmonds donated a Heritage Hamper which was raffled off at the reunion and raised £300 . One of their aims was to raise funds for the HT and John Simmond had donated a heritage hamper .
 John Shere said he had been looking into Insurance for Post Preservers but had made very little real progress . Shere also said he was looking into insurance for PostPreservers .
 In 2010 there had been 48 cases and £51,000 had been given out in grants . In 2011 there were 64 cases and £45,314 was given out . In 2012 there were more than £45,000 given out to those in need .
 Posters are still available and he said that the ROCBF Banner should appear in every issue of every newsletter . Posters were still available .
 York Control was now called ‘The Bunker’ and were holding film nights showing Cold War style films . In Any Other Business, Jim Millington informed all that York Control .
 John Sharpe was adamant that the Scottish people would vote ‘No’ to this question . Sharpe said he was confident that the people of Scotland would vote 'No' to this issue .
 There was also a plea for ROCA to do something special in 2015 . 2015 was the 90th anniversary of the formation of the ROC in 1925 .
 Jenny Morris dealt with tickets for the Cenotaph Parade in London, St Clement Danes tickets and mentioned the Bury St Edmunds Ops Room Project . Jenny Morris also dealt with the tickets for tickets for London's Remembrance Sunday .
 The proposed unveiling date for the new ROC Stone at the NMA would be May 2013 . Jenny then told delegates that the proposed unveiling of the new stone would be in May 2013.
 ADM only lasted 2 hours and a lot of debate and topics were covered . This ADM was only 2 hours long and the ADM lasted two hours .
 W Burnie joined the Royal Observer Corps in 1956 and served on Crew Two in No 7 Group Bedford . Reached the rank of Chief Observer on his appointment to Post Supervisor, a position he held for many years .
 In 1988 he transferred to Riseley Post, on age grounds, where he served until the Corps stood down in 1991 . He served in the Army from 1988 to 1991 .
 Jock’s expertise and enthusiasm for the Corps was greatly appreciated by his peers, especially by Post Observers on Exercises .
 When new recruits came along he would take them under his wing, he would make them feel at home in his new surroundings . He would make new recruits feel welcome in their new surroundings, he said .
 Jock was well known not only in Bedford Group and Midland area, but in many other Groups too . Jock is well known for his work at Bedford Group, Midland and Bedford .
 He was a regular attender at ROC Camps and made many friends around the country . He was also a regular attendee of the camp camp .
 He was awarded the C in C Strike Command’s Certificate of Commendation in 1975 . He is now retired from the RAF .
 The Jock Burnie Trophy was donated by his son Andrew after his death in 1995 . The trophy is to be used to help preserve his memory into the future .
 John Sharpe accepted The Jock Burnie Trophy kindly donated on loan by No 7 Group Bedford . No 7 group Bedford donated the trophy on loan to the National Committee .
 Michael Marks became the first recipient of the Trophy awarded in recognition for his many years of dedication and service to the Association . Marks was awarded the Trophy in recognition of his dedication to the sport .
 Bedford Cup remains the property of No 7 Group Bedford ROCA, and is on permanent loan to the National Committee for the purpose of awarding it annually, to selected members at the National Reunion, for their meritorious service .
 Recipients are asked to maintain the cup in good condition and arrange for it to be returned to the National Committee at the end of their year, or earlier if they so wish .
 Should the National Committee no longer wish to continue with this award, the cup is to be returned to the Chairman of Bedford Group at that time .
 Fund raising for the Memorial stone continued at this year’s Reunion . The Arboretum Grove Memorial was dedicated to the Grove .
 Project leader Jenny Major thanks all those who have donated to the project . Jenny Major: 'A very big thank you to all the donations to this project'
 Following a recent visit to the stone mason, I came away with a number of samples of granite . One was a dark grey, one was a very pale grey and a third was a buff colour .
 The general consensus considered that the dark grey was the most appropriate, with the carving being picked out in silver enamel . The carving was chosen from a dark grey enamel made in the enamels .
 This memorial is representative of the service of ALL members of the ROC, and you were part of that . You were a member of that. This Memorial is representative .
 The fund is growing quite steadily and the target remains at approximately £6000 .
 At the start of the reunion we had just under £2500 and managed to add a further £300 during the weekend . At the end of the weekend we had over £2500 .
 This was achieved through auctioning of a bottle of limited edition whisky, silent auction of donated books, personal donations and contributions from the sale of Christmas cards .
 Our next target must be to double our money in the next few months to ensure a satisfactory outcome . The next target is to increase the amount of money we have invested in the project .
 Any further donations please with cheques made out to ROCA and sent to J Major at 56 Wordsworth Road, Rugby, Rugby .
 Annual Delegates Meeting 13 October 2012 : Next Steps Report from the National Committee ‘The way ahead’ ~ In the report sent to Groups last March listed on page 2 are the priority questions for discussion .
 Review the options for the selection and election of the member’s representation . Review the candidates for the . selection of the . member of the representative .
 The NC will look at the viability to reshape itself away from the Area focus and if this is appropriate to replace with an alternative selection process . The NC is looking into the viability of replacing the current selection process with a new focus .
 To look at who is best placed to be the member of the member’s representative for example should this be a representative selected from the Group Chairman, on a regional, geographical, Group/Cluster basis .
 The National Committee proposal to the Delegates at the ADM was to form a small sub group to review the options . The proposal was proposed by the National Committee of the Delegate .
 Much of the discussion and gathering of ideas could be done by email or modern technological means . There would be a need for one or two face to face meetings but much of the talk could be discussed by email .
 The sub Group will be formed of 6 volunteers with 3 National Committee and 3 other members . The sub group will be made up of six volunteers .
 The first meeting will be called early in the New Year at a venue that keeps travel reasonable for all . First meeting to be held early in New Year .
 The full report and original No 1 Group paper can be obtained from Group Secretaries and is accessible on the web site .
 If you are interested in being part of this important discussion please let either Murray Whitcher or me know by 16 February 2013 . If you want to be part of the discussion please email Murray Whitchers or Murray Whitaker .
 Scotland Area’s turn to carry the Standard and have first call on the 10 tickets . Scotland Area will have first choice of 10 tickets for the event .
 I need names by 21 January 2013 if you wish to have tickets or to be placed on a reserve list please let me know as quickly as possible . I need to be on the reserve list by January 21 .
 The service will be followed by a special reception in the Royal Courts of Justice .
 Bentley Priory Battle of Britain Trust Appeal is under way . Construction, renovation and conservation work are under way at the historic priory . The Priory is the birthplace of the Battle of the Great War .
 The Trust now needs to raise the final £1.8m to create the museum and education centre . The Trust is hoping to raise more than £2m to build the museum .
 You can help by making individual donations and by local Group fund raising to support the appeal .
 Visit www.rocatwentytwelve.org. See photos and report of the National Heritage support provided by members at the open weekend last September .
 Another busy year with 2012 marking new landmark events in our evolving Association . Finally a message to all from the National Secretary .
 Heighten awareness of our roles continues with the growing public interest in the Cold War period . The Cold War era was a period of tension between the U.S. and Britain .
 The growing number of the younger generation now preserving Posts is astonishing . It is astonishing that the number of young people preserving their posts is astonishing.
 13.13 promises to be just as busy with preparations for the Dedication of the Arboretum Memorial Stone, opening of Bentley Priory Museum and support forthcoming National events in 2014 .
 As we approach Remembrance many of you will take part in Parades and Services we will fall silent to remember those who have given their lives in all conflicts . Time to remember our friends and colleagues no longer with us .
 The festive period fast approaches, all my best wishes to you and your families for Christmas and a peaceful New Year .
 Re-enactors attended this event including Bernie Porter and Trevor Sampson who were there in ROC uniform .
 On the Saturday there was a 1940s Dance and a memorial Parade . Trevor Sampson carried the 10 Group Standard . Bernie Porter was in attendance at the parade .
 Kilkhampton Battle of Britain Service took place on Sunday 2 September 2012 . The weather for once was wet but this did not stop quite a few people gathering at the Village Hall .
 There were about 8 standards including 10 Group standard carried by Paul Hingston . There were 8 standards carried out by the 10 Group Standards .
 It was one of the few occasions that some of the standard bearers and members of the Veteran’s contingent wore macs . It was a rare occasion for the standard bearer to wear macs.
 There was no band this year but there was a drum which kept the marchers in some sort of a step .
 The church was less full than normal perhaps because of the wet weather . The church had a less full attendance than usual perhaps due to the rain .
 Several stirring hymns were sung about ‘our men who fly in the air’ and the wonderful lady lay preacher gave another marvellous sermon about the Battle of Britain .
 The standards and Veterans marched back to the Hall where the ladies had again put on a very good spread of food for everyone . Afterwards, in fairly heavy rain, the standards and veterans marched back .
 ROCA should attend the event every year by year . The event was a very good experience for the local community . It was held in New York City .
 The Battle of Britain Service at Illogan and RRH Portreath took place on Wednesday 12 September 2012 .
 The 10 Group standard was not paraded . Jeff Carson's ill-health meant the standard did not have to be paraded at the event .
 First service took place at newly renovated Illogan Church . Rev Brian Mavers, officiating chaplain at RAF St Mawgan, officiated chaplain .
 After the service everyone walked to the moving War Graves section at Illogan Church graveyard . The service was held at the moving war Graves section .
 All the names of those killed at RAF Portreath in WW2 were read out and wreaths laid . Wreath-laying ceremony was held in memory of those who died in the RAF .
 Two local soldiers from the Parachute Regiment were killed at Arnhem . A small ceremony was held at the Church War Memorial in Illogan .
 Standards were again paraded around showing the two plaques . Everyone then drove up to RRH The impressive memorial at RRH Portreath Portreath .
 There was a killed from the Station and the other to those short service and again wreaths were laid . The Glider Regiment was also killed in short service .
 On the reverse of the Station Memorial is a plaque commemorating members of the RAF and the Glider Regiment killed in Operation Beggar . A plaque commemorates those killed in the operation .
 Operation Huskey was the towing of Horsa gliders by Halifax aircraft from Portreath to Tunisia to take part in the Sicilian landings codenamed Huskey which took place in July 1943 . This operation was the . towing the gliders to Tunisia . from Port
 The plaque is the only one in the UK commemorating those killed in Operation Beggar . It is only one of the UK's commemorative plaques commemorating the deaths of those killed .
 The brigadier of the Glider Regiment again made a small speech but this year one of the glider pilots who took part was present . This year's glider pilot was present at the ceremony .
 John Sale gave a moving account of one of his flights from Portreath to Morocco in September 1943 . His name was John Sale and he gave a very moving account .
 Halifax was en route from Portreath in Cornwall to Rabat in Morocco when it came under fire over the Bay of Biscay from three German Junkers Ju88s .
 The glider pilot, John Sale, unselfishly cast off as Norman tried to evade the attackers . Norman was attacked in a glider crash in the early hours of the day .
 The Halifax sustained major damage, but its rear gunner, Sgt John Grant, succeeded in shooting down one of the Junkers . The Halifax suffered major damage but was able to shoot down the one .
 The glider and its two pilots were also shot down, but its occupants survived . The Halifax limped to Morocco on three engines on its way to Morocco .
 After the ceremonies people retired to the Peregrine Club for cream tea . After all the ceremonies, people retired for a cream tea at the club .
 One of WW2’s best deceptions called ‘Operation Mincemeat’ was to confuse the Germans about the details of the invasion of Sicily .
 Exeter Branch met up with Tamar Branch for a guided tour of RAF Harrowbeer by Michael Hayes . Michael Hayes led the tour, starting with lunch at the Knightstone Tearooms .
 Tamar Branch members then went back for a cream tea at the restaurant . The Tamar branch members went to the restaurant for the cream tea .
 Michael arranged for us to take our cream teas with us with us . The Exeter Branch members had to leave but we did not miss out on their cream tea .
 For more information or confirmation of events contact Dave Flower on 01392-438956 . Dave Flower is a keen supporter of the events in the UK .
 Denis Ellery gave a Power Point Presentation on ‘Cornwall from the Air’ when he showed many superb aerial shots of Cornwall’s landscape .
 Denis’s sparkling comments made for an interesting evening . Coupled with Denis's sparkling comments, it was an interesting night .
 Due to Jeff Carson being indisposed the programme was changed and a DVD was shown . Jeff Carson was unable to appear on the show .
 On 22 November for the second time we returned to the Merchant House Hotel for the branch Annual Dinner . For the second year in a row we held the annual dinner at the hotel .
 Lawrence thanks everyone for their support and says everyone has now paid their subs . Lawrence thanks the fans for supporting him on Twitter . Lawrence says he is proud to be able to continue his career in the UK .
 The branch still continues to subsidise annual subs and will do so until 2013 when the situation will be reviewed . The branch will continue subsidising subs until 2013 .
 Branch had also made a £100 donation to the proposed ROC Stone at the National Memorial Arboretum . The branch also donated £100 to a proposed stone at the proposed National Memorial Park Stone .
 The branch continues to produce about 2 to 3 newsletters per year thanks to editor Dave Bray .
 All normal branch meetings take place at the RBL Truro at 1930hrs unless otherwise stated . All normal meetings are held at the Truro branch .
 Christmas Quiz by Brian Stoddern, and nibbles by nibbles. Future programme :10/12/12:12.12 . Future programme: 10/12, 12/12 .
 Work on the Decoy Command Bunker is expected to take place in the winter/spring . Next year both bunkers should be open to the public next year .
 Next Spring the bunker will require a complete clean and re-paint and help will be needed . The bunker will need to be completely re-painted next Spring .
 Open Days 2013 were about to be defined and sent to the National Trust . Open days 2013 was about to define and send to the national trust .
 It is also planned to invite the Cornwall Military Vehicle Trust to visit the bunker in 2013 . The Cornish military vehicle trust will also be invited to the bunker .
 For any more details on Veryan Bunker phone Lawrence Holmes on 01872-278234 . For more information call Lawrence Holmes at 0800-273-8255 .
 Tamar branch summer programme was quite busy . Shirley Abell reports that the Tamar Branch summer programme has been very busy . She says it was a great success for the children .
 We were represented at the National Armed Forces Day in Plymouth by Paul Hingston carrying the National Standard and Ron Toll carrying the 10 Group Standard . We are represented at this year's event by Ron Toll .
 In July a group went to explore the Exeter Tunnels which was quite an experience and highly recommended . In July, a group of people went on a tour of Exeter's Exeter Tunnel .
 The road was blocked by an overturned car near Tavistock and we had to be diverted around the back roads . An overturned car caused the road to be blocked by the overturned car .
 The driver from Plymouth had no idea where to go, so Gerald took over the navigating to get us to Tavistock bus station . Gerald then took over to take us to the bus station, where he took us on a tour of the town .
 With all the delays we arrived late at Okehampton, and then found the train we were to catch was also running late .
 A small contingent of eight members attended a very damp Kilkhampton Battle of Britain Parade in September .
 There was a large contingent of Standards with Paul Hingston carrying our 10 Group Standard . There were also a large number of Standards Standards . There was also a huge contingent of standards from the World Championships .
 Parade Marshall was Mr Peter Paice BEM and the service was conducted by Mrs Gloria Street Lay Preacher . Parade Marshall Mr Paice and Mrs Gloria Stood Preacher were present .
 Sunday 23 September we met again for a visit to Dingles Heritage fair ground at Lewdown . We met again this week to visit Dingles heritage fair ground .
 The undercover venue was ideal because of the inclement weather . The start of the Round Robin Day trip was delayed due to the weather .
 The October Film Show had to be cancelled due to Lawrence Holmes being called to do film work in the south east . Lawrence Holmes had been called to work in south east to film work . The film show was cancelled after Lawrence Holmes was called up to work on film .
 The branch attended Remembrance Day Services in Launceston and Callington . The branch also attended services at Launcestons and Callings .
 8/12/12 Branch Christmas Meal at Trethorne Park, Launceston . Forward Programme : 8.45 for 1915hrs. Forward Programme .
 Ron Gage died on 19 July 2012 aged 96 years . Gage was a member of the Royal Family .
 He will be remembered by many OBITUARY people through his association with ROC Camps where he was invariably the Entertainments Officer . He will always be remembered for his role in the camp .
 He joined the Corps in November 1956 as an observer on 3/M3 Swindon Post . He was an observer for Swindonian Post, Swindonia .
 He then moved to 14 Group Winchester where he became actively involved in the ROC Museum . He was actively involved with the museum in Winchester .
 He retired from the Corps in February 1981 but reverted to an observer on 14/36 Kingsworthy Post for 3 years . He was an observer for three years .
 He was well known for his knowledge and collection of ROC badges, buttons, insignia and ties . He was also well-known for his collection of memorabilia .
 Basil joined the Corps in 1950 at the Newhaven Post which closed in the 1968 reorganisation . Basil was a member of the Corps at the time of the post-war period .
 He transferred to the Cuckmere Haven Post where he served until retirement . He then served as a reporter in Cuckere Haven, Connecticut .
 ‘Burlington The Central Government War Headquarters at Corsham’ by Nick Catford . ‘Corsham” is the name of the main British headquarters at the time of the war .
 For fifty years the bunker now known as 'Burlington' was the most secret place in Britain . For 50 years it was known to be the most secretive place in the country .
 In the early 1950s it was felt that an alternative seat of government should be available in case London became untenable in the event of a nuclear war . In the 1950s, London was considered to be an alternative to London's government if London was threatened by nuclear war.
 Corsham bunker would be the size of a small town and accommodate over 4,000 ministers and civil servants . The bunker at Corsham in north-west Wiltshire would be built in the middle of the country's largest town .
 Also accommodated would be other military and civil government departments such as the Air Ministry, Foreign Office, Home Office and so on .
 It would have a power station, water works, sewage works, telephone exchange, ventilating systems, and catering facilities . It would be able to operate in a closed down condition for up to ninety days .
 The bunker had a number of code-names during its life as a bunker . Subterfuge, Stockwell, Burlington, Turnstile, Chanticleer and Peripheral . 'Burlington' is the name by which it is remembered .
 This book tells the story of 'Burlington' from its inception in the early 1950s until 2004 when the site was finally declassified . It tells the fascinating story of the site from the 1950s to the 1980s .
 The Lincolnshire Aviation Society publishes excellent photographs and diagrams of aircraft flying .
 This book in some ways is meant to be an update of Charles’s previous book called ‘The Royal Observer Corps in Lincolnshire 1936-1991 published in 1991 . But the new book is much more than an update. This book is more than just an update .
 Charles has packed in an inordinate amount of different and new information . Charles is known for his work at the center of the story . Charles has been in the news for more than a decade .
 The book sets the scene for early warning with the historical Beacon Warning System . The book is based on the history of early warning systems .
 The book continues with a short history of aircraft tracking in the First World War, including airships, LADA and Ashmore .
 Formation of the Corps in 1925, sound location, early plotting instruments, the invention of radar and the spread of the . Corps into Lincolnshire and Humberside .
 There are more post plotting instruments and the start of WW2, aircraft silhouettes and the Royal Observer Corps Club . There is also a post plotting instrument and an aircraft silhouette .
 There is an excellent write up of ‘Operation Gizela’ and the Death of Obs Kelway . There is also an excellent piece of information on the death of the British spy .
 After the end of WW2 Charles then deals with the ROC Revival with the low level plotting role of the late 1940s and early 1950s . Even the running of the Farnborough Flyer trains is covered by Charles .
 In the latter part of the book, the book covers Rocmet, Royal Reviews, exercises and early warning systems . The book also discusses Rocmet and Royal Reviews .
 Charles sensitively describes uniforms, the last few years of the Corps where systems are getting old and communism is collapsing . Charles is a veteran of the U.S. Army and the Army .
 The body of the book covers 80 pages but then there are 32 pages of appendices . In all, the book is a staggering 32 pages long .
 There is a superb list of ROC equipment with many photographs and specifications . There is an excellent list of equipment with photos and specifications.
 Appendix 4 contains a rare write up about the NRCs of the ROC and a description of the Lincolnshire area . The Lincolnshire NRC is one of the three NRC sites in Lincolnshire .
 The appendices continue with the ROC Spitfires, ROC Camps in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, What remains today to be seen and what remains today is seen .
 The beauty of this book is that, although written primarily about the Lincolnshire and Humberside area, much of what appears through its pages could apply to any Group .
 The quality is excellent, there is much to read and the book covers so much . The quality of the book is excellent and there is a lot to read .
 Cornish Aviation Society held a visit to the Cornish aviation museum on Tuesday 4 September 2012 .
 Eight members of the society approached RAF St Mawgan just in time to see a low loader with a WW2 Hurricane fuselage leaving the main approach road headed eastwards .
 We knew instantly that we had missed at least part of the reason for our visit to the U.S. Museum of Natural History .
 Our destination was the premises of GateGuards Ltd based in St Mawgan, near Newquay Airport . We visited the premises in HAS2, HAS2 near New Quay Airport, on the south coast .
 This relatively new company are manufacturers and suppliers of full sized replica aircraft for museums, collectors and the film industry .
 RAF St Mawgan main gate and on to the top of the airfield were nine curving hardened hardened aircraft shelters constructed in the 1980s to house Buccaneer bombers in their anti shipping role .
 The HAS were not specifically to house nuclear armed aircraft, but to protect the airframes from missile or aircraft ordnance . Airframes were designed to protect them from missile and missile ordnance, not to be armed with nuclear weapons .
 Their use as bomber shelters ceased some years ago with the end of the Cold War . I thought they stand at the side of the original Bentley were derelict .
 GateGuards, Ltd occupied two of the former Priory Spitfires at Gateguards Ltd, Newquay . They constructed fibreglass replicas of aircraft in the former shelters .
 After signing in and being given a site pass, the first aircraft we saw was a wingless Spitfire . The Spitfire was the first of its kind to be seen in the UK .
 This was the aircraft which formerly adorned the front of Bentley Priory along with the Hurricane . The Hurricane was also painted on the inside of the aircraft .
 GateGuards had made a complete replica of this aircraft . The completed replica was due to be taken to Bentley Priory by the end of the week .
 The original Bentley Priory Spitfire was to be restored and taken to the Cosford Aerospace Museum . It was intended to be taken to Cosford aerospace Museum .
 Richard tells us about the recently completed replica of the P51 Mustang . The replica Mustang was recently delivered to the USA to commemorate black aviators in WW2 . Richard says the replica Mustang will be a museum of sorts .
 Tuskegee, Alabama, was the base of the black airmen during the war . This beautiful replica now rests at Tuskege, Alabama . It is a replica of the original aircraft .
 Richard explained that fibreglass moulds were made from the original aircraft picking up fine detail like rivets, lights and gun openings . Richard explained how fibreglastic moulds are made from original aircraft .
 All the panels were bolted on special steel framework until the complete aircraft was built up very much like a giant jigsaw . The aircraft was designed to be a 'jigsaw' made of panels of panels .
 This had been used to ensure that the cockpit of the replica P51 could indeed hold an average black airman . The cockpit was brought over from the USA by the clients .
 Two wings still being worked on which belonged to the Hurricane fuselage we had seen earlier leaving the station . Here we saw the two wings still working on which belong to the fuselage .
 This aircraft was also from Bentley Priory and the original replica had just been fully restored and was being sent back to the new museum at Bentley . The original replica of the aircraft was just being sent to a new museum .
 Next to the Hurricane wings was the fuselage and wings of a replica Bentley Priory Spitfire . The new Spitfire replica also destined as a ‘Gate Guardian’ at roundels painted on fuselage . The replica was also destined to be as a 'Gate Guardian'
 The propellers were still to be attached and workmen were busy taping the painted surfaces of the Spitfire fuselage and wings prior to the roundels being sprayed on . The roundels were sprayed on to the fuselage, wings and fuselage .
 The client provided detailed drawings of the colours and insignias to be used . The client had provided detailed plans for the project .
 Some add-on extras like landing lights, gun barrels and wheels had already been fitted .
 Richard also said that it took about a week for two or three workmen to paint a full aircraft . Richard said it took a week to complete a full painting of the aircraft .
 The real aircraft was so secret that BA would not let GateGuards copy an original nor would they provide any plans . Yet they wanted a fibreglass replica for some exhibition or other . The real plane was so secretive that it was not copied .
 In the end sanity prevailed and somehow the replica was faithfully built . The replica was a replica of the replica of a real-life scene .
 It seemed quite strange to see moulds at one side of the hangar and the replica at the other side .
 Almost all of Gateguards’ work to date has been of an aviation nature . But one project currently underway is not. The project is currently underway and will be completed in 2018 .
 The completed cross, which will be some 40 feet high, is due to be erected at the gateway to Cornwall at the Tamar Bridge, Saltash . It will be 40ft high and will be at the entrance to the Cornish border .
 Richard said he thought it was to be the Cornish version of 66 feet high ‘Angel of the North’ in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear .
 Richard Islip is a former New York Mayor of New York City . Richard is the author of a book called The Daily Mail's Travel to the World . Richard writes about his unusual visit to New York .
 Group ROCA COMMITTEE MEETING HELD ON 8 SEPTEMBER 2012 1 . 1. 1. 4. 4 . 4. 5. 6. 7. 5 . 5. 4: 5. 5: 7. 6: 5: 10. 5; 5
 The three board display Lawrence Holmes had borrowed and used at AFD in Plymouth, had been a success . The display was a success, with three board displays being used .
 The 3 board version is light and can be lifted and placed in a car easily . The light version can be placed in the car easily and is light .
 Lawrence offered to produce material required for a variety of displays for the boards . Lawrence also offered to provide material required to display boards . The boards will be displayed on display boards in various locations .
 The boards could be taken around the Group in a similar manner to the standard . They could be used to take around the world in similar manner .
 Truro branch has already sent in a donation of £125 . Exeter branch has also sent in £125 and the Exeter Branch has also donated . Truro and Truro branches have already donated £125 each .
 Tamar branch was asking members to donate at the rate of £3 per member . Tamar members were asked to donate to the Tamar Branch at £3 a member .
 The committee appreciated that some Independent Members may wish to contribute and indeed are urged to do so . Independent members of the committee were urged to contribute .
 Any such donation cheques should be made payable to 'ROCA' and sent to Jenny Major .
 The committee debated 10 Group wreaths laid at services like Remembrance Day Service . The committee also debated the 10 Group Wreathes laid at the Remembrance Service .
 10 Group agreed that 10 Group would pay for three wreaths at Truro, Exeter and Tamar . 10 Group also agreed to pay for wreathes in Truro and Exeter, and at Exeter .
 The wreaths at Truro and Exeter would be laid as normal on Remembrance Sunday . Truro, Exeter and Truro will lay wreathes as normal for Remembrance Day .
 Tamar branch would have to decide whether to use the 10 Group wreath at Remembrance Sunday at Plymouth, Launceston or Callington . Tamar would also decide if to use wreathes at the June Allied Aircrew Monument Service or at the Remembrance Service .
 Any branch could purchase their own additional wreath and lay anywhere they choose . The wreath will be placed at their local branches .
 Branch Secretaries have been asked to make a list of any members who would be prepared to receive newsletters by e-mail . To save on costs, branch Secretaries should make list of anyone prepared to get e-mails .
 Lawrence Holmes is to send the Secretaries of the Truro, Tamar and Exeter branches an electronic copy of the newsletter .
 They would then be responsible for sending out the newsletter by e-mail to all members on their lists . The newsletter would be sent out to members of the public on lists and lists .
 Lawrence Lawrence is an independent member of the Independent Party . He is the author of a weekly newsletter by e-mailing Lawrence to see who is willing to sign up for it .
 When operational 10 Group ROC had some 59 Honorary Members most of whom have now sadly died . Most of the Honorary members of the ROC have sadly passed away .
 Honorary membership of the ROC was normally granted when a member retired and only for exceptional service to the Corps . Honorary members were normally granted to a member of the Corps.
 Lawrence Holmes attended the Garden of Remembrance at Truro Cathedral . He planted a cross in memory of Seaborne Observers Salter and Bancroft .
 He also attended the RBL Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall, London on 10 November .
 The ROCA contingent at the Cenotaph in London this year had very good weather but was less than 50 members . Less than 50 were present at the event .
 Paul Hingston carried the 10 Group standard at Torpoint British Legion Festival on Thursday 25 October . David Weaver was also in attendance at the Torpoint Festival .
 Paul also paraded the Group standard at Plymouth on 9 November . Group Chairman Tony Child was in attendance at the event . Paul was also in attendance for the event at Plymouth .
 The ROCA wreath was also laid at the Remembrance Service in Truro where our Joint President, Colonel Edward Bolitho was in attendance . The wreath of honour was laid at Truro .
 I am currently on a tour of the regions as Master of the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators I write this in Australia having already visited New Zealand with Hong Kong next .
 "It was a real pleasure to see so many of you at the Annual Reunion at Manchester and in such good heart. Anyway, it was a . pleasure to . see . so many people at the annual Reunion . at Manchester .
 Sadly the years continue take members from our ranks but we remember them all with great affection, none more so than at the Christmas season . Sadly, we remember members of our ranks from their ranks .
 We send our best wishes to you all for a peaceful Christmas and a happy New Year .
 It's that time of year for sitting down and reflecting on the year, which is rapidly coming to its close . Christmas 2012 is the perfect time to reflect on the past year .
 I'm sure we all ask ourselves where does the time go, as the year seems to get shorter and shorter . I’m sure you all ask yourself where does this year go?
 As time goes by our numbers continue to slowly decrease but it’s not all bad news as we are delighted to welcome Colchester Group back into the national family . Colchester is now back in the national fold after a seven-year slump in membership .
 I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of the Groups for all their efforts over the last year in what is an ever increasingly difficult task . I would also like to thank the groups for their efforts .
 Never forget that you are the Association and we on the National Committee are only here to reflect your views and wishes . We are happy to clarify that we are only reflecting your views .
 I know that you will all do your utmost to continue to promote the Association and encourage former colleagues that the ROCA has something to offer them . I know you will continue to do your best to support the Association .
 It is also important to promote the Royal Observer Corps Benevolent Fund . Let former colleagues know that the Fund is there to help out in times of need .
 Our 23rd Annual Reunion took place at the Britannia Country House Hotel in Didsbury Manchester in October .
 This was our first visit to the hotel for some 15+ years . We had a really enjoyable weekend where we all had the opportunity to meet old friends from all parts of the Association .
 Our numbers were a little down on last year’s Chester Reunion but I think that those who came along enjoyed the weekend . Unfortunately, our numbers were slightly down .
 Next year our Reunion will be returning to the Britannia Country House Hotel in October . The hotel are keeping the cost at this year’s level . The cost of next year's event will be kept at same level .
 Further details will be issued as soon as the final arrangements have been resolved . Further details are expected to be issued .
 The Queen will write to Her Majesty to convey her best seasonal greetings and to assure her of continuing loyalty and devotion .
 We now have a new web site and our thanks go to Mick Marks who has produced a vibrant and exciting site .
 Please make use of this new resource that I am certain you will find easy to navigate through . I am also happy to welcome you back to the page you came from .
 I would like to take this opportunity to send my very best wishes and seasonal greetings to all of you and your families as we approach the Christmas festivities .
 May I also wish each and every one of you health and happiness in 2013 . I look forward to having the pleasure of meeting many of you during the course of the next twelve months .
 Christmas Message from 10 Group ROCA Chairman . 10 Group members have had a busy year with Jubilee and sporting events .
 I wish you an active and enjoyable Christmas, while still saving enough energy to continue your support for 10 Group ROCA during the coming years .
 This year we return to the Wessex Hotel, Street, BA16 0EF from Friday 15 to Sunday 17 March 2013 . All good Yuletide wishes Tony Child"" .
 The location is situated in the heart of Somerset and steeped in history . The location has been described as 'sadly beautiful'
 Please indicate if you are interested in a coach trip to experience the local area during Saturday . Coach trip to the area will take place on Saturday .
 There will be plenty of time for shopping at the nearby Clark’s Village .
 The cost of the two nights’ weekend is £75 per person sharing a Double/Twin room . The two-night stay is available at £75 for two nights .
 Single room cost for 2 nights is £105, of which there is a limited number available . Single room costs £105 for two nights and there are only a few rooms available .
 Extra Sunday night, 3 nights total DBB cost is £110 per person double/twin or Single £155 . DBB costs £110 a double or double or single or double .
 The Friday evening three course dinner and the Saturday evening Gala Dinner will be served in the Wessex Suite . The Saturday night dinner will be held in Wessex suite .
 Please fill in the booking form and return to Jenny Morris, 11 Melita Road, Bristol, BS6 5AZ by 11 January 2013 .
 September 2012 was the 70th anniversary of the first edition of the Inter-Services Aircraft Recognition Journal . September 2012 is the 70 years since the publication of the Journal .
 The journal emphasised the importance of aircraft recognition to all sections of the services . It contained articles on aircraft recognition as well as silhouettes and tests .
 Inter Services Journal spelt the end of the marvellous ROC Club Journal . It issued its final Journal at Christmas 1942 . The inter Services Journal was published by the Inter Services Club .
 Allan F Coggan's new book 'Watch and Warn – The Story of Canada’s Aircraft Detection Corps' is available from Amazon .
 This book tells the story of Canada’s Observer Corps . This book is only relatively small and tells the tale of the Canadian Observer Corps.
 The government is listing the remains of two nuclear missile sites in Rutland and Northamptonshire . In memory of the dark days of the Cuban Crisis, the sites are listed .
 RAF North Luffenham in Rutland and RAF Harrington in Northamptonshire are being listed at Grade II . The two bases being listed are the former RAF North and Harrington in the Northants and Northants .
 The anniversary will also be marked by special events at the York Cold War Bunker and the cold war tunnels under Dover Castle .
 North Luffenham was a main Thor missile site and Harrington was under its command and was armed with Thor missiles in 1959 . Harrington was the site of the first Thor missile launch .
 The Thor missiles could be brought to operational readiness in 15 minutes after receiving the order to launch . 59 of the 60 missiles were made ready in October 1962, and 59 of 60 were ready .
 Development of the Bentley Priory site is continuing with developers and estate agents making the most of the site’s potential .
 ‘Stanmore’s best kept Secret’ – Bentley Priory Mansion now available for viewing . ‘Bentleys best kept secret’ is now available to viewing .
 On offer is an exclusive selection of apartments with luxurious bathrooms, sleek lined kitchens and serene views over parkland to London .
 The 50 acre site is being brought back to life by the City and Country Group . Barratt Homes are building lavish new properties .
 In the 19th century it became home to the Abercorn family and was the residence of the Dowager Queen Adelaide . It was also the home of Queen Adelaide's Dowager queen Adelaide .
 The building was then a hotel, a girl's school and then gave its most famous role, that of that of HQ Fighter Command . It was then used as a hotel and a girl’s school .
 Air Chief Marshal Lord Dowding set up his office and Ops Room in the elegant rooms . He oversaw the Battle of Britain and the D-Day Landings in the rooms .
 The mansion house will also contain the Bentley Priory Museum to interpret the history of the property and honour its past . As well as stunning apartments, the mansion house also contains a museum .
 In mid September 2012 next to the ROC window, has been placed a new window dedicated to the Civil Defence in the Blitz . The new window is dedicated to Civil Defence .
 The two previous Gate Guardians, a Spitfire and a Hurricane, have been renovated or renewed by the Cornish company called GateGuards based at Newquay Airport .
 These two ‘new’ aircraft were put on their pedestals on 14 September 2012 .
 At least 12 crosses have been observed in a series of incidents in the past week . They appeared to make crosses and at least 12 appeared to be made .
 Rumour says that they are ‘chemtrails’ and that aircraft are spraying particles of chemicals out, making cloud cover and leaving residue over large area .
 A very fine grey dust sparkles in the sunlight can be seen on cars and windows . A fine grey cloud of dust can sparkle in sunlight .
 The three posts are at national level but are not part of the national committee . The posts are not at national levels but at national .
 The old Royal Observer Corps Post on the outskirts of Billingshurst, West Sussex as it appeared in July 2007 . The first is a short film showing the old post on its outskirts .
 Originally opened in June 1958 at the height of the Cold War, it was decommissioned in October 1968 . The site was opened in 1958 and opened in October 1958 .
 The second concerns the restoration carried out at Cuckfield Post by Mark Russell in 2009/2011 . Mark Russell's restoration was carried out in 2009-2011 .
 Mark gives a detailed history lesson on the surface and then descends to complete an informative tour of the underground and historical time capsule . Mark gives an informative history lesson .
 This was made for Lincolnshire Heritage and comprises of approx 17 min of documentary about the work of the Royal Observer Corps at the Lincoln 66 Post .
 History given by ex-Chief Observer Frank Sauntson and then a walk through the actual Post and a look at the ‘Cold War Years’ equipment and how it worked .
 NEW: The next issue of the weekly Newsquiz will be published by April 16 . NEW: This issue will be the first of the 2013 issue to be published .
 The Truro Hospital Raid of ’42, The Connors of Veryan, The Satellite Posts of the ROC 1940 – 1945, The POW Camp at Hayle, North Wales . Anson Crash, the Holman Projector plus all the latest ROCA news and comments