 The clock represented the Bulletin’s judgment as to how close mankind was to self-annihilation . The closer to midnight it ticked, the nearer the world to nuclear holocaust, the closer the clock ticked .
 Michael Dobbs’s One Minute to Midnight takes its title from the Doomsday Clock . The title implies that, for a two-week period in October 1962, the world was but sixty seconds from nuclear war .
 After reading this fascinating yet terrifying book, it is clear that Dobbs is far too conservative . Five Seconds to Midnight might have been a more appropriate title, Dobbs says .
 Dobbs, a foreign affairs reporter for the Washington Post, has produced a marvelous historical narrative . Dobbs: "I have produced a wonderful historical narrative. It's a wonderful thing to see," he says .
 His research employs material that has become available only in the last twenty years, including President Kennedy’s tapes of Oval Office and Cabinet Room discussions .
 Much of the story Dobbs tells is familiar, but instead of dwelling on many of the missile crisis’s better-known events, he focuses on the numerous events that point to the lack of control both sides had .
 Dobbs tells the story of Soviet saboteurs at a radar station on the grounds of the Duluth, Minnesota, airport . Dobbs: The story is one of the most compelling examples of Soviet sabotage in American history .
 This facility was a crucial link in the radar net that guarded the northern approaches into the U.S. It was a vital link to the radar system that guarded northern approaches to the United States .
 Dobbs says the U.S. assumed a Soviet nuclear attack would be preceded by Spetsnaz commando raids . Dobbs: The United States assumed that a Soviet commando raid would attempt to take out that warning network .
 Duluth airport was one of many to which USAF fighters had been dispersed as a means of preventing their destruction in a Soviet first strike . Air Force fighters were dispersed to protect them from Soviet first strikes .
 During the missile crisis, a guard at the Duluth facility spotted a figure climbing its surrounding fence . The figure was seen climbing the surrounding fence during the crisis .
 At Galena Air Force Base in Alaska, F102s’ conventional air-to-air missiles were replaced with nuclear-tipped missiles . The F102’s conventional air to-air missile system was replaced with nukes at the base .
 Pilots could fire missiles without presidential approval or two-man control . Pilots of these aircraft, once airborne, could fire the missiles without president approval . The missiles could be fired without the need for presidential approval .
 Several Galena F102s went into the air on 27 October 1962, as part of a search for a missing U-2 . The plane had flown to the North Pole on an air-sampling mission and strayed into Soviet airspace on its way home .
 The Soviets scrambled aircraft for the purpose of shooting down the U-2 at the same time as Galena’s F102s were sent out to search for it . The Soviets, of course, had scrambled aircraft to shoot it down .
 The decision to fire at Major Anderson’s U-2 was emblematic of the problem . Though nuclear weapons were not involved in the shooting, the decision to shoot at the U.2 is emblematic .
 Saturday 27 October was the most crucial day of the Cuban missile crisis . It was also the most important day of October 27 October .
 In previous days, Khrushchev had sent conflicting signals regarding his terms for ending the crisis . Kennedy administration was deeply divided over how to respond to the crisis.
 Administration hardliners believed the Soviets either had misled the U.S. or shifted their position to a more aggressive stance, either of which, they believed, meant war could hardly be avoided .
 Those hoping for conciliation, on the other hand, were bemused and trying to find a way to end the crisis short of conflict .
 Dobbs makes it clear that, at this critical juncture, both Kennedy and Khrushchev were looking for a way out . Dobbs: "Both Kennedy and KHrushchev wanted to find ways out of the crisis"
 Officers at conventional SAM sites in Cuba had authority to engage U.S. targets . Unfortunately, not just regular SAM sites had the authority to do so .
 Dobbs tells of Soviet cruise missiles carrying tactical nuclear warheads deployed throughout Cuba . Dobbs: Soviet missiles were carrying tactical nukes deployed throughout the island nation .
 The Soviets intended to use these missiles against an American invasion of the island . One battery was deployed near enough to use against the naval base at Guantanamo Bay . The missiles were intended to be used against a U.S. invasion .
 Dobbs recounts the travails of four Soviet submarines sent into the Atlantic to protect merchant ships heading to Cuba . Dobbs also recounts four Soviet diesel-electric submarines sent in the Atlantic .
 Russian subs were able to use nuclear-tipped torpedoes without Moscow’s approval . Subs captains could use them without the permission of Moscow . The subs could also use torpedoes that were fired without permission from Moscow .
 The United States Navy hunted aggressively for Soviet submarines and found two, one of which was the B-59 . The U.S. Navy found two of the Soviet submarines .
 Circling destroyers dropped hand grenades into the water as a signal for the sub to surface . The U.S. had communicated to the Soviets the meaning of this action .
 The problem was that the Soviets never sent this message to their submarines . The problem is that the Soviet Union never did this .
 The sub’s captain, believing himself under attack, briefly considered using his nuclear torpedo but his officers talked him out of it . The sub's captain, believed himself under attacks, thought he was under attack .
 Fitzpatrick 3 stead surfaced, to be greeted by U.S. aircraft dropping illumination flares of 50 million candlepower .
 Under such circumstances it was miraculous that nuclear war was somehow avoided, says author . "Under such circumstances, nuclear war somehow avoided"
 Dobbs bursts many of the myths that have arisen over the decades regarding the missile crisis . Dobbs: "The missile crisis is not over and over again"
 Soviet ships bound for Cuba had turned around nearly twenty-four hours before the establishment of the quarantine line, not at the last minute as was reported at the time and “confirmed” in books .
 Dobbs also quashes myth that the president responded angrily to the decision by General Thomas Power, the commander of the Strategic Air Command, to move SAC to DEFCON 2 . Dobbs quashes the myth that President George W. Bush responded angrily .
 Dobbs portrays both nations’ intelligence services as borderline incompetent in the run-up to as well as during the crisis . Dobbs also portrays the intelligence services in both countries' run-ups to the crisis as incompetent .
 Soviet intelligence had little information about and even less insight into the Kennedy administration's inner workings .
 They believed that Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon was a member of the faction urging conciliation and that Defense Secretary Robert McNamara was a hard-line faction . For example, they believed that Defense . Secretary of . the Treasury . McNamara and Defense Secretary Douglas Dillon were members of the
 The CIA’s intelligence regarding the situation in Cuba was just as flawed as its intelligence . The CIA's intelligence on Cuba was also flawed, as was its intelligence on the situation .
 The agency’s failure to detect Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba was but one example . The agency failed to find Soviet nuclear arms in Cuba in the 1970s .
 CIA found evidence to support whatever hypothesis was most fashionable at the time . Agency dismissed numerous on-the-ground reports of nuclear weapons . Agency also dismissed numerous reports of weapons .
 CIA had expected Soviet nuclear weapons storage sites to follow the template of those in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe . The CIA had also expected the sites would follow the same template as Soviet nuclear storage sites .
 The Soviets stored their weapons wherever they could, often in circumstances that caused the on-site officials to fear for the weapons’ security . In Cuba, however, the haphazard nature of the weapons' deployment and the limitations of operating in a Third World nation, the Soviets stored
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev struggled to maintain control of the situation . The film is based on JFK's efforts to end the crisis in the Soviet Union .
 This is a message that we as a nation and our new president ought soberly to consider after eight years of Bush-Cheney hubris in foreign affairs . The message is that we should consider soberly, especially in the aftermath of the Bush administration .