 Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House . Inspired by real-time events that happened in the White House. Inspired by a real life story . Inspired from the real life of the Kennedy administration .
 Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.""@en: Inspired by events that occurred in the White House .
 The film is set during the two-week Cuban missle crisis in October of 1962 . It centers on how President John F Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and others handled the explosive situation .
 After the discovery of Soviet weapons in Cuba, events and tension escalate between two military superpowers and within the White House . The story of how the Kennedy administration dealt with the Cuban missile crisis .
 For 13 extraordinary days in October 1962, the world stood on the brink of an unthinkable catastrophe . For thirteen extraordinary days the world was on the verge of an unimaginable catastrophe .
 Oct.62, for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction . Oct. 62, for 13 extraordinary days, the world was on the verge of destruction. Oct. 22, 2012, is the 13th anniversary of the first World War II .
 The U.S. and the USSR were on the brink of a nuclear war in Oct.62 . In Oct. 1962 the United States and the Soviet Union were at risk of nuclear war .
 For thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction . For 13 extraordinary days, the world was on the verge of destruction. For 13 days, it was the worst of the worst .
 President Kennedy knew airstrikes on the Soviet missiles placed in Cuba would end the world as we know it . Krushchev wouldn't back down, President Kennedy wouldn't give in, but Kennedy did .
 Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.""@en: "For thirteen extraordinary days in October of 1962, the world stood on the brink of destruction"
 Zwischen den USA und der Sowjetunion herrscht der Kalte Krieg . The U.S. and S.J. began a war in 1962 .
 Präsident John F Kennedy steht nun vor der schwierigsten Aufgabe seines Lebens . Kennedy's life is "a very difficult time for him"
 Wenn er seine Militärs und Geheimdienste nicht von einer friedlichen Lösung überzeugen kann . Der Dritte Weltkrieg unmittelbar bevor, der Dritter Welt Krieg
 Kennedys Bruder Robert and sein engster Berater Kenny O'Donnell veruschen alles, um einen diplomatischen Ausweg zu finden . The Situation scheint beinahe aussichtslos und Robert und sein .
 Events of Oct.62, when for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction . Events of October 31 .
 Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House.""@en" October 1962, for thirteen extraordinary days the world stood on the brink of destruction .
 Inspired by the real-life events that took place in the Kennedy White House during the Cuban Missile crisis .
 After the discovery of Soviet weapons in Cuba, events and tension escalate between two military superpowers and within the White House .
 Giovane americano in carriera frequenta gruppi di terapia nel vano tentativo di condividere il dolore altrui . Tormentato dall'insonnia, angosciato succubo dell'ideologia
 These are the 13 days that shook the world and put the U.S. and the USSR on the brink of a nuclear apocalypse.""@en: "These are the thirteen days that shake the world" The United States and the Soviet Union were both on the verge of a nuke
 US-Piloten Kontrollflüge über Kuba starten, machen sie eine furchtbare Entdeckung . Als US-piloten starten US-Kuba Kuba Kontrolling flüge starten .
 Gut verborgen im Dschungel liegt eine Basis mit sowjetischen Nuklearraketen . Gut Verborgenen liegt auf eine wescheinische Basis with sowjetisch-Nuklearräketen
 Präsident John F Kennedy steht vor der schwierigsten Aufgabe seines Lebens . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to die. I'm not scared to die"
 Kennedys Bruder Robert and sein engster Berater Kenny O'Donnell versuchen alles, um einen diplomatischen Ausweg zu finden .
 Wachsamkeit ist gefragt, denn in diesen 13 Tagen könnte jede Entscheidung die falsche sein . In diesen Tagen wann wann auf ein falsche Entscheiden .
 Strana idea quella di imbastire un docudrama di suspense sul possibile scoppio di un conflitto nucleare quando nell'ottobre 1962 a Washington si venne a sapere che a Cuba i sovietici stav
 This is a placeholder reference for a Organization entity, related to a WorldCat entity . The WorldCat. Ltd. is a reference to the WorldCat . Ltd.