 After a week of secret deliberations in the White House, the President announced on the evening of 23 October both the existence of the Soviet threat and the imposition of a naval quarantine .
 Revisionists have suggested long before the missiles were discovered, the Kennedy Administration was supporting a renewed effort by Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime .
 1962 plan, code-named ""Mongoose," allegedly was to be accompanied by conventional American air and ground attacks on Cu ba ba 2 .
 The U.S. contingency operation in connection with the Cuban missile crisis was the largest of the Cold War . More important, however, the American contingency operation was in connection to the crisis .
 This incident illuminates continuing questions of joint operations and contingency planning, says CNN.com . The U.S. Air Force says it is investigating the incident .
 Army and Air Force units in the United States belonged to their own services for training and administration . US Strike Command was responsible for the process of deployment to reinforce the unified commanders .
 STRICOM would be responsible for the deployment of forces in the U.S. Once those forces were deployed, control would pass to the appropriate command, which planned and conducted actual operations .
 Continental Army Command controlled ground combat troops . Air Force's Tactical Air Command controlled fighter, reconnaissance, and selected airlift units .
 CON ARC and TAC had to function as those headquarters in the event of hostilities in the LANTCOM area . TAC and CON ARC lacked Army and Air Force component headquarters in peacetime . In peacetime, CON ARC was used as headquarters for CON ARC ARC .
 CON ARC and TAC would assume the titles of Army Components, Atlantic and Air Force Component, Atlantic when they passed under LANTCOM control . CON ARC ARC would be the Army Components of the Air Force, Atlantic .
 In April 1961, the United States sponsored the abortive invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . The U.S. had sponsored the failed invasion of the country's Cuba .
 The invasion was planned and carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency . President Kennedy and his staff blamed the Joint Chiefs of Staff for a large measure of the failure .
 Only the soldier-intellectual General Maxwell Taylor had access to Kennedy, first as Military Assistant to the President and then in September 1962 as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs . Taylor was President Kennedy's military assistant to the president and chairman of the joint chiefs .
 Major Jonathan House is assigned to the Defense Intelligence Agency . The Joint Chiefs and their planners believed the Administration remained unreconciled to the Castro regime in Cuba .
 Major House served in tactical intelligence and engineer units in the U.S. and Korea . He has taught at the US Army Armor School, Intelligence Center and School, and Command and General Staff College .
 A 1983 graduate of the staff college, he researched this article as part of a larger study of joint operations while assigned to the United States Army Center of Military History . He is a member of the Army staff college .
 Chain of command, planned Cuban operations, as of 18 October 1962 . and therefore that military operations against Cuba remained a distinct possibility .
 Joint Chiefs instructed the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic, to make Cuban contingency plans his highest priority . Admiral Robert L Dennison was the Commander of the Atlantic .
 The amphibious phase of the operation would be controlled by Headquarters, Second Fleet, acting as Joint Task Force 122 . Headquarters of the Second Fleet will be in charge of the operations .
 Headquarters, XVIII Airborne Corps, would become JTF Cuba to control all further operations . Once the initial landings were completed, Headquarters would become Headquarters . Headquarters would then control all other operations .
 Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force, Atlantic, would deploy Special Forces teams and other elements into Cuba . To facilitate the 'expected popular uprising against Castro'
 Given such short notice, the Marines would be unable to load and deploy by sea . The initial assault would be restricted to the XVIII Airborne Corps .
 His Army commanders objected to the long delays necessary for the Marine elements to prepare for OPLAN 314 . Army commanders, however, all objected to long delays .
 They argue delay would endanger any hope of surprise, leave masses of troops in crowded staging areas where they might be lucrative targets for Soviet nuclear attack . They argued that such a delay would not only endanger surprise, but also leave masses .
 XVIII Airborne Corps intended to use all available airfields in Florida to stage its troop transports during the assault . XVIII planned to use the airfields as a logistical base to support later operations .
 Staff officers from Third United States Army headquarters visited all the airbases in Florida . They planned a support structure of supply, communications, and medical units for the area .
 Third Army was hard-pressed to find the personnel for this elaborate support structure . Contingency plans mean nothing without the forces to execute those plans . Troops Available Contingencies are a vital part of Third Army .
 The Army gave troops in the continental U.S. lower priorities for personnel and equipment than units overseas . Troops in continental United States were given lower priorities than those overseas .
 The shortage was aggravated in 1962 by the beginning of conflict in Southeast Asia . This shortage was Spring 1991 95 aggravated by the conflict in the region . The shortage of food and medicine was exacerbated in 1962 .
 The Kennedy Administration would find it politically difficult to recall the Army Reserve and National Guard so soon after the previous mobilization . The Kennedy administration would have been reluctant to recall .
 Continental Army Command was short-handed in terms of available units and of the more specialized individuals within those units . As a result of all these factors, the Continental Army command was shorthanded .
 The average deployable strength even in high-priority Strategic Army Corps units was only 80 percent of their authorized strength . The average deploymentable strength is 80% of the authorized strength, the Pentagon says .
 The 2d Armored Division, earmarked to provide the heavy forces for Cuba, was organized on the older Pentomic structure, as were similar divisions in Europe .
 CONARC commander, General Herbert Powell, had to switch assignments of the two divisions at the last moment . The two divisions had been assigned to each other at the start of the war .
 The 1st was reactivated only in February 1962, in order to replace a federalized National Guard division . Unfortunately, the 1st had only been reactivated in 1962 .
 Newly formed, poorly equipped 1st Armored Division found itself assigned as the mechanized force for the Cuban invasion virtually overnight .
 The Corps commander, Lieutenant General Hamilton Howze, headed this operation until the situation relaxed on 10 October . The operation took place in the early hours of October 10 .
 U.S. discovery of Soviet IL-28 medium bombers in Cuba on 30 September . Soviet Union announced on 19 November that those aircraft would be withdrawn .
 Defense Secretary McNamara met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 1 October 1962 . McNamara was the Defense Secretary of the Defense Department of 1962 .
 When informed of the presence of the bombers and the strong possibility of missiles in Cuba, McNamara told the Joint Chiefs to intensify both contingency planning and the readiness of forces not only for blockade, but also for air attack or invasion .
 In a letter to General Taylor the next day, McNamara enumerated six possible circumstances that would trigger U.S. military action . Some of the circumstances had already occurred, such as the positioning of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba and Cuban support of subversion .
 Joint Chiefs were therefore justified in considering invasion to be imminent . The Joint Chiefs are therefore quite justified in thinking invasion is imminent .
 In response to McNamara's guidance, on I October Admiral Dennison directed his subordinate Army and Air Force headquarters to undertake all possible actions so as to be ready to execute the three operations plans at any time on or after 20 October .
 The armed forces began preparations two weeks before missiles were actually sighted in Cuba on 14 October . Thus, quite apart from any support for the Bay of Pigs sequel, Mongoose .
 Joint commander was no longer a joint commander on the scene to coordinate Navy and Air Force air strikes, Army paradrops, and Marine or Army amphibious landings . Joint commander had to coordinate Air Force, Marine and Army air strikes .
 Dennison's reasons for this change in command structure are unclear, particularly his motive for trying to run a war in Cuba from his headquarters in Norfolk, Norfolk .
 The JTF commander may have been reflecting the desires of the Kennedy Administration to maintain extremely tight, centralized control over all military operations .
 Both were composed of staff officers with little knowledge of previous plans . Both were made up of staff staff officers who had little knowledge .
 The additional burden of these two headquarters overwhelmed the makeshift communications arrangements in Florida . The extra burden overwhelmed the two headquarters .
 At the same time, these new headquarters suffered because of belated changes in Air Force plans . Air Force headquarters suffered due to belated plans, Air Force says .
 Air Force bases in Florida lacked space for both fighter-bombers and troop transports . As a result, the bases lacked sufficient space for fighter bombers, troop transports.
 This forced recomputation of the entire plan for the airdrop, because of different flight times . Different flight times from alternate airbases in Florida to drop zones in Cuba required .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff would transfer operational control of CON ARC and TAC forces from STRICOM to LANTCOM when execution of the operations plans for Cuba appeared imminent .
 Exercise Three Pairs is a complex series of maneuvers scheduled to occur at the U.S. Army base . The exercises are scheduled to take place at Ft. Ft. George Washington on June 28 .
 Adams was naturally reluctant to abandon the exercise unless war appeared inevitable . Adams said he would not abandon it unless war was inevitable .
 He believed cancellation of the Three Pairs would telegraph American intentions to attack Cuba . Moreover he believed cancellation would signal American intentions .
 Faced with this massive change, General Adams concluded that the exercise could not be salvaged and canceled it . General Adams wanted to continue it as a deception operation .
 CONARC/ARLANT and TAC/AFLANT were dual-hatted under CINCLANT . This was a normal procedure when CINCSTRIKE transferred forces cleanly to an overseas unified command, but the situation here was fuzzied .
 Monroe/Langley AFB/Norfolk area of Virginia, Virginia, and with STRICOM in Florida, Florida .
 CONARC and TAC continued to report to both STRICOM and LANTCOM as they struggled to prepare for war . CONARC continued to fight for the U.S.
 Joint Chiefs of Staff decided to bring armed forces to Defense Condition 3, an increased state of readiness . Ground forces were positioned for possible implementation of OPLAN 316 .
 That night, General Powell directed the movement of 1st Brigade, 1st Armored Division, and the other elements of Task Force Charlie, the mechanized force for the invasion, from Ft. Hillside .
 Task Force Charlie was created to locate forces near the ports of Savannah, Georgia, and Everglades, Florida . The purpose of this movement was to locate the forces near those ports . Task force Charlie would deploy from these ports .
 Because the 1st Armored had to be ready to move on short notice, the vehicles were kept mounted on flatcars rather than offloading at Ft. Hillside . Because of the need for quick offloading of the vehicles, they were kept on flatcar instead of offloading .
 Third Army transportation officers turned to the rail sidings at nearby Hunter Air Force Base, on the outskirts of Savannah .
 At the time, Hunter was a Strategic Air Command base, and the local commander would not accept Army railcars until the Army's Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, Lieutenant General Theodore W Parker, appealed to the Air Force Chief of staff .
 Task Force Charlie arrives in Savannah and the Port of Everglades . Task Force will load the first wave of Task Force members aboard ships in Savannah .
 Staff officers Spring 1991 99 discovered numerous technical problems in the process of Spring 1991 . Staff officers at Spring 1991 found out what was going wrong .
 The two lower decks of the roll on/roll off ship USNS Comet lacked sufficient clearance to accommodate M48 tanks unless the commander's cupolas were removed . For example, the lower decks were not enough to accommodate the tanks .
 The same problem, on the same ship, had arisen during the 1958 deployment to Lebanon, but it had not subsequently been fixed . This same problem had occurred during the same deployment to the Lebanon .
 The II Marine Amphibious Force was aboard the largest collection of amphibious shipping assembled since the Korean War . After eight days of loading ships, the II Marine amphibious force was aboard .
 The 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, from California, reinforced the 2d Marine Division by air and sea deployment . The brigade is from California .
 Seven hundred and fifty fighter-bombers waited on airfields and aircraft carriers . 7,000 fighter bombers were waiting for them on the ground .
 President Kennedy approved McNamara's suggestion that 24 Air Force Reserve squadrons of troop-carrier aircraft be deployed .
 Aircraft made it possible to airlift the first wave of the airborne invasion, consisting of 34,800 paratroopers at Ft. Ft. E. Hill .
 Forces controlled by CINCLANT went into a kind of suspended animation, waiting for an execution order that never came . At this point, the forces controlled by the forces were in suspended animation .
 The 1st Armored Division participated in maneuvers during the Cuban missile crisis . The division was involved in the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 This prolonged alert indicates the seriousness with which the Administration contemplated the possibility of attacking Cuba . The prolonged alert, like the prolonged preparation prior to the discovery of missiles, indicates serious consideration .
 In effect, the U.S. Army had prepared for a major war without mobilizing its reserve forces . The anomaly presaged a similar situation during the Vietnam War .
 The call for equipment and personnel to bring units up to strength seriously depleted the Army school system . This high state of readiness was achieved only at substantial cost, both in dollars and in the long-term efficiency of the services .
 The Army never received authority to extend soldier enlistments or recall reservists . McNamara granted such authority to the Navy and Marines on 27 October . Without such mobilization measures, the Continental Army Command cannibalized its schools and support bases .
 In essence, the commanders and staff officers involved ""ate the seed corn"" for the sustained prosecution of the Cold War and for the approaching Vietnam conflict, although the schools eventually recovered .
 Powell argued that the commander of the conventional invasion forces had to control the unconventional troops operating in his area . Powell: "The commander of [the] conventional forces has to control [the unconventional troops] operating in ... his area"
 Admiral Dennison declined, instead retaining JUWTFA directly under CINCLANT control . The UWTFA is now under control of the U.S. Navy .
 He indicated that unconventional warfare elements located in proximity to invasion forces could be subordinated to such forces on a case-by-case basis . He indicated, however, that such elements could be subbed to invasion troops .
 Given the complexity of any airborne or amphibious invasion and the difficulties of special operations teams engaged in the enemy's rear, Dennison's compromise might well have proved unworkable . Given the difficulty of any . airborne or . amphibious . invasion .
 President Kennedy ended the quarantine on 21 November 1962 . Within a week the return of units to their home stations was in full swing .
 The crisis is justly regarded as a classic case of national decisionmaking during diplomatic confrontation . The crisis was justly . regarded as an example of national . decisionmaking .
 Historians and political scientists should not study it in isolation from the military aspects of the crisis . The military aspects were highly visible to the Soviet leadership, and which went far beyond a quarantine of Cuba .
 The American mobilization for the Cuban missile crisis is unfortunately all but forgotten . Since no combat ensued, the American mobilized for the missile crisis has been forgotten .
 It shared many characteristics of previous and subsequent joint operations, it said . The operation was the first of its kind in North America .
 Continental Army Command was caught between Strike Command and Atlantic Command in peacetime . Atlantic Command assumed control to implement contingency plans . Continental Army command was in control of the Continental Army .
 Coordination between the services, especially with regard to base usage in Florida, left much to be desired . Coordination was much to the extent .
 The time lag required to deploy Marine amphibious units by sea when compared with the air deployment of paratroops fueled interservice rivalry . Marine amphibian units are deployed by sea rather than by air .
 The problems of the Army in providing trained manpower for the operation clearly illustrated the importance of reserve components to conducting even limited warfare . Reserve components are key to conducting limited warfare, Army says .
 Those familiar with the joint command structure for the U.S. interventions in the Dominican Republic and in Grenada will instantly recognize the equivalent structure in 1962 .
 Atlantic Command's decision to control the operation from Norfolk, without a joint task force headquarters on the scene, was potentially disastrous . Atlantic Command: The decision was made to take control from Norfolk rather than Washington .
 The absence of a joint land forces headquarters to coordinate Army and Marine elements from the start of the invasion would have posed insoluble difficulties in coordinating airspace management, fire support, and other matters .
 The crisis subsided before the command structure's flaws were revealed in battle . Fortunately, it didn't happen before the battle .