 The U.S. discovered that the Soviet Union had stationed nuclear capable missiles in Cuba in October 1962 . Washington and other major cities within reach of Cuba .
 The United States reacted by implementing a blockade or ‘quarantine’ of Soviet ships from delivering further weapons to Cuba . The blockade was implemented by the U.S. in response to the threat of Soviet weapons .
 U.S. military leaders unanimously urged Kennedy to bomb Cuba . In response, the United States military leaders urged him to bomb the island .
 USS Cony fired depth charges near a Soviet B-59 submarine in an effort to force the soviet submarine to the surface . Soviet naval officer Vasili Arkhipov vetoed the launch of the nuclear torpedo . Later that same evening, in waters near Cuba, the destroyer USS Con
 Captain Vitali Grigorievitch Savitsky wanted to retaliate by launching the nuclear-tipped torpedo warhead that the vessel was carrying . The Russian ship was cut off from communications with Moscow, and under the impression that war had started .
 Russian naval officer Vasili Arkhipov refused to grant his authorization that was required for the nuclear attack . He persuaded the captain to surface and await orders from Moscow . However, the captain was ordered to wait for orders .
 This fact was only revealed in 2002 at a conference to mark the 40th anniversary of the crisis . It was only discovered in 2002 when it was 40 years old .
 Chairman Khrushchev agreed to the removal of Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuban soil . The crisis ended on 28 October after a series of tense negotiations . The Soviet Union agreed to remove the weapons from Cuba .
 President Kennedy agreed to the non-publicised removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey and gave assurances that the United States would not to invade Cuba or assist others in doing so . In return, President Kennedy also agreed to remove United States missiles from Turkey and give assurances that
 In the following months, both parties, alongside the United Kingdom, continued negotiations on banning nuclear testing . The United States and the U.K. continued to discuss the ban .
 While a comprehensive ban on all nuclear tests was on the table, only a partial ban could be achieved owing to pressure from the military establishment on both sides .
 President Kennedy on the prospect of banning nuclear tests in 1963: 'We should seize the chance. If it does represent a possibility of avoiding the kind of collision that we had last fall in Cuba, which was quite close'