 DK has published more than 20 titles, including Battle, Soldier, Flight, and History .
 David K Allison is Associate Director of Curatorial Affairs at the National Museum of American History . Allison is also a director of curatorial affairs at the Smithsonian . He is a member of the SMITHSONIAN Institute of Art .
 He served as the Chair of the Division of Information Technology and Communications from 1995 through 2009 . He was chair of the DCT from 1995 to 2009 .
 His research specialties are military history and information technology . He is also interested in military history .
 Smithsonian Institution is the world’s largest museum and research complex . Established in 1846, the Smithsonian Institution includes 19 museums and galleries and the National Zoological Park .
 Cell phones, computers, and mass air travel are of extraordinary contrasts, of incredible widespread, while the tribes that worked in stone live achievements and tragic disasters .
 Karl Marx observed that modern saw the most rapid progress in medicine, science, welfare, and industrial capitalism contained a remarkable imperative and economic security . The past century was the most violent in history, but it also also saw rapid progress, says Karl Marx .
 Soviet and Chinese emancipation, but one in which many women lived in leaders attempted to prove Marx wrong and establish poverty . Women were forced to follow standards of dress and global communism .
 In the greatest communism represented perhaps half the paradox of all, nuclear weapons were a paradox . The 20th century was the world’s population, with the majority of the world population .
 In 1941, Hitler mounted the the power to wipe out human civilization, but it also bloodiest military campaign of all time to . destroy the Soviet Union . It was also a century of rich discovery of the Soviet .
 In 1900 the most technologically advanced the USA and its allies fought to prevent its communities in Europe and North America spread . In 1900, the most advanced the U.S. fought to stop the spread of its European communities .
 In the end, Marx was proven right. The Soviet bloc collapsed due to economic as well as powered flight . In the future, the world will be using telephones and driving the first cars .
 This book contains a great many images and modern citizenship went hand-in-hand with rising living of violence, discrimination, and coercion that seem to seem to standards . The book contains many images of modern citizenship .
 But before we write off the last hundred freedom to choose a job, what to buy, how years as a disaster, it is important to recall to be educated . The last hundred years of freedom to decide what to do and buy is important .
 Attempts by outside forces to international cooperation to extend political intervene often caused more harm than good . Freedom, broaden economic opportunity, and preserve popular resistance that proved most successful .
 Mandela is a remarkable example in recognizing that, whatever crimes the apartheid regime may have committed, vengeance and hatred would not build a better South Africa . If these lessons are learned, Nelson Mandela stands out as images of the 21st century may tell a brighter story .
 The result was a bitter Pguagempecpecocmmty to '’ ’ the Boer states, and had t lasted for three years . Already gone to war once in 1880-1881 .
 The British used armored trains to transport supplies, and destroyed vast swathes of crops and farms in a bid to starve out the guerrillas . The British also used armored cars to transport food and supplies .
 Scouting started in 1907 . Scouting began in 1903 . Scouting was the first organization to organize in the United States .
 Since | Bcirclarer-lamunearcsnavem-naalovalemnats) inalomvr-Naalcyc1e) 0M aHe mm @auler-yanar-lel ultlanders working . Since .
 He would then “restore” opavahale meals . @intsjam-soMalelenacmne would calm and take control .
 Ladysmith, British Field Marshal Lord Roberts led ~~” the advance into Orange _ Free State .
 Oxen "". trains were used to move armament and supplies across rough terrain . Oxen Oxen were used during the Second World War .
 The celebrated Boer general Piet Cronje surrendered to the British at the Battle of Paardeburg on February 27, 1900 . The celebrated general was captured by the British in 1900 .
 Louis Louis was the first Prime Minister of the Union of south Africa in 1910 . Louis became the first President of the South African Union of South Africa .
 The race to Pein ttt they were bring aviation to the world would turn a seeming slow and cumbersome . It would turn the race to be the world's first aviation revolution .
 The impossibility into everyday life in a few short years. fe eg create a taster taster, more reliable alternative. fe .
 Wilbur and Orville tossed a coin to decide who would make the historic attempt . Orville and Wilbur decided not to toss a coin .
 Orville won and took the controls for the first successful powered flight, lasting 12 seconds . The first powered powered flight lasted 12 seconds.
 Army Lieutenant Thomas Selfridge was killed in the English Channel from Calais to Dover . Army Lieutenant Selfridge died in his passenger's death .
 Orville was competing for a £1,000 prize offered by the London Daily Mail . monoplane, built to Reims, France, and offered large cash prizes . He was flying the FESTIVAL OF FLIGHT A 1909 poster .
 They traveled each summer to the sand dunes of Kitty Hawk in North Carolina to test their designs . The team attempted both unmanned and piloted flights .
 Based on their earlier success with glider designs, the new machine was made of wood and canvas . It was powered by a fuel-injection engine .
 Cast in aluminum, the engine weighed 791b and generated 12 horsepower . Other pioneers were less successful . The engine was cast in aluminum .
 Aerodrome, a powered airplane designed by Samuel Langley, crashed into the Potomac River on takeoff on takeoff in Washington, D.C. The plane was the first powered plane to crash into the river .
 In 1901 I said to my brother Orville that man would not fly for 50 years. In front of a large crowd, I confess that in 1901 I . confessed that in . 1901 I told him that man . would not . fly for . 50 years, he said .
 Secretive by nature, they refused to publish details of their designs while pursuing patents for their machine .
 Aviation had caught the popular imagination and would change transportation forever . It was the first time aviation had been seen in the sky .
 The Wright brothers’ achievements were virtually unknown , in Europe, so the © Aero-Club de France proclaimed the flight a world record . Wright brothers' achievements were nearly unknown in Europe .
 The first powered flight was powered by steam engines in the early 1900s . The first manned flight was the first powered powered flight to take off on a sub-aeroplane .
 Wilbur and Orville Wright made the first sustained heavier-than-air flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, in 1903 . Orville and Wilbur Wright made first sustained sustained heavier than air flight in 1903.
 For years the winged airplane and the airship developed side by side . Experiments with powered lighter-than-air craft, notably promoted by Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin .
 By the end of the first decade of the century, the world was in the grip of a flying craze . It was the first time the world had seen a flying aircraft .
 Crowds flocked to air shows to see intrepid pilots risk their lives in flimsy flying machines . Newspapers offered cash prizes for longdistance air races .
 At first there appeared to be little practical use for aircraft, but this changed during World War I . The aircraft were much in demand for reconnaissance and for bombing the enemy .
 Aircraft began to be mass produced in factories, rather than made by hand in workshops . Tens of thousands of pilots were trained to fly and aircraft began mass production in factories .
 Early aircraft had few instruments in the cockpit and those that did exist were often unreliable . Instruments on the cockpit were difficult to use .
 Louis Blériot became the first man to fly a heavier-than-air machine across the English Channel in July 1909, crossing from Calais to Dover in 37 minutes . The device has airspeed and altitude gauges .
 As flying became part of everyday life, it generated new challenges for science . A whole new frontier of exploration opened up in space in the 1970s .
 Charles Lindbergh, Amelia Earhart, and Amy Johnson blazed the trail for commercial airlines . The first intercontinental flights by individuals such as Charles Lindergh and Amelia Johnson paved the way for commercial aviation .
 Airships looked set to dominate long-distance travel, but proved too slow and too vulnerable to bad weather . Airships provided the first airborne trans-Atlantic passenger services in the 1930s, but they proved too fast and vulnerable .
 Concerns about their safety came to a head when a fireball engulfed the airship Hindenburg in 1937 . The Hindenburg airship was one of the world's most famous airliners .
 Winged aircraft, in contrast, grew bigger, safer, faster, and faster . Winged aircraft grew bigger and safer, and steadily more comfortable. Winged aircraft are still flying today .
 Aircraft began to be constructed out of metal in the 1930s . Zeppelin airship flights between Europe and South America .
 First prototype helicopters had been developed in the 1930s by French pioneer Louis Breguet . The first prototype helicopters were developed by the French aviation pioneer in 1930s .
 Igor Sikorsky launched the first mass-produced helicopter in 1940 . The Sikorski R4 helicopter was launched in 1941 . The helicopter was the first to be built in mass production .
 First jet aircraft entered service during the war, as did the first practical helicopters . First practical helicopters were also entered into service .
 Military aviation continued to set the pace, achieving phenomenal speed and altitude records with jet airplanes in the 1950s .
 Commercial aviation was slower to abandon the propeller, but the arrival of the de Havilland Comet in 1952 marked jet air travel as the way of the future .
 The Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird was revolutionary when it entered service in 1966 . In 1952, the de Havilland Comet became the first commercial jet to take to the skies .
 Though a groundbreaking technical achievement, it suffered a series of high-profile disasters and was overtaken by rival models . The car was the first of its kind to be launched in 1966 .
 Scientists had experimented with rockets since the early part of the century, but it took the military advances of World War II for these ideas to become reality .
 The Soviets took an early lead when Yuri Gagarin became the first human being in space in 1961 . Neil Armstrong was the first man on the Moon in 1969 when he landed on the moon .
 Concorde, a joint French and British enterprise, was the height of luxury in the 1970s . Concorde was one of the first super-fast jets to be built in the 1950s . The Canberra was the first post-World War II military jet .
 By the end of the 20th century, airlines were carrying billions of passengers every year . Airlines were carrying millions of passengers each year .
 From 1981 until its retirement in 2011, the Space Shuttle was the backbone of the U.S. manned space program . Wealthy tourists were able to take part in the historic Space Shuttle flights .
 The modern airplane creates a new geographical dimension... the world is small and the world Is one . The modern airplanes create a new geographic dimension .
 The world's first supersonic passenger aircraft entered service in 1976 . The world’s first jetliner was the Concorde . The plane was the first to enter service in the world of aviation .
 Concorde enabled rapid trans-Atlantic flights but rising costs and fears over safety led to the retirement of the fleet in 2003 .
 A smaller force then continued to push the Russians back toward Mukden, Manchuria’s capital . The Russian-held city is located in the eastern part of the peninsula .
 Liaoyang 26 Aug-2 Sep 1904 mBeijing Jan 1905 . Qing Sea 05/25/1904 . QING Sea 05-25-04 .
 The last major land battle of . wrecked ships still _ the war, fought over a 90-mile visible in the harbor, was fought over 90-miles . The battle was the last major battle of the . war . Russia .
 The battle quickly turned into a rout as Stessel surrendered Port #) the Russians abandoned their weapons and supplies . The Russians abandoned Arthur to the Japanese .
 Russia’s last hope of | victory lay with its Baltic Sea fleet . New Russian fleet .
 Socialist movements inspired by Karl Marx inspired by political theorist Karl Marx were better pay and working conditions, and for the the face of Russian politics, and sow the seeds of future revolution . Committee to represent the workers in disputes. committee . committee to represent workers . committee .
 Nervous authorities ordered troops to prevent the crowd from reaching the palace . The crowd was trying to reach the palace in a bid to get to the palace.
 He persuaded the Czar to sign the October Manifesto granting freedom of the press and . other basic civil rights . Urging concessions, he persuaded the . Czar . to sign a manifesto granting freedom . of the . press and the . right to freedom of press and other civil rights
 Mensheviks and Bolsheviks organized an armed national parliament uprising in Moscow . The October Manifesto was dismissed as a cynical sham by the Russian revolutionaries .
 Bombs were manufactured, and barricades, manned by workers and students, were erected in the streets . The barricades would be manned by students and workers and workers .
 As popular support grew, tens of thousands of workers joined the strike, paralyzing industry ’ in St. Louis .
 Workers’ strikes erupted all across the Lino ass SMe ei eis country . As news of Bloody Sunday killings spread, workers' strikes erupted across the country .
 Universities closed co eae ee tne and Russian army had been down . Students joined defeated by the Japanese the protests . Universities closed .
 Leon Trotsky, a Marxist revolutionary who had been living in exile, secretly returned to Russia and made his way to St. Peter's . Trotsky was a member of the Communist Party in Russia . He had been exiled from Russia .
 Similar sailors would come to their support and flocked soviets were soon to the port . Similar sailors came in support of the Russian sailors .
 As unrest spread, troops fired on established in some crowd and parts of the city were set ablaze . As unrest spreads, troops fire on established forces in some crowds .
 Duma and ¥ to shell the factory retain an absolute veto district of Presnia, the over legislation . Then the confirming his right to army brought in artillery dismissed the Duma .
 The main stronghold of the Czar remained absolute workers, and the ruler, and thousands . were imprisoned or executed . Large areas of Moscow executed for their part were left in ruins in the rebellion .
 St. Petersburg soviet were put on trial and deported to Siberia . They were sent to Siberia, a harsh, isolated region in Russia’s far north .
 It is never less than 40ft deep, and is 300ft wide at its narrowest point . It is the largest submarine in the world and is the world's longest known submarine .
 More ats halomem o'ilhteyamelelo Loman @molOmasniinlovamelle)lomaa) me) rubble was removed in its construction .
 Before it was built, ships traveling between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans were forced to undertake a dangerous diversion around Cape Horn, the southern tip of South America .
 The new route would provide vital trade links to the American West Coast and to the countries of the Pacific .
 Over the next 10 years, the USA. USA . jeXolungalemnc)Alsme)mnaanllnkolatcmelmelo)t-hacmnalKemnalcm@r-harele .
 At 5:13m. on the morning of April 18, 1906, the city of San Francisco was struck by a central Nevada . It remains a vital artery in the world .
 As the tremors subsided, massive earthquake, measuring between the 7.25 and 8.25 on the Richter scale, measured between the wealthy city of San Francisco and the city of Los Angeles . The quake measured 7.5 degrees Fahrenheit on Richter Scale .
 The violent largest on the West Coast and the ninth shock shook the city for 48 seconds, the largest in the USA—lay in ruins . Much was felt from Oregon in the north to Los Angeles, with much of its population homeless and desperate .
 Se 25,000 houses were would be shot on sight if looters looted them, officials said . The government warned that looters would be killed if they tried to take advantage of looting .
 Estimates 250,000 people. of the damage ran to Makeshift tents were more than $200 million . Officials gave the on beaches on beaches .
 It would be number of dead as 375, ae months, in some cases in an effort to prevent years, before panic, before many of panic . The actual the displaced returned figure was probably to their rebuilt homes closer to 3,000 .
 Citizens of i _ San Francisco were awakened in terror by the first tremors . San Francisco earthquake occurred in 1906 .
 The city was both a center of culture and finance, and one of the largest industrial ports on the Pacific coast, with a large working-class and immigrant population . The city is now a major tourist destination .
 Work started immediately on clearing away the future trajectory had | the damage . San Francisco ers ———s . . rose as a new City, but the damage had already been done .
 In 1910 he was approaching 80, and hopes were high that he would retire . In 1910, he would be approaching 80 and hoped to retire .
 President Obama declared victory in a fraudulent election . Instead he ran again for president, declaring victory in an election fraud .
 Madero entered Mexico City in triumph . This time, however, he returned to Mexico City .
 He had promised land reform to his peasant allies, and his failure to deliver led to further unrest . He promised to reform the land but failed to deliver .
 On February 19, 1913 army general Victoriano Huerta overthrew Madero and claimed the Presidency . The Big Four started to fall apart in the aftermath of his defeat .
 Obregon and Carranza came from wealthy backgrounds . They were suspicious of Villa and Zapata, who called for better rights for peasants . Obregon came from a wealthy background .
 Before long violence erupted again, as Obregon defeated Villa’s cavalry at the Battle of Celaya . Obregon and Villa's cavalry fought again in the battle .
 Lawyer Venustiano Carranza and wealthy farmer Alvaro Obregon were also opposed to the regime and raised their own Constitutional Army .
 Villa, Zapata, Carranza, and Obregon—the so-called Big Four—formed an uneasy alliance . Villa, . Zapata and Zapata . Carranzza, . Carrranza and . Obregon, . Villa . Villa. Zapata.
 A diplomatic dispute with Huerta led U.S. President Woodrow — Wilson to impose a ban on arms imports to Mexico . The ban was imposed after a diplomatic dispute led to an arms embargo .
 He campaigned vigorously election, seemed certain and announced his own opposition mounted . But he campaigned vigorously and seemed certain in the election .
 Pancho Villa used everything from train robbery to forced loans to equip his formidable army . In June 1914 he attacked thesia heavily defended city of Zacatecas and inflicted a 7 crushing defeat on Huerta’s forces .
 Huerta resigned and fled the country, and Villa’s fame and popularity spread . Villa's popularity grew and he became a national celebrity .
 General Pershing was sent at the head of an American expeditionary force to capture Villa Villa . Villa was captured by Villa Villa in 1819 .
 Madero escaped from jail and was smuggled across the border to Texas . Madero was smuggled into the U.S. from jail .
 The Mexican people still celebrate Revolution Day on November 20, a day the Mexican people celebrate as Revolution Day .
 Zapata’s rebels continued to fight, defying Carranza's attempts to stamp them out . Zapata's rebels fought back, and Zapata was eventually killed by the government . Carranzza's government tried to stamp out the rebels, but Zapata refused to
 Zapata was finally killed in an ambush on April 10, 1919 . Obregon ousted Carranza a year later, claiming he had betrayed the constitution . Zapata's death was the death of Zapata .
 In need of an army, Madero joined forces with Pancho Villa, a former bandit . Carranza was assassinated while trying to flee the country .
 Emiliano Zapata, a campaigner for peasants’ rights, raised a guerrilla army in the south . They recruited Zapata to raise peasants' rights in the country .
 Together they defeated Diaz, and the President was forced to resign on May 25 . Diaz was the President of Honduras .
 Obregon, who had lost his right arm fighting against Villa, proved a popular leader . Obregon was one of the most popular men in the world after losing his arm fighting Villa .
 His election marked the end of the Mexican Revolution . While violence and instability continued in some areas, his election was seen as the end .
 This ‘Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration’ saw men from around the world battle extreme cold and hostile conditions with only basic equipment . The “Heroic age of Antarctic exploration’s’ ‘Age of Antarctic Explorers’ was ‘The Heroic Age
 By 1910, the geology and meteorology of the continent had been widely explored, but no expedition had made it farther . The Norwegian flag was retrieved from the South 04/03/1911 .
 Two men, British explorer Robert Scott and Norwegian Roald Amundsen, were each determined to break that record and reach the Pole in 1912 . Scott was the only person to break the record, but died in a tragic accident . Scott's death was the first of two men to die
 They left letters for both Scott and the Norwegian king, Haakon VII, before setting out on their successful return journey . The pair set out on the return journey to Norway .
 By January 4, a team of five was left to make the final march to the Pole . The team was left on January 4 to make their way to the pole .
 Many of his men suffered frostbite and exposure . Hampered by their thick woolen clothing, many of their men suffered .
 Norwegian Amundsen was an experienced Polar explorer, who had already achieved fame for his Arctic discoveries . He was also known for his discoveries in the Arctic .
 On October 19, Amundsen and four companions set out with four sleds, each pulled by 13nusky dogs . Each pulled b Vietoarug aon hae tam of 13 nusky dogs.
 Wietory awaits him who has the dogs became exhausted, everything . In order —— luck, they were shot and their meat used for food . The dogs became tired, everything was in order .
 Scott’s journey began on ROALD AMUNDSEN, IN November 1, 1912, but immediately THE SOUTH POLE, 1912 encountered difficulties . Scott's journey started on November 1 .
 Scott relied on mechanical sleds, which quickly failed, and pack ponies, which died within days from cold and exhaustion . Scott and his four companions reached the South Pole only to discover that Amundsen had beaten them by 35 days .
 Exhausted and demoralized, they spent the next two days resting, after which they began the long trek back to their base camp on Ross Island .
 The long, grueling descent of Beardmore Glacier was still to come . But the long, ' grueling' descent of the Beardmore glacier was still yet to come.
 The glacier caused the first casualty of the expedition on February 17, as Edgar Evans died after a fall . Edgar Evans was the first person to die from a fall on the glacier .
 The remaining members of the team struggled on in appalling conditions . The team struggled to cope with the appalling conditions they faced .
 Titus Oates, barely able to walk, voluntarily left the party and walked to his death on March 16 . Robert Scott, Edward Wilson, and Henry Bowers were hit by a blizzard and forced to halt on March 19 .
 Scott carried and died a range of devices to monitor . weather and aid navigation . With no supplies and unable to leave their tent, the three men succumbed to . cold, hunger, and exhaustion, they succumbed to ——_—_- , cold and exhaustion . Scott carried a range
 Seismic changes in farming began with the development of tractors and combine harvesters . Beginning in the developed world, crop yields increased beyond farmers’ wildest dreams .
 Machines took over the work of men and animals at a fraction of the cost and at a much greater speed and scale . Machines took on the job of men, animals and humans at a far greater scale and cost .
 New, industrially produced chemical fertilizers replaced manure and guano, hugely increasing land fertility . Fertilizer fertilizers are now widely used to fertilise land .
 Before 1900, agriculture was small-scale and labor intensive . At the same time, ph-Jeler was a pioneer in the field of agriculture .
 In 1917, Ford Motor Company of Detroit introduced the Fordson, the world’s first mass-produced tractor . improved transportation links and refrigeration and container shipping made it much easier to transport goods to markets over long distances .
 In 1910, German chemist Fritz Haber discovered a way to synthesize ammonia . Large-scale monoculture—in which one crop grows one crop one crop every year, was the focus of the story .
 His work allowed fertilizer to be produced cheaply on an industrial scale . Previously barren land were brought under the plow under the .
 By the end of the century the sudden increase in food production had fueled a global population boom . New equipment and new farming methods spread around the globe .
 Many countries was grown over a vast area— became the dominant system of farming in the developed world . Many countries were grown over vast areas .
 In the USA and Canada, the problems were exacerbated by drought and dust storms . Dust storms tore off fertile topsoil and rendered vast swathes of farmland useless .
 Limits on overseas food supplies during World War II encouraged intensive farming . Intensive monoculture, intensive farming, was a key part of the World War Two strategy .
 Women's Land Armies filled the labor shortage as men fought abroad . Women’s Land . Armies fill the . labor shortage .
 The birth of the gasoline-driven engine spurred industry to mass-produce general purpose tractors . It allowed ordinary farmers to mechanize their work .
 Scientists became increasingly aware of the cost to the natural world . However, while intensive farming practices increased, scientists became aware of its cost .
 Monoculture led to the destruction of traditional farmland and wilderness areas . The destruction of the area was caused by monoculture .
 Experiments with state-run, quota-based farming caused widespread famine in China . Pesticides such as DDT were found to have caused famine in 1960s and 1970s .
 A 100 years of farming has led to unexpected consequences, poisoning birds and mammals . It is the first time the pesticide has been used to kill animals and birds .
 A growing environmental movement called for responsible agriculture . The movement seeks to feed the world without sacrificing animal welfare or natural ecosystems .
 A growing organic movement rejected chemical fertilizers and pesticides to grow more ‘natural’ produce . Highly mechanized farm machinery like this Case IH Magnum series tractor has increased yields and profit .
 By the early 21st century, scientific management of food production had made basic nutrition cheaper and safer than ever before . Millions still lacked sufficient food, but millions still lack sufficient food .
 The challenge became balancing the needs of the hungry with sustainable food production . The challenge is balancing the need for food production with sustainable production . Food production continues to provoke debate .
 The first essential component of social justice is adequate food for all mankind . Social justice is social justice, the author says . Food is an essential component to social justice .
 Genetically modified foods may come to define farming in the 21st century, but concerns remain about their safety . Concerns remain about the safety of genetically modified foods .
 Puyi, seen here with his father Zaifeng and baby brother, was taken to live in the Forbidden City . His father served as his regent .
 They formed a secret society known as the League of Righteous and Harmonious Fists . The League was formed in the 1920s and 1930s .
 They were ge backed by Oing Empress Cixi, who had taken power after usurping her nephew, the reformist Guangxu Emperor . They were backed by her sister-in-law, who was overthrown by her nephew . The Emperor died in the early 1900s
 Cixi NiVEe Foi otole MRO MONAY rage of the Boxers away from imperial family away from the imperial family .
 The international force stormed Beijing, ‘{ force representing the reducing the Oianmen Gate of the Inner City to ruins.’ Alliance army, a large . large large force of the . Alliance army . The . international force . stormed Beijing .
 Cixi escaped from the imperial palace disguised as a peasant . He was sent and fled to the ancient capital of Xi’an to lift the siege .
 Cixi, permitted to ’ remain Empress, began » to make overdue reforms, but the rebellion had permanently weakened the Oing Dynasty . The rebellion was the result of the rebellion .
 Yuan ""% brought about the abdication of Puyi and | was inaugurated as first president of the Republic of China . This marked the end of ~ 4,000 years of imperial imperial jqvllomhale mAatom ohanale)i modern China .
 On one day of violence they smashed shop Windows across London's West End and attacked government buildings . They smashed shop windows across the city and smashed government buildings in London .
 By 1912 women had been campaigning for the vote for more than half a century . But only a few countries had agreed to their demands . Women were campaigning for votes for over 50 years .
 Women’s suffrage movements, angered by the broken promises of male politicians, became increasingly militant . Women's suffrage movement became more militant in the 1930s .
 Canadian social activist Nellie McClung staged a mock women’s parliament in a theater in Winnipeg, Manitoba . By the end of the decade, the movement had spread beyond Western borders .
 It satirized male politicians and their attitudes to women . Debating whether to give men the vote, it satirized their attitude to women.
 Manitoba became the first Canadian province to grant women the vote in 1916 . In 1916 Manitoba was the first province to give women the right to vote .
 Emily Davison died after throwing herself in front of the King’s horse at the Epsom Derby . Suffragette threw herself into the path of the horse at Epsom .
 1914 German poster exhorts women to go out to support women’s right to vote . Women's International Day is celebrated by women around the world .
 In 1921 the Japanese parliament overruled Article 5 of the Police Security Act and granted women the right to attend political meetings . O0G6G/O06/1921 MOVEMENT SPREADS TO JAPAN .
 This led to a surge in the number of women’s groups, who campaigned for the right to vote . Women's groups led to an increase in women's groups campaigning for votes .
 A jeweled pendant in the colors chosen by Emmeline Pankhurst for the suffragettes is purple for dignity, white for purity, and green for hope . The 19th Amendment prohibits any U.S. citizen to be denied the right to vote based on sex .
 36th and deciding U.S. state tilted the balance in favour of women’s suffrage . It was the 36th state that tilted the US state to women's suffrage in 1881 .
 Alice Paul and Lucy led a huge suffrage parade held in Washington, DC on the day before President Woodrow Wilson’s inauguration .
 The suffragettes advocated civil injured . Influenced by the British a suffragette movement, they advocated civil rights . The suffrage movement was influenced by the UK .
 At the outbreak of World War I, she suspended the suffragette campaign and turned her energies to the war effort . not at all in national elections. to publicize their cause. not at least .
 The French . women's suffrage movement was largely middle-class and citybased . The French women's . suffrage . movement was mostly middle-classes and city-based .
 Female suffrage was delayed until 1945 because of deep-rooted conservatism in France’s male . population .
 The world of industry had been revolutionized in the 19th century by the introduction of the factory . Ford’s Factory Revolution revolutionized the world of American social workers .
 Complex products such as machines were still produced in workshops, by teams of mechanics working on a single unit at a time . However, complex products such a machine were still made in workshops .
 Rather than mechanics moving from one unit to the next, the units themselves would move along a track, stopping at each station for workers to perform a specific task . Instead of mechanics moving to one station, the trains would move to another station .
 The rate of manufacture could be greatly increased, and the price of individual units slashed . At a stroke, the rate of production could be increased .
 The Model T was the first car to be widely affordable, not a luxury item . The moving assembly line made his iconic Model T automobile the first vehicle widely affordable .
 Europe at the turn of the 20th century was a complex network of alliances and counter-alliances . The Dreadnought was the world’s first modern a Europe .
 The precarious balance of sums of money on their own power was upset by the assassination of the Austrian Archduke fleet . Austria's financial crisis was the result of the assassination .
 BOSNIAN CRISIS ey $C Jo, 08/10/1913 . The situation in the Balkans was summed up in a French cartoon .
 Emperor Franz-Joseph of Austria-Hungary snatches Bosnia from the Ottoman Sultan, while the King of Bulgaria declares his independence .
 Serbia has already formed an alliance with Russia . The neighboring state of serbia had already formed a alliance with the Russian state .
 Conflict erupted in the Balkans in 1912 when, driven by a wave of Slav nationalism, the Balkan states attacked the Ottoman Empire . The Balkans was the heart of the conflict between the two countries .
 After the conflict ended in 1913, Ottoman prisoners were marched through the streets of the Serbian capital . After the war ended in Serbia, they were marched along the streets .
 This spiked helmet is adorned with an imperial eagle, symbol of the German Empire . Helmet is decorated with a German imperial eagle .
 Germany then declared war on France, invading Belgium to reach the French border . Germany then invaded Belgium and invaded France .
 Italy left the Triple Alliance and the Ottomans joined Germany F and AustriaHungary as the Central Powers . Italy joined the German-AustriaHungary alliance and joined the Ottoman Empire in the 1920s .
 Russia mobilized its troops in defense of Serbia and, on August 1, Germany declared war on Russia . As expected, Russia mobilized troops in response to Serbia .
 Europe was dominated by vast imperial powers, which competed for economic and colonial gain . Britain's Foreign Secretary Edward Grey was assassinated in 1914 .
 Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy were joined in the Triple Alliance . The alliance formed a buffer between Britain and France in the west and Russia in the east .
 With the signing of the AngloRussian Entente in 1907, Britain, France, and Russia made up an opposing alliance, the Triple Entente . The Anglo-French Entente was formed in 1907 .
 Austria-Hungary was k een to gain control of Bosnia-Herzegovina in the Balkans . The Ottoman Empire also laid claim to the region . Smaller, independent states, such as Belgium, sought protection in treaties .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand was visiting the Bosnian capital Sarajevo when he and his wife were shot dead . Heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, Franz Ferdinand, was visiting Bosnia when he was killed . Franz Ferdinand's wife was also shot dead in Saraj
 The killer was Gavrilo Princip, a 19-year-old Bosnian-Serb nationalist . Princip was a Bosnian Serb nationalist who was killed in the Bosnian war .
 With members of the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance involved, the crisis was poised to engulf all of Europe . The crisis was likely to engulf the entire continent, with members of both of Europe involved .
 The Russians mobilized faster than expected and advanced across the German border into East Prussia . TANNENBERG: The Russian forces advanced into the region in less than expected .
 Commanded by General Paul von Hindenburg and » his chief of staff, Erich > ™ Ludendorff, the German army outmaneuvered the ‘a Russians at Tannenberg in . a stunning victory .
 FRENCH GENERAL JOSEPH JOFFRE, SEPTEMBER 5, 1914 . The fight developed into a race to the sea .
 A series of battles were fought closer and closer to the northern coast, ending in a savage encounter at Ypres in western Belgium . The two sides fought to a standstill in the Battle of Ypres, which ended in a bloody battle .
 At Christmas some declared a spontaneous truce, climbing out of the trenches to exchange gifts and play soccer . At Christmas, some children play soccer and exchange gifts .
 The truce quickly ended and the war continued, with no victory in sight for either side . The truce was quickly ended, but no victory was achieved .
 These vast armies were moved to the front with impressive speed and efficiency . The vast armies are moved to frontlines with impressive efficiency .
 During the fight, Gallieni | commandeered taxis and buses to rush reserves from Paris | to the front . During the . fight, the . commandereered . taxis and . buses .
 French troops attacked along France’s border with Germany . British troops were killed in the attack .
 Wearing bright uniforms, they made easy targets for German machine guns and suffered massive casualties . The Germans wore bright uniforms and suffered heavy casualties .
 The British Expeditionary Force crossed the Channel to aid France . It found itself in the path of the German advance through Belgium . The German advance was part of the invasion of Belgium .
 The Germans invaded neutral Belgium, intending to march swiftly on to France . The small Belgian army put up a stiff fight against the Germans .
 At the city of Liege, the Germans had to deploy massive siege guns to batter down fortifications . At the same time, they had to use siege guns at the height of the Second World War II .
 Seiet disorganized the German forces. But the long march exhausted and Seiet managed to defeat the Germans . Seiet's long march disorganized German forces .
 French commander, General Joseph Joffre, prepared a counterattack, committed suicide . The French commander . committed suicide. General Joseph . Jofre, who was in charge of the French . commander, prepared to counterattack . General Jofrey committed suicide in a suicide attack .
 Gallieni’s attack on their flank forced the Germans to reverse direction and withdraw . The Germans abandoned all hope of a quick victory in the West, abandoning all hope .
 Infantry and cavalry units charging over open ground were easy prey for machine guns and artillery . Machine guns, artillery and machine guns could be easy prey to machine guns .
 At the end of the war, new weapons such as tanks and new tactics had evolved to break through defensive lines . Conditions were miserable—the trenches filled with mud, ice, and rats .
 The face of warfare had changed forever, but at the cost of the lives of a generation of young men . It was the first time a generation had been killed in Afghanistan .
 Rumpler Taube was one of the first aircraft to fly in the 1930s . It was a German-built aircraft with swept-back, birdlike wings . The Rumpler's wings were swept back and swept back .
 As the war TPAC ialmoyavmnenloycomsye)e)ahtcincincer-ln-rel ~ Boetosenloy-var-vicereclim-\ice) His-vommvaleal automatic release mechanisms | and
 The effectiveness of bombing was limited by the small weight Beascimeticecctim-imermntent-mereyvilel carry . The »» effectiveness of the bombing was ») limited by a small weight .
 Schoolchildren among those taught how to fly over Thames estuary . Zeppelin L15 was British schoolchildren shot down by anti-aircraft guns .
 In 1917 they were integrated into the United States Army » Air Service . In 1917, the Air Service was integrated in the Army .
 Churchill sought alternative to the stalemate on the Western POT eseilee Front . Churchill was British First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill Constantinople . Churchill led the British troops to Constantinople .
 Landings at Gallipoli on April 25, 1915 proved to be a costly minefield . Instead of an easy victory, eer landings were costly minefields .
 Three military disaster and a brutal initiation for troops from eT taile F Australia and New Zealand . Three military disasters and brutal initiation .
 It was there that troops embarked to be carried to the Gallipoli peninsula . Troops embarked to carry out their mission on the peninsula .
 Hamilton had decided to carry out landings at several places where he believed he believed |» ol ey"" ke 7.7.7 . Hamilton decided to land on landings in several places he believed his mission would be successful . Hamilton was killed in the crash .
 They suffered heavy casualties from Turkish fire during the landings and were then slow to advance inland . The British troops were slow to move inland and suffered heavy losses .
 This gave the Turks time to form an impregnable defensive line across the peninsula to the north of the landing site. be weakest. The Turks were able to hold on to the base of their base .
 At Gallipoli, troops who had most actively often fought at promoted the operation, close quarters, was forced out of the hurling grenades, government. Government. Winston Churchill .
 Troops were trapped in filthy trenches in the heat of summer, suffering heavy losses to disease as well as in combat . Troops suffered heavy losses in the summer, including disease and combat losses .
 Supplies were inadequate, and soldiers made improvised bombs out of empty jam cans . The bombs were improvised bombs made out of jam cans and made from jam cans, soldiers said .
 In August Australian troops won control of Turkish trenches at Lone Pine after heroic fighting . Seven Australians were awarded Victoria Cross medals for their bravery in the battle .
 Many Turkish soldiers were taken prisoner, but the Allies were still unable to achieve a decisive breakthrough . The Allies were able to capture many of the captured Turkish soldiers, but were unable to reach a breakthrough .
 British General of World War I, and al Sir Ian Hamilton was men flocked to volunteer f appointed to command for overseas service . Combined as Anzac ic “me | simultaneous landings (Australian and New. ut # aul at several points. i , a the invasion,
 The Anzac troops were unable to break out of their previous beachhead . They were pinned down with their backs to the sea . The troops were pinned to a beachhead with backs to sea .
 ADMIRAL LORD FISHER, in a LETTER to CHURCHILL, wrote: “Mustafa Kemal. Heading the resolute Turkish defense at Gallipoli was Mustafa . Kemal . Mustafa was a hero for Turkey .
 First day of the Battle of the Somme brought carnage on an unprecedented scale . Carried out without significant losses, the withdrawal was the best executed part of the entire operation .
 Tens of ae sees) o! ate Ior VVar, put OUT a thousands of soldiers, many of them entering combat for the first time, were cut down by machine guns . Mae e a ‘4 they assaulted German trenches.’
 The battle continued for five months at a staggering cost in lives . Haig ordered a massive Pec laniil-yara eloyanley-haenaal-yalmreks .
 More than 2,000 (obhatsmolelunatel-romnatsy §) German line for eight days . More than two,000 people were on the line at the time .
 Hague believed that the German defences would be soldiers at the front . The war in France had Mleiabtaiclorvale mahtcmcrecrecre)leht-yas reached stalemate .
 He to use the new army to punch through the deadlock. was tragically mistaken. He was tragic mistaken. The new army will not be able to be used as a weapon of war .
 Both sides employed JoleyEsfoyalmefmef-komnamAatcyie attempts to breach the enemy fortifications, adding to the terror of life on the Western Front .
 Many lay stranded for days in no man's land, hiding in oJ alo) lm ako) Kotowme).qcvel oyaMAaloMer-ymant-hamel-haelcre| _ wire.com .
 First use of tanks was during the Battle of the casualties . But small territorial gains had come at the cost of half a million .
 The Germans, | JaksXo ms e\olo1aly O)g@)Ro(eincle mageyaal Th eC nati O n Mm U St els . artillery fire by deep dugouts and emerged to man ete ecleste to
 ' They ' mowed down the advancing casualty . They 'mowed down . The advancing casualty | ISts , troops in their thousands. In their thousands .
 At Easter 1916, a minority -__ themselved with of Irish Republicans staged an armed uprising in Dublin . The uprising was a minority of the Irish Republican Party .
 Germany sent a s\V{sre hole to rebels in the sea, but the British intercepted it . The British intercepted the hole .
 The army brought in artillery to shell | the General Post Office in rebel positions that were resistant to infantry assault. flames, the rebels surrendered. The rebels surrendered after a heavy artillery bombardment .
 Fifteen leaders of the uprising, naXeLbKo halo mm acre ac{-mhalo m@xe)avare)Ihya were executed by firing squad after trial .
 Eamon de Valera was the first head of the Irish Free State following the battle . Much of central Ireland was spared from the conflict .
 The outbreak of war in The Protestant Ulster August 1914 averted a Volunteers were joyce (e) ey-e)(-m-haantslo mere yansicoln incorporated directly into the British Army Protestant Irish .
 Men of the 36th Ulster ole. ole) Malmeksvare)aannar-lAleyarcmriicct ac) Division . Men of as the 36st Ulster ollmriar-a-annar . Division .
 Armed rebels i but about 1,600 rebels manned barricades and fortified buildings as British troops were sent in to retake Dublin . British troops sent in as British forces retake Dublin from Dublin .
 The rebels executed after the Easter Rising were remembered as martyrs for the Irish cause, their graves ldalomolo)in-hanalery| ceremonies of commemoration .
 By the time this wreath was laid on Pearse’s grave in June 1922, southern Ireland was on its way to becoming independent .
 Republican Sinn Fein party was able to win most of the southern Irish seats in a UK general election in December 1918 . Most were released in 1916, returning to lead the fongere .
 Lawrence joined Faisal in 1916 that was only partially kept . A promise of independence after the war was made to the Hashemite .
 Arabian Hejaz, Prince Faisal and became his closest ally in was the leader of the revolt. the war against the Turks.
 The brown by Lawrence in guerrilla jacket and black wartare, Faisal’s Arab leather belt were fighters carried out a similar in style to campaign of sabotage German uniforms, and hit-and-run attack . Running between . eee Kalabash hat Damascus and Medina,
 The port allowed the Arabs to receive supplies of money and weapons shipped in from Britishcontrolled Egypt . The port was used to send money and supplies to the Arab population .
 Faisal shifted his headquarters to Aqaba and it became his base of operations for the remainder of the war . The city became his headquarters for the rest of the conflict .
 Turks were defeated in a major battle against British forces at Gaza in November 1917 . Turkish forces were determined to hold on to Palestine and Syria .
 The following year, Faisal set up an independent Arab government in Damascus, proclaiming himself King of Syria . The next year, he set up a government of independent Arab governments in Damascus .
 He provided Prince Faisal with military advice and liaised with the British . He liaised between the Arabs and the British during the Arab Spring .
 After the war, Britain and France took control of large areas of the region, under the mandate of the newly formed League of Nations .
 Faisal attended a peace conference in Paris, hoping to confirm his independent Arab state . He attended the peace conference hoping to secure his independent state .
 British and French split the Middle East between them . Britain took Palestine and Jordan, and France Syria and Lebanon .
 Almost 700,000 men helavecinibad weather a —_ THE FRENCH FIGHT BACK to hold on at all costs . The French government is determined to win the battle for France back .
 The German advance was lost their lives in the battle of attrition that followed . The German offensive opened on February 21, 1944 .
 From March — onward, the French DEFENSES FORTIFIED —, endured repeated repeated France increased its output . Sees attacks. Sees .
 In July the northeast, Fort Vaux, the British launched an offensive f which had survived for at the Somme, and Germany was forced to transfer troops from Verdun .
 The Germans finally taken by German no longer had the strength to troops on June 7. achieve a decisive breakthrough. Germans finally had the . strength to . achieve a . decisive breakthrough .
 In the last stage of the Battle of Verdun, the initiative passed to the French . In the French capital, Verdun became a French colony .
 French troops carried out a series of dogged attacks that regained most of the fm ground they had lost . Commanded by the newly appointed General Robert Nivelle, French troops .
 The Germans hammered French trenches with a massive artillery bombardment, after which German infantry swept unstoppably forward . The Battle of Verdun was the first battle of its kind .
 Petain ~ connected the battlefield to instituted a system of troop rotation, so that usually no soldier was in the rear areas of the battlefield . To maintain morale, Petain created a system to maintain morale .
 French trucks pass on average every 14 seconds in France . One truck passes on average 14 seconds every day .
 Although his attack had caused the French heavy casualties, it had been at a high cost to his own troops . The French had suffered heavy casualties .
 Field Marshal Paul von iy Hindenburg replaced 2, ~ le Falkenhayn and quickly ty leh cancelled all further attempts to take Verdun . The Hindenburg was replaced by 2,~ le Falkenayn and the Falkenhams .
 In addition to those killed, more than 400,000 men were wounded, many hideously injured by poison gas or high explosives .
 The ""| following year, there 4” were widespread i* mutinies in the French army to protest the . unbearable losses . The '4' mutinees were widespread in France in the 1950s .
 French Hotchkiss MLE 1914 machine gun was typical of weapons used by both sides at Verdun . Gas-operated machine guns were used in both sides' battle .
 Its rapid rate of fire caused heavy casualties among troops advancing over open ground . The rapid rate was caused by heavy casualties .
 The czars ruled as wealth remained in the ha of t Pitisecdassun absolute monarchs of the Russian elite . For centuries the czars had ruled as well as the czar .
 Lenin fled the country once again to avoid arrest . The Bolsheviks were blamed for the disturbances and Lenin fled again .
 Kerensky, fearing a coup by the Russian army, allowed them to take up arms . He feared a coup .
 The coup was averted, but the newly formed Red Guard were now a military force . The Red Guard was now a major military force in the country .
 With Lenin fled to Finland, his ally Leon Trotsky Kole) aero) ange ange) meymnn als . Kole' aero' ange, ange' meymn als) socialist movement . With Lenin fleeing to Finland he was able to
 From summer 1918 foreign powers intervened in Russia, supporting the czarist White forces in the Civil War .
 The Ko)q-dle palma cele)esomenlomalnAle could not prevent the eventual defeat of the Whites by the Bolshevik Red Army . The socialist Bolshevik aateyigcvantc)almmars advocated revolution in Russia .
 The Russian jexchd hk haatcyalem o)aelelr-nnaalsremrel Provisional Government to replace the Czar, but Icyahuamerc Hi nannale is short of full socialist revolution .
 November 7 soldiers, sailors, and Red Guards ; loyal to the Petrograd PS MESteyralcies . Petrograd .
 The met in Petrograd, only ensuing civil war resulted in a minority of whom between the Bolshevik and the Bolshevik were Bolsheviks . Civil war ended in 1918, with a majority of the Bolsheviks being Bolsheviks.
 AAV Evan ae sovaloh hale mageyeyeys to Galicia . In 1917 he renewed Russia’s involvement in World AAV . Evan ao s.Ae s.ovaloh .
 The military offensive failed and exhausted soldiers mutinied, forming elected committees, or soviets . exhausted soldiers formed elected committees and soviaries .
 By summer 1918, former Czar Nicholas II sT\Vfckowre lm ©) asfo als) ao lmmnalcc (Bolsheviks) Bolsheviks murdered the Czar and his family .
 On July 16, Ekaterinburg, central Russia, Russia, will celebrate its first anniversary with a concert . The event was held on July 16 .
 The victorious powers redrew the map of Europe at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but failed to establish a durable peace . The victors redrew Europe's map in 1919 .
 Using tanks and aircraft, the Germans broke through the defenses of the German Hindenburg Line . Using tanks, aircraft, as well as improved infantry and artillery tactics, they used improved tactics to break through the lines .
 In a series of incidents, German sailors mutinied, refusing orders to sail on a final death-or-glory mission against the British fleet . Quentin Canal is one of the holes punched in the German defenses .
 The mutiny at the port of Kiel triggered uprisings in cities across the country . Mutiny at Kiel at the end of the 1990s triggered a wave of anti-government protests .
 By the war’s end there were 1. million U.S. combat troops in Europe . By the end of the war, there had been more than 1 million American troops .
 Provoked by German U-boat attacks on American merchant ships, the USA declared war on Germany on April 6, 1917 . USA JOINS the war . U.S. joined the war in 1917 .
 The first troops of the American Expeditionary Force, nicknamed the “doughboys,” were dispatched to France that summer . They did not enter combat until 1918 .
 The signing took place in a railroad car in the Forest of Compiegne in eastern France . The signing was held in a train car .
 Germans massed their forces on the Western Front for a major onslaught, which was their last hope to win the war . Germans were massing their forces in the last hope of winning the war in Germany .
 A major — breakthrough, it drove the Allies back toward Paris but failed to achieve final victory . A major breakthrough, the Allies drove back to Paris but didn't achieve a final victory. A major victory, it was a major breakthrough .
 British and Commonwealth troops launched a series of offensives in Flanders, culminating in the notorious Battle of Passchendaele . The Battle of Flanders was one of the most famous battles of the Great War .
 Fighting in atrocious conditions, with the battlefield a sea of mud, they gained only a few miles of ground at a fearful cost in dead and wounded . The battle was held in a mud-soaked mud and mud-filled battlefield .
 Private Jack Mudd sent a pressed Flanders poppy to his wife before he died at Passchendaele . Private Mudd died in the Battle of the Somnies in November 1918 .
 The Flanders poppy became a symbol of remembrance for those killed in the war . It was used as a symbol for remembrance of those who died in Flanders .
 Most Germans resented the ‘4 terms imposed on their country, especially the demand for reparations payments and the “war guilt” clause blaming the conflict .
 Soldiers on leave took the lead, relieved that | they would not now be sent to die at the front . Soldiers took to the streets to carry out their duties in the UK .
 The war is thought to have cost 10 million lives, and the total of * dead and wounded is estimated at 37 million . The total of the war's casualties is estimated to be at least 10 million .
 Spanish Flu was the most deadly natural disaster of the 20th century . Hundreds more fell ill with Spanish Flu within a week . It was the deadliest natural disaster in history .
 Across the world, vast numbers of troops were returning from the battlefields . The disease spread the disease with terrible swiftness .
 Victims experienced extreme fatigue and fever, as well as a wracking cough that caused bleeding inside the lungs . Victims were left with extreme fatigue, fever and fever . Victims experienced bleeding inside their lungs .
 To families devastated by years of bitter fighting, this new loss of life was heart-rending . Mortality rates were staggering as warshattered economies struggled to cope .
 The movement grew as an ‘noble experiment,’ as it came to be known, was a Mle cessive drinking. huge failure. However, the movement grew . However, it was a . ‘Noble experiment’, as it became known .
 Alcohol remained readily available through new clubs frequented by gangsters and bootleggers . The law was widely violated and alcohol was widely available through clubs .
 Speakeasies, or illegal drinking dens, sprang up in most communities and did a roaring trade . Speakasies were popular in the 1920s and '50s .
 Many were not even that secret, because bribing the police was commonplace . Many of the secret bribing police officers was commonplace, and many were not that secret .
 The speakeasies needed music to play to their patrons, and most of the jazz players of the age found ready employment .
 The nightclub scene exploded, gender roles shifted, and jazz music became intoxicating . a, 64 # substitutes. The club scene exploded and gender roles changed .
 Alcoholism was on the effort to combat the socia advocates was preacher Billy Sunday . Sunday's spicy sermons attracted both support and ridicule .
 As one joint was closed down, another would soon spring up in its place . But corrupt cops often warned speakeasy operators of coming raids, police often warned operators .
 Moe smith relied on plants to enforce the ban on illicit alcohol . Supplies of illicit alcohol came up with the idea of a 'disguised ARM of alcohol'
 Corn whisky and disguises during their ‘bathtub’ gin led to a raids, once posing as tise in alcohol-related man and wife . ‘Bathtub gin’ was a popular gin in the 1970s .
 The authorities record of 4,392 arrests struggled to contain the and 5 million bottles of spread of home brewing, liquor confiscated .
 Alphonse “Scarface Al” Capone of Chicago was the most notorious gangster in the world . Alphonse "Scarface" Capone was known for his role in the World War II .
 The Act prohibited the manufacture, trade, and supply of any drink with an alcohol content greater than 0.0 percent . The Act also banned the manufacture and trade of any alcohol with a higher alcohol content .
 Many flouted the law by carrying illegal liquor flasks, inventing ingenious methods of smuggling booze . The battle for booze had begun .
 The term “bootlegging” referred to the practice of hiding bottles of liquor inside boots . The term was used to refer to hiding liquor bottles of alcohol in boots .
 Women could hide flasks strapped to their legs, hidden under skirts or overcoats . Flasks could be strapped to women's legs or hidden under their skirts .
 People looked for relief and came to resent the ill-advised Prohibition . Prohibition was an attempt to ease the pain of Prohibition, but it was a success . Prohibition has been a success story since Prohibition ended in 1933 .
 Several large cities staged “We Want Beer” marches, pushing for repeal of the law .
 Initially law agents pursued enforcement with zeal, leaving no stone unturned in banishing booze from homes and bars . Prohibition began in 21st century Prohibition Prohibition .
 During Prohibition, hard liquor gained favor because it packed more alcohol into a small quantity of liquid . Hard liquor became popular during Prohibition because of its ability to pack more alcohol in a small volume .
 This set of bottle and shot glasses is cleverly hidden in a kettlebell . Bottle and shot m glasses are hidden in the kettlebell hidden inside a bottle .
 Considered a failed social experiment, it was difficult to enforce and provided gangsters with revenue . Gangsters provided the police with money to buy drugs and carry weapons .
 Franklin D Roosevelt campaigned for the Presidency promising to legalize alcohol . Franklin D. Roosevelt made a promise to legalize the drug trade .
 He was swept into the White House, along with several cases of legal beer . The president was swept in the 2008 presidential election .
 This radical style of painting ignored all previous traditions of perspective by showing the subject from several viewpoints at the same time .
 Marcel Duchamp submitted a porcelain urinal entitled “Fountain” to an exhibition as an example of “ready-made” art . Cubism would inspire many other movements, uh-h felANTI-ART MOVEMENT .
 "It was a Slap in the face of traditional art. formalism. his grandiose behavior. . It was a slap in the . face to traditional art . formalism formalism."
 Their work was seen as revolutionary, but it was only the first in a series of sea changes in the theory and practice of art . Their work is only the beginning of a sea change in the art world .
 By the end of the century, art was no longer restricted to traditional forms, creating startling new modes of expression . Art was not only restricted to forms, but it was also creating startling forms .
 It led the way to the pure abstraction of Kazimir Malevich and Pieter Mondrian, whose works depicted feelings rather than objects .
 Color, they believed, should express the artist’s feelings about a subject, rather than simply describe it . Color should express a subject's feelings, they said .
 Picasso's Cubist works made him one of the most influential artists of the 20th century . Their work had a major influence on the Expressionists in Germany, such as Wassily Kandinsky and Paul Klee .
 Their anti-art, consisting of collages, montages, and kinetic sculptures, would prove highly influential later in the century . Their anti art would be a formative form of modern art .
 Surrealism emerged in the 1920s in parta rejection of Dadaism’s negativity . Surrealist was in part a rejection of the negativity of the Dadaist movement .
 Alberto Giacometti created the elongated bronze figures in the 1950s . They expressed the loneliness and alienation of human experience . The elongated sculptures were created by the surrealist Swiss surrealist in the '50s .
 Art works incorporating animal corpses, excrement, or blood were designed to provoke a visceral reaction from the viewer . Art works incorporated animal corpses and excrements to provoke reaction .
 At the same time, artists such as Francis Bacon and Lucian Freud continued to work in paint and canvas .
 By the end of the 20th century, the notion of art had expanded to include everything from digital experiments to street graffiti .
 Pop Art played with iconic images from mass media, such as film stars and advertisement logos, to blur the boundaries between high art and popular culture . In the late 1950s, a counter movement developed in the form of Pop Art, which played with images from the mass media .
 From the 1960s conceptual art came to the fore . This emotionally intense, anarchic style aimed to capture emotional processes .
 Artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude surrounded 11 islands off Florida with floating pink fabric .
 In 1919, Sinn Fein declared an Irish Republic independent from British rule . However, in the six years it was largely largely dominated by the Irish Republic .
 War 4 dT ” 9 British ili f Th dedi , broke out between the Sea July 1921, and within months, Irishmen would be fighting SeeeeeE 20 their supporters . The civil war that tore Ireland apart was between 1921 and 1921 .
 Sinn Fééin leaders Arthur Caahaninatsm-nakem\/blelaraKeyl htatsm <emnalombansial negotiators. Sinn FÉin leaders .
 Crowds gathered in Dublin as Eamon de Valera, supporters responded with brutality . Crowd gathered as De Valera was assassinated in 1968 .
 Anti-treaty Republicans began to threaten a return to violence . Sinn Féin leader Arthur Griffith signed a truce with the British government .
 Collins was killed by anti-treaty Republican ; forces in an ambush in County Cork . Collins was a member of the Anti-Treaty Party in Ireland .
 Arthur Griffiths had died of a . JoyechhamaX-vaateradat-ler-m [UE1F '. 10 days before. Arthur _ Griffiths . Griffiths died of . a Joyech .echmamaX .X: JoyechmaX-
 Eamon de Valera was arrested, along with Wale) URst-NaXe ome )lime)nalaya anti-treaty campaigners . Wale was arrested along with anti-war campaigners .
 His economic policies led to widespread famine, he had risen to become one of the most powerful . His paranoid political whims saw millions men in the world, the leader of the Soviet Union killed and exiled .
 His rapid rise to power was based on masterful clever manipulation of public opinion . Nonetheless, his rapid rise of power was . based on clever clever manipulation . left him a propaganda and a ruthless will to silence his hero .
 Stalin suppressed the Last Testament and began to gather allies in his quest for power . In the power struggles that followed, Stalin suppressed it and gathered allies .
 His family were killed or imprisoned, and he was eventually assassinated in Mexico City by a Soviet agent . His family and friends were imprisoned or killed, and his family were imprisoned .
 Stalin's revolutionary activities saw him exiled four times to Siberia by the czarist government . 5 million of whom were deported were deported. or Pd 2 than guns .
 Grain grown on collectives went to fill government quotas, leaving none to feed the peasant workforce . Grain grown in collectives was filled with government quotas and left out of food for the peasants .
 Ukraine, the main grain-growing region of the USSR, was hit by a devastating famine that led to millions of deaths . Millions of people died in the famine in the Soviet Union . Productivity declined, and Ukraine was hit hard by the famine .
 Those who failed to reach the required output were publicly criticized and humiliated . Those who did not meet the requirements were publicly humiliated .
 Some victims forced to proclaim their guilt at show trials in Moscow . Some of the victims were forced to do so at Moscow show trials . Others forced to declare their guilt .
 During Lenin's last illness Stalin was a frequent visitor to his country dacha . Stalin visited Lenin's dacha during Lenin's illness . Lenin died at the end of his illness .
 Lenin began to fear Stalin was using his position as General Secretary to build up a personal power base . Lenin feared Stalin was trying to use his position in the party to gain power . Stalin died at the hands of the Bolsheviks in August 1918 .
 He became a hero, and fellow workers were urged to imitate his efforts . He was a hero for his efforts, and became a national hero .
 Those who fell out of favor were not only killed but removed from history . They were removed from memory .
 Nikolai Yezhov was a head of the secret police renowned for his brutal interrogation methods . He was head of Russia's notorious secret police during the Cold War .
 Once the press got wind of the discovery, tourists flocked to the site to catch a glimpse of what had been found .
 With Carnarvon at his side, Carter started to lo)qcr-l.qunange)elelamaanns second door . Carter was greeted by a wave of support from the crowd .
 Carter set up a field laboratory in the empty tomb of Seti II nearby . Carter assembled a formidable team of museum specialists to set up the lab .
 A time capsule of ancient Egyptian art, it contained golden shrines, jewelry, statues, and clothing . The time capsule was a time capsule, containing golden statues, shrines and jewelry .
 This fueled rumors of an old ‘mummy’s curse’ — anyone disturbing a jeatchacle (alecmnovanlemyitce)eilel be punished . The curse is believed to be based on an old curse .
 After seven unproductive years in the Valley of the Kings, Carter’s benefactor Lord Carnarvon was threatening to pull out of the project . After seven years of unproductive work, Carter was forced to leave the country .
 Excavation ) revealed a flight of 16 steps . leading to a walled-up doorway . The discovery of the entrance led to the entrance .
 Carnarvon, accompanied by state officials, opened the sarcophagus of Tutankhamun . State officials also attended the opening ceremony .
 When he finally opened the third coffin, he found the mummy of Tutankhamun, covered with amulets and jewels . The mummy was covered in amules and jewels and covered in jewels .
 The mummy was pried loose, measured, photographed and photographed, then rewrapped and laid to rest in its outer coffin . The mummy is believed to have been buried in a shallow grave in the family home .
 Dominated by Turks, the population also included Arabs, Greeks, Armenians, Kurds, Jews, and other ethnic minorities . The city was dominated by Turks .
 Once powerful empire ruled by an autocratic Sultan, it was in decline . However, this once powerful empire—an Islamic caliphate ruled by a Sultan—was in decline. However, the caliphate was ruled by the Sultan .
 At its head was the Committee of Union and Progress . The Committee was a group of well-educated military officers known as the Young Turks . The Young Turks were well-respected military officers .
 The government ordered the deportation of the entire Armenian population in eastern Anatolia . Following a pro-Russian uprising in the city of Van, the government ordered deportation . The deportation was ordered by the government following an uprising in Van, Van .
 One million people were driven from their homes and up to 800,000 perished in the Holocaust . One million died in the disaster . Up to 800-000 perished .
 Ottomans fought on several fronts, including in the Caucasus, on the Balkan and Eastern Fronts in Europe, at Gallipoli, and in Sinai and Mesopotamia . As the war progressed, the Ottoman fought against Russia in several fronts .
 At peace Mustafa Kemal (on the talks in Paris, the Allies discussed the division of the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire proved harder to defeat than the Allies had expected . The hero of Gallipoli, THE EMPIRE .
 The Middle East would be divided between France and Britain, Greece would have the Aegean coastline, and Armenians their own right, according to an advisor . Armenians were determined to retain an independent Turkish state, the advisor says .
 In May 1919 his forces landed at Samsun on the Black Sea and began organizing national resistance . His forces landed in Samsun, Turkey, in May 1919 . He began organizing a national resistance movement in Turkey .
 Following the Ottoman surrender, a British fleet sailed into Istanbul and state of the Ottoman Empire .
 Parliament at Ankara called upon Turks to occupied the city, dealing a severe blow to Turkish pride . The Turks thought the Turks, they thought, were too much of the Turkish people .
 After striking deep into Anatolia, the invaders were defeated by Kemal’s army and forced to flee to the coast . 74 broken to resist the Allies’ treaty reject the treaty .
 Greeks and Armenians trying to flee were trapped on the waterfront, as Allied ships stood by observing strict neutrality . Allied ships observed strict neutrality in the area .
 The revolt, led by two Young Turk officers, Enver Pasha and Niyazi a, Bey, began when an army and replaced by his regiment stationed in brother Mehmet V Macedonia rebelled . The Young Turks fled to the hills .
 Niyazi CUP took charge of the aoe ae rx a Bey headed a march to empire and introduced — — a Istanbul to demand fundamental changes . The people of the Balkans constitutional change. to reduce the power saw the rebellion as their chance for Protests spread and
 The war in the Middle East ended four days later with the signing of an armistice at Mudros . The end of the conflict in the Mideast was reached by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Albanians lost almost all of their Balkan territory . Their empire was in ruins . employing irregular troops such as these Albanians, but lost most of their territory .
 MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATURK, in an order to the TURKISH ARMY, AUGUST 26, 1921 . i 07/24/1923 |"", TURKS CELEBRATE “as The unexpected ferocity of the Turkish
 The Treaty of Lausanne established the frontiers of the modern Turkish state . Mustafa Kemal outlawed the traditional Ottoman fez as part of his modernizing reforms . The treaty established the Turkish republic with Kemal as president .
 He introduced Latin script and traveled the country teaching the new alphabet . Latin script was introduced in Latin America in 17th century .
 The victorious Allied powers demanded reparations in cash and material, and Germany was also burdened with a vast war debt . Germany was forced to pay millions in war reparations .
 International confidence in the German currency, the mark, collapsed in 1922, causing runaway hyperinflation . The collapse of the mark in 1922 caused runaway inflation in Germany .
 Banknotes became worthless just weeks after they were printed, good only for notepaper, kindling, or children’s kites . Banknotes were printed in 1953, but are now worthless .
 The government paid off its debt with worthless notes, and in late 1923 a new currency was launched . The new currency launched in 1923 .
 Germans who had bank accounts or cash assets were ruined, but production and employment soon reached new heights . Germans who lost bank accounts and cash assets soon began to find employment .
 The iz rereyaXoyentlom-hatomm olehinter-VmnunaaateylmAatclmmce)ilennii-vel would provide a platform for the rise of Hitler .
 Frustrated workers organized regular protest marches, in London and other major cities . Workers organized regular marches in London, London and London .
 This led to a decade of severe economic depression, which was felt across the world . It led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1980s . The collapse of Soviet-era Soviet Union was the result of a collapse of communism .
 People lost their jobs and savings, which culminated in a housing crisis . Many could no longer afford their mortgages . The housing crisis was triggered by the collapse of the economy .
 Successive years of drought exposed the light soils of the region to , damaging wind erosion . The light soils were exposed to the region's light soils . The region has been hit hard by wind erosion and drought .
 The storms removed large amounts of fertile topsoil and buried fields and houses in a sea of dust . Large shantytowns emerged across the USA to house the homeless .
 They were mockingly named ‘Hoovervilles’ after President Hoover, who was widely blamed for his failure to solve the crisis . They were mockedingly named after Hoover, and were named after him .
 He later introduced informal radio chats + to build his rapport *, with the nation . Later introduced informal conversations to build rapport with the public .
 Thousands of farmers migrated from the devastation of the dust bowl to find seasonal work in California . The dust bowl devastated California in the 1930s and '60s .
 The Depression ended earlier in some parts of the world than others than others . Whole families traveled the roads, carrying only what possessions they could fit into their cars .
 Entry into World War II following Pearl Harbor turned around the U.S. economy . Industry expanded rapidly to supply the war effort .
 Factories supplying vehicles and munitions created thousands of jobs across the world . Factories supplied vehicles and . munitions created . thousands of . jobs across . industrialized world .
 Peo Condi NOneGn Daan's policy of nonviolent resistance attracted millions of followers . He was a hero not just to the Indian indigo plantations, but to civil rights campaigners across the world .
 Gandhi's act of defiance encouraged thousands of others to break the law . Utes Utes CSIC (CCC MTSPEA ei ILLL™)
 Women joined the protests by boiling bowls of seawater on the streets to make illicit salt . Women joined in the protests with the use of illicit salt in the streets .
 A number of protests took place outside the headquarters of the Indian National Congress . The party was at the forefront of the independence movement in India .
 As he set out on another salt march, Gandhi was arrested and imprisoned . Gandhi was imprisoned for his actions .
 News of his arrest sparked protests, and a long procession made its way through the streets in Bombay to demonstrate against the British rulers .
 The mass renewal of satyagraha led to the arrests of tens of thousands of his followers . Tens of thousands were arrested in the wake of the movement .
 GANDHI RESISTS BRITISH RULE BOYCOTTING IMPORTED TEXTILES . Cheap imports were destroying traditional Indian industries, he says .
 Gandhi set a pile of foreign cloth on fire in a bid to emphasize the idea of self-reliance . Gandhi set the fire in an attempt to emphasize self-independence .
 This symbolic protest against imports was widely imitated by his followers . His followers were widely imitating the protest against imported goods .
 Gandhi modeled his life on ascetic principles, owning very few possessions . Gandhi was a man of few possessions, living in a very modest lifestyle .
 His white robe, simple sandals, and round glasses became icons of the Indian independence struggle . His white robes, sandals and white sandals were icons of Indian independence .
 The Government of India | Act granted Indian provinces the right to run their own affairs . The Act was passed in 1996 .
 The largely Hindu INC dominated the | first elections in 1937, leaving Muslim groups | fearful of being sidelined . Muslim groups are now more likely to be sidelined .
 Gandhi, who had left the INC, pleaded with Muslim and Congress leaders to reconcile their differences . Gandhi's efforts to reconcile his differences with the Muslim community have never been successful .
 The tournament was a rousing success, with 18 matches played in 18 days . 18 matches were played in an 18-day period of competition .
 An estimated 93,000 people crammed into the stands to watch the Uruguay vs. Argentina match . Uruguay take on Argentina at the World Cup in Sao Paulo, Brazil .
 Uruguayan captain inspired hosts to fight back from 2-1 down at half time to win . Visitors had the better first half of the game, leading 2—1 at half-time . Uruguay captain gave a rousing speech from the Uruguay captain .
 A last-minute goal from one-armed striker Hector Castro brought Uruguay a 4—2 victory over Argentina . Uruguay defeated Argentina 4-2 in their first World Cup match since 1966 .
 The World Cup was firmly established as one of the world's most popular sporting events . The tournament was held in Brazil in 2002 and 2004 .
 An inspired speaker relate maida) el-1e-1 Ke) mm al-Mae-lal-yce)anal-ve idaliom-yaatc lim eylana lal com .
 At the time, they were a small party, attracting less than 3 percent of the vote in national elections . At the same time, the party was a small enough party to make it a national party .
 Mass unemployment, feoyandeynalcremyiainalmelalcyag | effective campaign to stir up popular fear of communism, rapidly increased their following . Mass unemployment and mass unemployment were key factors in their success .
 WAViaterere\Wievmerclamexe)ile (t-te the street will one day conquer the state. W-A-Wieviatere . W-AEA-AEAE-AE-Ae-AE . The street will soon conquer the
 The SA, led by Ernst Rohm, were loathed by the German army, who regarded them as rivals . The SA were loathe by the army, and regarded as rivals to the Nazi Party .
 Hitler, by then one of Germany’s most joke) eel than ele)hinteir-harce, ran against him . Hitler was by then a member of Germany's most joke-filled parliament .
 Despite a spectacular campaign organized by his jeyqejercler-never-melantcyi Joseph Goebbels, Hitler was defeated . Despite a . spectacular campaign that was organized by . his jyqejel, never-ever-elimantryi
 Arrested after the Munich putsch, Hitler was tried for treason . Arrested in 1924, Hitler spent the rest of his life in prison .
 He exploited his trial to make widely reported speeches, publicizing his political ideas . He exploited the trial to publicize his ideas .
 Found guilty, he was sentenced to five years in prison, of which he served less than nine months . Found guilty of attempted murder, he served just nine months in prison .
 In February 1933, a fire broke out in the Reichstag—the German parliament . Mein Kampf . me r r r me r i STREET-FIGHTING in Berlin .
 Hitler used this as a pretext for assuming exceptional emergency powers, Hitler used it as pretext for taking over the situation . Hitler used the situation as pretexts for assuming extraordinary powers . Hitler's use of this pretext was used as pretext to take over the Holocaust .
 In WW Rehdol an atc eyoh@atchaalcyane in effect voted its own abolition, and by the summer the Nazis were inalomovalhvaslcverlm ele)ninterey| party in Germany .
 By 1930, the Nazis had a presence in the German parliament . Hitler was a member of the Nazi Party . He became a German parliamentarian .
 Following a backstairs political deal, i hincyam olocer-hankomalcr\el anat-hamerey-Hulnceyel government in January placed followers in key positions of power .
 Hitler despised democracy and believed in the triumph of force . His Nazi paramilitaries, the Stormtroopers, intimidated opponents . Hitler took part in elections, he despised democracy .
 The officers of the German army swore a solemn oath to serve him with unconditional loyalty . The officers swore to serve the German president with "uncondconditional loyalty"
 Japan sought Nanking shanghal OOEAN . The Japanese pushed China into bloody civil strife, and into the larger conflict of World War I .
 Chinese who were caught fighting for the wrong side could expect no mercy . The Kuomintang won control of the country, and Chinese who fought for the right side expected no mercy.
 They were responding to alleged Chinese attacks on Japaneseoa controlled areas of the city . They were j responding to allegations of attacks on Chinese territory .
 A peace deal brokered in March allowed Japanese troops to remain in the city . The peace deal was reached in March .
 Kuomintang moe forces massacred communist activists in Shanghai and brutally suppressed a communist uprising in Canton . The Communist Party of China was massacred in Shanghai in the 1930s .
 The communists took refuge in remote rural areas in rural areas of Russia .
 Meanwhile, Chiang Kai-shek continued to campaign against the communists . The war was the first of its kind in China .
 In fall 1934 communist forces in Jiangxi province, led by Mao Zedong, embarked on a Long March northward to evade capture . The Long March was part of the Long March to avoid capture in fall 1934 .
 This stamp honors the Long March as a heroic achievement . The Long March was a heroic effort to carry out the Great Depression .
 Japanese forces captured the Kuomintang capital, | Nanjing, in December 1937 . Nanjing was captured by Japanese forces in 1937 .
 In 1919 Chinese students protested the transfer of the Shandong province in China to Japan, following World War I . This caused an upsurge of political radicalism known as the May Fourth Movement .
 In September 1931, falsely Mukden, Japanese troops invaded and occupied Manchuria . Japan controlled a railroad in the Chinese .
 Japan turned the province into the state of Manchukuo, and installed f Puyi as its puppet ruler . The province was turned into a state of the state, and the puppet ruler of the puppet state .
 From here the Japanese sought control of the whole of northern China . 4 fi. 4 fi . From here, the Japanese would seek to take over the entire northern China.
 Kuomintang and the communists suspended their civil war to fight the invaders from bases deep in the Chinese interior . Chiang Kai-shek's Northern Expedition won control of Beijing .
 The slaughter of civilians is appalling... rape and brutality... beyond belief. The slaughter is appalling. Rape and brutality is beyond belief .
 A full-scale war started ™ between China and | Japan in 1937 . U.S. was involved in the conflict .
 Clashes near Beijing in July, and sustained fighting broke out in Shanghai, and Japanese aircraft bombed the city . After that, Japanese planes bombed Shanghai .
 Kuomintang troops fought street by | street until Japanese invasion force, landed by sea, threatened them with encirclement . Japanese invasion forces fought street-by-street battles until invasion force landed .
 Chiang Kai-shek was recognized as one of the Allied leaders when the USA went to war with Japan in December 1941 .
 At the turn of the century, the predominant architectural style was Art Nouveau, which took its inspiration from nature . Changing societies demanded new types of buildings, such as apartment and office buildings, cinemas .
 It is characterized by plantlike curves and ornamentation in glass and iron . It was characterized by . plantlike . curves .
 Antoni Gaudi’s townhouse does not contain a single straight line . Buildings ranged in style from the organic forms pk-) [elCASA MILA]
 The undulating balconies look like a series of waves from Antoni Gaudi's villas in Barcelona to Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s towerlike Glasgow School of Art .
 Modern industrial techniques were used to bring art and beauty to the urban environment, with decoration given a new importance . Modern industrial . techniques were . used to . bring art to . urban environments .
 Prominent modernist architects included Frank Lloyd Wright, Mies van der Rohe, and Walter Gropius . Mies was the architect of the World War II era .
 At the same time, new building materials allowed innovative architectural styles . New materials allowed new buildings to be built in a new way .
 By the 1950s, modernism was the prevailing style, but the last two decades of the century saw startling innovations . Modernist style was the dominant style of the decade .
 Modernist buildings were typically flat-roofed, supported on metal or concrete pillars, with horizontal rows of windows . Modernist architecture was designed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Frank Lloyd Wright’s modernist masterpiece of 1934 embodied his belief that architecture should be in harmony with nature . An eclectic blend of influences, from Cubism to 1930s FALLINGWATER . Wright's belief that nature should be harmonious with nature.
 Construction workers can be seen poised high above the streets of Manhattan .
 Ancient Egypt, it embodied the aspirations of the machine age, combining glamour with functionality . Ancient Egypt was the birthplace of modern technology .
 Many architects adopted the brutalist style of French modernist Le Corbusier, characterized by walls and staircases of gray poured concrete . Many architects adopt the brutalism style of Le Corbuier .
 Oscar Niemeyer was given the opportunity to design an entire capital city --Brasilia . The Brazilian capital city was designed by Oscar Niemeyer .
 By the 1960s, functional steel and glass corporate skyscrapers had come to dominate the skylines of downtown business centers around the globe . From Toronto to Hong Kong, they have dominated the skyline .
 Buildings were turned inside-out, with the inner structure and service systems placed on the outside . The inner structure was turned inside out of the building, and the inner service systems were placed outside .
 Le Corbusier proposed high-rise residential blocks in his Unite d’Habitation in Marseilles were the architecture of the future . Jorn Utzon’s iconic Sydney Opera House mimic the shape of sails on Sydney Harbor .
 In the 1980s, an influential group of American architects abandoned the modernist concept of functionalism, bringing decoration and individuality back into the built environment . The 1980s was the first time a modernist group of architects abandoned functionalism .
 The Sun Dial building in Dezhou, China, is the world’s largest solar-powered building . It is the largest building in the world, powered by solar energy .
 In the 21st century, architecture seems to defy gravity, with soaring curves and fragilelooking structures that dominate futuristic skylines . In the 20th century, architects seem to be taking a break from gravity .
 Hose are the things that men need just as much as they need bread or a place to sleep . Space and light and order are essential to men, says the author .
 The water pipes, elevators, and electrical conduits are on the outside of Richard Rogers’ high-tech building in London . Richard Rogers built the building in the 1970s and 1980s .
 At 1,483 ft , this building in Malaysia was the world’s tallest from | 1998 to 2004 . At 1.483 ft, it was Malaysia's tallest building from 1998-2004 .
 Benito Mussolini formed the Fascist movement in Italy after World War I . Muscled his way to power, he embarked on a quest for military glory and empire .
 In 1935-1936 his forces conquered the independent African state of Ethiopia, driving out that country’s ruler, Haile Selassie . In 1936 he drove out the ruler of the independent Ethiopian state, driving him out .
 Ethiopia was the only fully independent African country at the time . Ras Tafari was crowned emperor in Ethiopia .
 He adopted the name Haile Selassie and embarked on political reforms . He gave Ethiopia its first written constitution . He was Ethiopia's first prime minister .
 Most were tribal warriors, carrying spears and shields, yet they successfully resisted the Italian advance . Most of the tribesmen were carrying spears, shields, and carrying shields .
 Mussolini sent thousands of troops and aircraft to Eritrea and Somaliland in East Africa . Thousands of troops were sent to the region to prepare for the attack .
 These colonies shared borders with Ethiopia, and provided a military base for the Italian invasion . The colonies were established in Ethiopia .
 Italy ruled Ethiopia until 1941, when British troops defeated the ltalians in East Africa . Haile Selassie was returned to his throne by British troops in 1941 .
 Threatened by the rise of the Nazis, Britain and France were eager to preserve good relations with Italy . Se Ye STRESA FRONT .
 At Stresa in Italy, British and French leaders made a pact with Mussolini to oppose Nazi ambitions in Europe . The pact was made at Stresa at the end of World War II .
 Mussolini assumed that in return they would accept his takeover of Ethiopia . The Italian dictator assumed that he would accept the takeover . He did not .
 In early 1936, under a new commander, Marshal Pietro Badoglio, the Italians imposed a series of defeats upon the Ethiopians . The Italians were able to defeat the Ethiopianians .
 By May, the Italian forces had captured the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa . The Italian forces captured the city in May .
 Haile Selassie addressed the League of Nations in an emotional plea for help . Mussolini celebrated his victory in Rome . Haile went into exile .
 The League responded to the Italian invasion with economic sanctions that had little impact . The League was formed to preserve peace by collective action against aggression .
 The Italian victory depended on superior weaponry, including chemical agents . The Italian government was defeated by the Soviet Union .
 Poison gas was dropped from aircraft, inflicting terrible injuries on unprepared Ethiopians . The Ethiopians suffered terrible injuries from the gas .
 The brutality of the war helped turn public opinion in Britain and France against the Italian leader . Public opinion in France and Britain turned public opinion against Italy's leader .
 Mussolini appointed Mussolini the prime minister of Italy . King Victor Emmanuel appointed him as prime minister . Mussolini was the first Italian prime minister to be elected to power .
 He wanted to make Italy “great, respected, and feared,” and declared his goal to build an empire in Africa and around the Mediterranean . Italian opinion forced the British and French governments to oppose Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia .
 Mussolini abandoned the Stresa Front and sought an alliance with Nazi Germany . Offended, Mussolini sought to join the Nazi Party . Mussolini was forced to abandon the front and join the Nazis .
 Military forces made slow progress across mountainous terrain with few usable roads . lt is international morality that is at stake .
 Hitler used these mass rallies to strengthen Jahtsmhaatcle Meme -)mnst-Hehvamelciiciciclaronnelemants people from an international conspiracy of Jews and »* communists . Hitler used this mass rally to strengthen his regime .
 The Fihrer could be an inspired public speaker, and his frenzied rhetoric whipped his supporters into fury against the enemies of the Reich . He could be a public speaker .
 The rallies were used as the basis of propaganda films to spread Hitler’s message as widely as possible . Hitler's rallies were also the basis for propaganda films .
 Edward VIII ascended the British throne in 1930-1939 . He seemed to have everything—good looks, an easy charm, and popularity . Edward VIII died in 1939 .
 The nation eagerly awaited news of his marriage, but his love affair with a divorced woman plunged Britain and its empire into a constitutional crisis, which ended in his abdication . The affair with the divorced woman led to a crisis in Britain .
 While visiting South Wales, he assured a group of unemployed miners, “I am going to help you.” He told them he would help them .
 Both the Church and the Prime Minister opposed the King’s affair . Both the church and the PM opposed the affair .
 The Archbishop of Canterbury made it clear that as Supreme Head of the Church of England, Edward could not marry a divorced woman . Edward was made clear that he would not be allowed to marry a divorcee .
 Mr. Simpson would marry her against the advice of his ministers, who would immediately resign; or abdicate; or . resign . Simpson; . resign; . marry her; . . resign, resign, or abandicate . Simpson . Simpson. Simpson .
 George V's reign was known for its moral conservatism . Thousands attended the Sees funeral procession of mm George V .
 Wallis Simpson, a twice-married American socialite, had begun a few years before . Wallis had been married to three times before .
 Couple F were snapped together on a holiday in the Mediterranean in the summer .
 The pictures were splashed across the U.S. and European press but kept out of the British newspapers .
 The papers printed daily accounts of the frenzied discussions and juicy titbits . The newspapers printed daily reports of the events .
 Facing mounting pressure, Edward was forced to make a decision . signing the Instrument of Abdication, Edward announced to the nation his decision to step down . Edward announced his resignation in a televised broadcast .
 It was the first time in history that a British monarch had voluntarily given up the throne . The Queen gave up her throne voluntarily in 2011 .
 "Shy, diffident, and loyal to his brother, he was hampered by a stammer," he said . "A’s a”
 After his coronation, he greeted the crowd from the balcony of Buckingham Palace with his mother, his wife, and his daughters . The future Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret were the future Queen of England .
 Edward was made Duke of Windsor on his abdication, Edward went into exile . Edward married Wallis Wallis in 1936 . Edward's marriage to Wallis ended in 1918 .
 He and Wallis Wallis were married at the Chateau de Candé in France in June 1937 .
 This emerald, ruby, and diamond brooch was commissioned by the Duke for the couple’s 20th wedding anniversary . The Duke commissioned the brooch to celebrate their 20th anniversary .
 Right-wing Nationalist army generals launched a military uprising in response to the uprising . The uprising was a military coup by the Nationalist Nationalists .
 They were resisted by left-wing Republican groups and Catalan and Basque nationalists . They set the scene for a bloody civil war that would scar Spain for decades . The Spanish civil war was fought between Spain's Republican and Catalan nationalists .
 The Italian air force and the German Condor Legion provided vital air support to the Nationalists . The Italian and German air force were the main sources of air support .
 The Republican airforce was inferior, giving the Nationalists control of the skies . Nationalists took over the air force from the Republican air force .
 Political discord between democrats, communists, Er-valor-hathat-hat-WcelantsiR-warve)uite| ee) alMuALUK>mnomar-haahe <-annale) Republican war effort over coming years .
 Republicans were defeated at the battle of Teruel . Nationalists mounted a coup in 1936 to take control of areas of Spain .
 Franco was a career army officer who, like many of his colleagues, believed rebellion against the Republican government was justified as the only alternative to a left-wing revolution . Franco believed rebellion was justified against Republican government as only alternative .
 Spanish anarchists and socialists launched failed left-wing revolts in the 1930s and 1940s . Spanish anarchists, socialists and socialists attempted to take over the Spanish state .
 Anti-Catholic revolutionary ideas frightened sl eens conservatives . Their anti-Catholics ideas frightened conservatives . They were inspired by their anti-Catholic ideas .
 Both press, and the Nationalists were quick to exploit the propaganda of this unlikely victory .
 Franco's troops fought G R] their way into the a the aiternoon of April 26, 1937 outskirts of Madrid . Franco's forces fought G . R]. Franco's soldiers fought G. R] Their way into . the a .the a iternoon .
 The town was crowded for market International Brigades, day and the population to aid the Republic. had no defense or defense . Repulsed after houseshelter. had . no defense and had no . defense or qr .
 The destruction Roms alolursiomalesaianale man ane) and heavy loss of life iNFelatoyarcletsincmetcyrclelitcyalciemmn SOOcKed the world. a siege of the city that lasted until 1939
 The broken Republicans gave up the fight and the Nationalists staged military parades . Franco took power as dictator, remaining ruler until his death » in 1975 .
 The Hindenburg was the largest airship ever built, and held aloft by 7. million cubic ft carry 72 passengers across the Atlantic in conditions of luxury .
 On May 6, 1937, while attempting a routine docking procedure at the Lakehurst Air Station in New Jersey, the plane burst into flames .
 Thirty-five of the 97 people on board were killed, along with one member of the ground crew . Thirty-seven people were killed in the crash .
 The tragedy was recorded by cameras, newsreel, and a live eyewitness . It was one of the most famous disasters of the broadcast age .
 In April 1939 Britain and France pledged to go to war in defense of Poland, if it was attacked . In April, for the first time in its history, Britain introduced conscription .
 The British and French explored the possibility of an alliance with the Soviet Union . Despite their dislike of Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, the French and British considered a possible alliance with him .
 On August 23, the Soviets signed a surprise pact with Nazi Germany, secretly agreeing to divide Poland between them . The pact was a secret pact between the Soviets and the Germans .
 JarcKomephiccleMmAalowaWlitcys control over major centers ° of German industry in the Rhineland . The Treaty of Versailles gave control of the Rhine .
 Hitler was returning to supply his war machine . Hitler was oKsKcyaaannalclo mney iVahemnarcyany back to supply him .
 He was keen to bring Austria and Czech-controlled Sudetenland into his Reich . He was also keen to include Austria and the Czech-occupied Sudetensland .
 On September 1, 1939 German forces launched a full-scale invasion of Poland . German forces invaded Poland on September 1 .
 Britain and France declared war on Germany on September 3, 1939, seeing no alternative, they declared war . France and Britain made frantic preparations to support the Poles . Poland was the last Polish nation to leave Germany .
 The Germans occupied Denmark in a lightning campaign lasting six hours . The Dutch were forced to surrender and the port city of Rotterdam was devastated by German bombers SS .
 Hitler’s ambitious expansion plan began with a swift invasion of Scandinavia . British and French forces were sent to help the Norwegians . Hitler's ambitious expansion plans began with the invasion .
 While the Belgian army surrendered, the British and French fell back to the port of Dunkirk in northern France . The British, French and Belgian armies surrendered .
 The operation was carried out by Royal Navy warships, aided by a flotilla of civilian vessels . It was under constant air attack under almost constant attack .
 About 200,000 people were active in the French resistance . In July 1940 Britain set up the Special Operations Executive to promote espionage . The Special Forces Executive was set up in 1940 .
 They provided military intelligence to the Allies, aided the escape of prisoners of wal, and carried out guerrilla warfare . They helped the Allies with military intelligence and helped prisoners escape from prison .
 While the Vichy regime collaborated with the sabotage, and subversion in German-occupied countries . While the French regime collaborated, it also collaborated in the subversion of Germany .
 Bombers speed and OUr brutal ity. provided close air support ADOLF HITLER, 1939 for advancing tanks, disrupted communications by destroying roads and bridges .
 This combination caused maximum destruction when dropped on urban areas . This combination of bombs was used to target urban areas in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Many Londoners throughout the Blitz sought safety by sleeping by visiting bombed-out in Underground subway areas after raids . Many of the Blitzers slept in bombed out underground areas .
 The stations, as well as in -) warm reception given specially built shelters . The stations were given special shelters .
 Every man, woman, and Prime Minister Winston child had to be prepared to seek cover when the was a Sign of popular warning sirens sounded .
 The Houses of Parliament were wrecked, stations put out of action, and 3,000 people killed or injured . The Houses were wrecked .
 The Blitz Blitz Blitz was the last major raid of the Blitz . It was the first major raid to take place in the Blitz Blitz .
 In August and September 1940, the Luftwaffe sought to drive the RAF ' from the skies ‘in the shortest possible time’ as a prelude to a land invasion of Britain .
 RAF shot down more aircraft than it shot down than it lost in the aerial war of attrition . RAF shot more than any other RAF aircraft .
 Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many io so few . Never in human ie conflict was as much owed to so many as so few. Never in history of conflict was more than a million people owed so much .
 This World War II version of the card game Happy Families was adapted to reflect life during the Blitz .
 Traveling faster than the speed of sound, these missiles struck without warning . The missiles hit without warning, striking without warning.
 Both Britain and the Soviet Union received essential food, fuel, and war material by sea, and trade U-BOAT BASE in France .
 Submarine commander Admiral Karl Donitz established his headquarters at Lorient in Brittany . Donitz was the first submarine commander to establish his headquarters there .
 German U-boats inflicted heavy losses in 1940 and 1941, sinking more than 1,000 ships . U.S. U-boat sank more than a million ships during the Second World War .
 British and Canadian vessels struck back, locating U-boats with sonar and attacking them with depth charges . U-Boats were attacked by British vessels using depth charges and sonar .
 Convoys could sail no Germans could successfully disrupt faster than their slowest ship, and there was a Shortage of both escort vessels and trained crew at all costs .
 Depth charges were used to attack German U-boats . Depth charges dropped into the sea were dropped by depth charges . The U-boat was the first to use depth charges in World War II .
 As German submarines took their toll on imported supplies, the British people suffered shortages of essential goods . The British people were forced to rely on German submarines .
 Gasoline was not available for private driving and food sales were Strictly controlled using ration coupons to ensure that no one was undernourished . Gasoline wasn't available for . private driving .
 The enemy Knows all OUr secrets America's entry into and we know none of his . the war, losses of merchant ships increased sharply . U-BOAT ATTACKs on | INCREASE after the enemy .
 U.S. shipyards mass-producing 20 cargo ships a week to replace the vessels lost . United States shipyards were mass-produced 20 new cargo ships in a week .
 The German battleship Admiral Graf Spee preyed on merchant ships in the South Atlantic . The battleship was sunk by the sinking of its battleship .
 After clashing with British warships at the Battle of the Plate River, it was forced into port at Montevideo, Uruguay . The ship was forced back into port after the battle .
 First attempt to intercept Germany’s prized battleship Bismarck ended in disaster when HMS Hood was sunk . HMS Hood is the first time the British Royal Navy has sunk a battleship in a battle with Germany's capital .
 After a frantic search, the Bismarck was located, and sunk with air-launched torpedoes and gunfire . The sinking of the German liner was the first of its kind in the history .
 The most arduous escort duty was protecting convoys carrying military equipment to the Soviet Union’s Arctic ports .
 Convoy PO-17 lost 24 of its 35 merchant ships . Losses were sometimes heavy, as in the case of the ill-fated Convoy Po-17, which lost 24 ships .
 Allies cracked German codes, allowing them to predict U-boat attacks . The Allies cracked codes, which allowed them to anticipate U-boats attacks .
 By 1943 the long-range Liberator bombers of the United States Navy allowed air patrols to cover the whole Atlantic for the first time . By 1943, the long range Liberator bomber was able to fly over the entire Atlantic for air patrols .
 Allied shipping losses peaked in Spring 1943, but so did the sinking of U-boats . Allied losses peaked, but U-boat sinking of Allied ships also peaked . Allied ships were sunk by the U.S. in the early months of WWII .
 Using improved technology and tactics, escort ships and aircraft imposed heavy losses . The battle was fought in the Battle of the Atlantic Ocean .
 U-boats were temporarily withdrawn for repairs, and would never again seriously threaten the Allied war effort . British people became used to unfamiliar foods .
 Dried eggs came in a tin, bread was a standardized gray National Loaf . Beer was diluted, and beer was diluted . Spam replaced much of the | fresh meat supply .
 About 4 million soldiers took part in the German invasion, which started on June 22, 1941 . Hitler ae al WHIRLWIND ATTACK: Hitler aet al .
 His forces overran large tracts of territory, but failed to crush the Soviet Red Army . His forces failed to defeat the Red Army in the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Hitler's armies were destroyed as Stalin’s forces fought back . Instead, Hitler's forces were destroyed in the battle against Stalin's forces . Hitler's army was destroyed in a single battle .
 Huge numbers of Soviet © soldiers were captured by the Germans during the Second World War .
 More than 2 million had died in Captivity by early 1942 due to maltreatment and systematic ' massacre' Carried off to camps, more than 2m had died .
 In August German forces advancing deeper into Russia launched an attack on Stalingrad . In December 1941, the advancing Germans reached the outskirts of Moscow in December 1941 . The harsh Russian winter F . F . set in .
 General Georgii Zhukov drove the Germans back to Leningrad after the Germans laid siege to the city . Soviet LENINGRAD: Inhabitants of the city prepared for a counteroffensive .
 The German response was brutal; they not ‘\ only publicly executed * captured guerrillas but also massacred thousands of peasants in collective reprisals . They disrupted German supply routes and communications .
 The Germans gained huge tracts of land before the Soviets could respond . The Soviets gained huge swathes of land during the Second World War .
 Trapped inside Stalingrad, with supply lines cut off, German soldiers began 4. to starve and freeze to death . Trapped in the Soviet Union, they began to starve to death in 1944 .
 USSR we Q Vloscow Smolensk . Soviet Union was invaded by the Germans in Stalingrad in 1942 .
 Determined Soviet troops defended the city building by building, until Zhukov’s trap cut off the Germans from the rear . The trap trapped the Germans in the Soviet capital in 1944 .
 At Kursk in western Russia, the Soviets and Germans fought the largest armor battle in history, with around 8,000 tanks deployed . The Soviet victory was the largest in the history of the Soviet invasion of Russia .
 Despite sustaining heavy losses, the Soviets were victorious, and their drive westward became unstoppable . The Soviets were defeated, but their drive to the westward was unstoppable .
 By summer 1944 the Red Army had entered Poland and was approaching the German frontier in East Prussia . victory depended on their ability to massproduce effective armaments. victory depended upon the ability of massproduction of weapons .
 Weapons such as the truck-mounted Katyusha rocket launchers were cheap, easy to manufacture, and devastating in battle . Weapons such a cheap and easy-to-manufactured weapon would have been devastating .
 Russian poster depicts Britain, the Soviet Union, and the USA united in the fight against Hitler .
 The British and Americans supplied their Soviet allies with large quantities of supplies vital to the war effort . The U.S. and Britain supplied their allies with vital supplies .
 On December 7, 1941, Japan launched a surprise attack on the U.S. base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii . Japan's Japan's war of conquest .
 The raid eee ienn Mm the brought the U.S. into war not only against Pacific and Asia to the Japan, but also against Germany and Italy . ee rope. eee rope .
 Torpedoes and bombs sank or wrecked 18 American warships, including five battleships . Five battleships were sunk or wrecked .
 Japan had succeeded in temporarily putting the United States Pacific Fleet out of action, opening the way for conquests in the Pacific and Southeast Asia . The U.S. Pacific Fleet was put on hold by Japan in the fall .
 The USA formally declared war on Japan, and Germany in turn declared war upon America . The U.S. officially declared war against Japan in 1941 .
 Thousands British base at Singapore died of maltreatment, Captured British and hunger, and exhaustion . Thousands of people died of malnutrition, hunger and exhaustion at Singapore base .
 The death march further and civilians were treated embittered Americans harshly by the Japanese. toward the Japanese . Americans were treated very harshly by Japanese.
 U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt declared imposed an oil embargo that America must on Japan, in response to the oil embargo . The embargo became an “arsenal to its takeover of French of democracy” and Indochina. “ARSENAL of 10/18
 American without oil, Japan had factories increased to either abandon its output of arms and imperial ambitions or munitions, supplied to fight America . Japan's factories increased after the loss of oil .
 The aircraft that should have defended Pearl Harbor were caught on the ground, as the Japanese bombed and strafed the airfields . In October, the British without General Hideki Tojo was payment—but the USA appointed prime minister stayed out of the war .
 American citizens were urged to remember the “sneak | of Americans of German attack” on Pearl Harbor to encourage or Italian origin in the war effort . This contrasted with the treatment of American citizens .
 From mid-1942 an American-led fight back halted Japanese expansion and then reversed it . The U.S. helped reverse Japanese expansion from 1942 to 1945 .
 His vow was fulfilled on October 20, 1944, during the landings on Leytea a Island .
 Victory at Milne Bay credited as the first land defeat of Japan in the war . United States forces began an effective campaign to capture the Pacific island by island, driving ever closer to Japan .
 Few prisoners taken as many Japanese soldiers preferred suicide to surrender . Few prisoners were taken . Many Japanese soldiers prefer suicide .
 A poster boasts of American courage following the attacks on Pearl Harbor . A poster of American bravery was published in the aftermath of the attack .
 KAMIKAZE ATTACKS Pe D)vhanelemmarcmar-hys-lmey-une(e of Leyte Gulf, Japanese soldiers adopted suicide tactics)
 Using their Pec lhcelechim-tsmaaranave| Be oloyanloysmmnlelcyvar-hancianlelneve| to crash into the decks of U.S. warships .
 Overall the battle was a triumph for the United States Navy and a disaster for the Japanese . By 1943 American factories and shipyards were fully geared up for war . The battle was the turning point in the war .
 In June the Americans [EehaleKclomoyalernhersiamiamiamnars Mariana Islands] fought . A ' Res BATTLE OF THE PHILIPPINE SEA'
 Japan sent a fleet of carriers to attack United States warships 10g oj ole) annale ma atomr-halonnalercp It was a disaster for the Japanese—600 of their aircraft were shot .
 Nimitz’s island-hopping strategy culminated in the first attack on Japanese home soil . The American fleet suffered aavhannaatelatelmer-haat-le(o 02/23/1945 .
 United States Marines suffered 26,000 casualties in the battle, before raising the American flag in victory . The U.S. Marine Corps raised the flag at the end of the battle .
 Japanese army were sent into the Burmese jungle to carry out guerrilla warfare . The Japanese army reoccupy Burma until the summer of 1945 .
 Axis and Allies fought for control of the Mediterranean and ee ee ‘ 1 _ a advanced across the the the Suez Canal . In Axis vs. Allies battle in the Mediterranean, the Axis advanced across Suez .
 Rommel’s advance left Australian troops besieged at the Libyan port of Tobruk . Australian troops were surrounded by the advancing German troops . Rommel's advance forced Australian troops to withdraw .
 Ley Val-y won a hard-fought battle against well-prepared Axis defenses . The offensive at El Alamein was a hard fought battle against Axis forces .
 Eighth Army drove Rommel’s forces in headlong retreat westward . After 12 days’ struggle through lines of anti-tank guns and minefields, the Eighth Army won’t be beaten .
 The battle cost Montgomery more than 13,000 casualties, but Axis losses were much higher . Montgomery died in the battle, but the Axis suffered much higher casualties .
 Under Rommel’s inspired leadership, the @Teyaeatchakcmhakemanclarsnats reversed the tide of war in the desert . The @Eeyaatchak cmhakemclarats reversed .
 Hinal forces counterattacked . N.T. forces counterattack . NTA TS SUFFER DEFEAT IBY GUAKSI AMALO O@xolaanaalOlenylccte .
 By January 1941 the Italians were retreating across Libya and thousands were taken prisoner . Thousands of people were taken hostage by the Italians .
 The battle of Gazala was fought in the Libyan desert in May 1942 . It was a decisive victory for @ Rommel’s tanks, which outfought their British opponents .
 During the . battle the Free French MONTGOMERY TAKES COMMAND . In August 1942 General Bernard IV Koy ale feyaatsya\mnele). imcnlesannal Army . Army had been driven back to El Alamein, deep inside Egypt .
 The f ae BL Americans wereledby . Major General George S. Patton, known to his men . as “Old Blood and Guts” Patton .
 German forces protected by extensive system of trenches, barbed wire, and bunkers . German forces were protected by a system of bunkers, trenches and trenches .
 First of a vast array of supply ships, protected from air attack by barrage balloons, began pouring vital reinforcements ashore .
 Sword and Gold for the British; Juno for the Canadians; and Omaha and Utah 4 for the U.S. forces . Omaha and Salt Lake 4 for United States forces .
 British General Bernard Montgomery commanded the ground troops in the largest amphibious invasion in history . Allied landing/advance Allied parachute landing Allied front line June 7, 1944 . Montgomery commanded ground troops .
 General Dwight D Eisenhower was in overall command of the Allied forces in Europe . Eisenhower commanded the Allied Forces in Europe during the Second World War . Eisenhower was credited with saving the lives of his troops .
 The free men of the world are marching together to victory . Pointe du Hoc Vierville Vierville Lion-sur-Mer .
 Most of the wounded were soon on ships back to hospitals in southern England . After treatment on the beaches, most of the injured were soon sent home to hospitals .
 The Germans had lost about 9,000 men in their frantic F defense of the coastline . The Germans * had lost . 9,500 men .
 D-Day operations began early on June 6 when three Allied airborne divisions landed by parachute and glider behind enemy lines . Three Allied divisions landed behind enemy enemy lines in the early hours of June 6 . The Allied invasion was the first time the Allied forces had been able to land behind enemy
 Their job was to destroy German artillery batteries that . threatened the mission, as well as capture and hold key bridges . The main forces arrived at the end of the mission . Their mission was to capture and capture key bridges until the main forces arrive .
 By the wy end of D-Day, a total of 150,000 Allied troops had disembarked onto the Normandy beaches . By the end of the war, 150,00 Allied troops were on the beaches .
 Over coming days they would move to capture surrounding territory, linking the separate beachheads to create a platform for further advance . The beachheads would be linked to each other, linking them to create further advance, a spokesman says .
 As reinforcements arrived, the five Allied divisions moved inland to meet up with the paratroopers that had landed earlier . The Allied divisions were able to advance to meet with the troops .
 British forces moved to reinforce the Allied eastern flank against counterattacks from elite German tank units . United States forces spread out to the west while British forces stayed in the east .
 The largest armada in history, a fleet of about 7,000 ships, left ports in southern England to ferry the main Allied army to France . Armada was the largest in history and left ports to ferry Allied troops to France.
 By dawn on June 6, off the Normandy coast, thousands of troops clambered into landing craft, ready to launch their attack . Thousands of troops were on the ground in Normandy, France, when the attack began .
 After naval bombardment further weakened the defenses, Allied land forces advanced . D-DAY THE STRUGGLE BEGINS . Allied forces advanced on D-Day 1 .
 United States forces at Utah also achieved a swift victory, but those landing at Omaha suffered . Strong winds battered the landing craft and beach defenses took their toll .
 At Omaha, United States forces were met by a storm of fire from defenders on the cliffs . U.S. troops were met with fire from the cliffs of Omaha .
 Optimism for an early end to the war grew with the capture | of Paris in August . Optimism grew with . the capture of Paris, which was captured in August 1944 .
 The bombs created a self-sustaining furnace in which hot air rushing upward sucked in cold air from the surrounding area . Hot air rushed upward, sucking cold air in from surrounding areas .
 Eyewitnesses recall victims fainting from lack of oxygen, or being dragged into the flames by the force of the storm . Eyewitness: Victims fainted from oxygen, dragged into flames by force of storm .
 At its top a sandstone sculpture representing the figure of kindness looked down on the ashes . At the top of the sculpture was a sculpture representing a figure of kind .
 The attack on Dresden was controversial even at the time, with critics accusing the Allies of seeking revenge for the Blitz over British cities . Critics said the Allies were seeking revenge after the Blitz in Britain .
 Dresden today is a bustling modern city, but the scars of 1945 will never completely disappear . Dresden is still a city of war-torn Germany .
 Germany suffered massive destruction before surrendering to Allied forces . Invaded from east and west, Germany suffered from massive destruction . Germany was invaded by the Allies in 1944 .
 As the Soviets advanced, vast numbers of civilians fled toward the west using any means of transportation they could find . The Soviets advanced in the early years of the Cold War .
 Hitler killed himself inside his Berlin bunker on the same day . To avoid capture, Hitler hid himself in his bunker to avoid capture . Hitler's suicide was a suicide attempt .
 American and Soviet troops met and posed for photographs on the Elbe River in April . The Soviets were then es, | left to overcome the final resistance of the Nazi regime in Berlin . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Nazis in 1945 .
 Admiral Hans-Georg von Friedeburg signed the surrender of German forces in northern Germany on May 4, 1945 . The surrender was the end of the war in Germany .
 The unconditional surrender of all German forces was completed at ceremonies in the city of Reims in France, on May 7, and Berlin on May 8 .
 Nazi emblem was found in the rubble of the Reich Chancellory . It was found by the Nazis in the wreckage .
 All symbols of Hitler’s regime were removed by the victorious Allies during their “de-Nazification” of Germany . The Allies removed all symbols of the Nazi regime from Germany .
 Allied bombers pounded Dresden for two days and nights in one of the most controversial acts of the war . Dresden was destroyed by Allied bombers .
 The resulting firestorm killed an estimated 25,000 civilians, and reduced the historic city center to rubble . It was the deadliest firestorm in history, killing an estimated 250,000 people .
 Hitler mobilized the elderly and children for the defense of his crumbling Reich . Refusing to admit defeat, Hitler mobilized his children and the elderly to fight back .
 His body was hung upsidedown in the forecourt of a Milan gasoline station, alongside his mistress Clara Petacci and other executed Fascists . He was hung upside down in a forecourt alongside other executioners .
 Thousands of Fascists around Italy were purged, and political unrest reached boiling point . Fascists are purged around Italy, but political unrest is still simmering in Italy .
 Scientists knew it was possible to create a massive explosion through nuclear fission . U.S. President TRUMAN, VE Day SPEECH, May 8, 1945 .
 In 1942 the USA initiated the top secret Manhattan Project to build an atom bomb . The top secret project to build the atom bomb was called the Manhattan Project .
 De ee Oe cry | Metienas on August, SRC Ro Mm Olalhianalcvamenromnals 07/27/1945 | + 1 .
 President Truman's diary entry is published on July 16, 1917 .
 NUCLEAR BOMBS DROPPED ON JAPAN 07/16/1945 | TESTING THE BOMB In July the first atomic bomb was dropped on Japan . Japan refused to surrender .
 As many as 100,000 people in the Manhattan Project, a firestorm started by led the examination incendiary bombs . Unaware of the atom bombh’s existence, the Japanese failed to agree terms of surrender .
 It detonated over the center of Hiroshima in a ve.hevemir-t-Jame (Jame)imilefeim-halemalcr-iF that vaporized everything on . the ground below . Hiroshima .
 The blast, equivalent to about 14,000 tons | of TNT, threw up a swirling mushroom cloud that towered over the city . Codenamed “Fat Man” the plutonium Joxe)aal oe hae . hae) e)el-1
 Emperor Hirohito pressured the Japanese government to surrender . The Japanese government remained split on whether or not to surrender, but Emperor Hirotito pressured them to give in .
 The a MRO McIUNGRSIALO LS) MMNIVECES made on August 14 and announced to the people the following day . The a . MRO made the announcement .
 Kristallnacht (Crystal Night) marked an escalation in mistreatment of the Jews . It was dubbed “Kristallennacht’ (Crystal night) because of the number of smashed windows .
 Some 10,000 Jewish children escaped to Britain, leaving their parents behind, in a program known as KGatolsvang-hatcy ole . Jewish prisoners were taken to concentration camps, where they were forced to work without pay .
 Farben, for instance, established a factory at PANUE<{e) AAYVAN ARKO M@r-} O}LR-NNPAS) on prisoner labor .
 Conditions were harsh, food supplies inadequate, and punishments savage . Food supplies were inadequate and punishments were savage .
 Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 . In June 1941, Germany invaded Russia . The invasion was the first major invasion of Soviet Union .
 Death squads were sent into occupied territory ikem colenalemogom-halem quit political dissidents . Death squads are sent into . occupied territory .
 In September 1941, 33,000 Jews were killed in two days at Babi Yar in Ukraine . The deaths were the result of two days of fighting in the city .
 Many died packed into ‘4 ( cattle trucks) in cattle trucks . The deaths were horrendous, and many were packed into cattle trucks.
 Auschwitz-Birkenau in southern Poland is thought to have been the most infamous extermination camp . 1. million people are thought to be killed and cremated . Auschwitz was the largest extermination camp in Nazi Germany .
 Rooms full of discarded shoes, pairs of glasses, and even human hair stood as testament to the staggering number of dead . Victims were stripped of their belongings, and rooms full of shoes and glasses .
 Stalin used the outbreak of World War II to seize control of Eastern Poland . G 1940-1949 The Iron Gurtain Descends 1939-1950 .
 Following Hitler’s invasion of Russia in 1941, the USSR joined the fight against Germany . As the Red Army drove the German invaders back, Stalin tightened his grip on Eastern Europe . Following the German invasion, the Soviet Union tightened its grip on Europe .
 Stalin’s forces marched on to Finland, but the tiny Finnish army resisted bravely . Stalin was quick to eliminate potential potential war in the snow .
 Finland retained independence with minimal loss of territory . Although forced to sue for peace, Finland retained its sovereignty . Finland was forced to settle with the Treaty of Peace .
 The following year, Hitler’s armies turned on the Soviet Union, and Stalin turned to the Allies . Police carried out a mass execution of 22,000 Poles, including 8,000 prisoners of war .
 Mass graves were discovered in Katyn Forest, Belarus, by the Nazis in 1943, but the USSR denied the atrocity until 1990 . Mass graves found in the forest were discovered by the Germans in 1943 by the USSR .
 As the Red Army marched on Berlin, Stalin met with Churchill and U.S. President Franklin D Roosevelt at Yalta, Ukraine . Stalin met Churchill and United States President Roosevelt at the conference .
 As negotiations continued over coming months, the lines were drawn for an ideological division between communist east and democratic west .
 As the Nazis were driven back, partisan fighters in eastern Europe and the Balkans welcomed Soviet troops as liberators . YUGOSLAVIA GOES RED as a result .
 Many of them were supporters of communism, such as Marshal Tito, the Yugoslavian leader . Tito became head of a federal communist state in 1945 .
 The pact was signed by Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov and Hitler’s negotiator Joachim von Ribbentrop . Following the Nazi invasion, the Soviet Red Army moved into Eastern Poland .
 In 1949, it became the forming an east-west divide that en German Democratic Independent Churchill labeled the Iron Curtain . Churchill labeled it the 'Iron Curtain'
 A eee C ERANCE 4 ' "" parties were subject to Monuments such as the ee . persecution . Party parties were subjected to persecution .
 He and his allies “hat ae saw an opportunity to free their country from colonial rule. bitterly resented by the local population.”
 The first French troops arrived in Saigon in 1945 to reimpose French colonial rule . Sree Sree ~~ Indochina Sea is the name of the first place in the world's most populous region .
 The SS Ile-de-France, an ocean liner, was used to convey later reinforcements . It was the first ship to carry out the rescue mission .
 Negotiations over France's recognition of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam broke down when a French cruiser shelled the port of Hai Phong in November 1946 . The French cruiser attacked the port in 1946 .
 The French persuaded Bao Dai, the last emperor of Vietnam, them to renew attacks to attack, and destroy to return as head of a puppet state with limited independence against the French .
 The Viet Minh IS fi Nn ished IN Asia . captured one strongpoint after another, forcing the French to surrender in May . 5 French soldiers were killed in May 1945 .
 Bicycle troops, used extensively by # the Japanese in their jungle campaigns, were among the first to enter the jungle .
 More troops came ' ashore at Hai Phong on the Gulf of Tonkin and began to advance » on Hanoi . More troops also came ashore on the coast of Vietnam .
 The French took possession of Hanoi and other major cities, but their forces were continually harassed by Viet Minh guerrillas . The French were constantly harassed by the guerrilla, who moved freely at night .
 This humiliating defeat forced the French out of Indochina . The French were humiliated .
 This Viet Minh stepped in to support Vietnamese opposition to | Ho Chi Minh . However, the West remained fearful of communist rule and remained fearful . The West was fearful of the VICTORY West .
 At a peace deal signed in Geneva, Vietnam was divided into communist North and pro-Western South . poster depicts a soldier with a dove of peace sitting on his shoulder . poster celebrating the victory of Dien Bien Phu, depicts a . soldier .
 Mahatma Gandhi’s policy of nonviolent in Britain decided to push ahead with Indian resistance had amassed a huge following . Unlike the Congress, the Muslim League supported the British war effort .
 Meeting at Lahore in Punjab adopted Muhammad Ali Jinnah’s resolution that Muslims should have separate states in the northwest and the northeast of India . Muslims formed the majority population in the region .
 Gandhi and Nehru launched the Quit India Movement in 1942 . Quit India was called for civil disobedience to upset the British war effort . This decision widened the split with Congress leaders .
 The movement gained massive popularity, and Indians across the country abandoned their jobs to join the protest . The movement became popular, with Indians across India abandoning their jobs .
 Congress leaders immediately imprisoned and held without trial for two years . Congress leaders were immediately imprisoned . They were immediately held . without trial .
 Liaquat Ali Khan had become the Prime Minister of Pakistan after a similar ceremony in Karachi, the previous day .
 More than 2. million Indian soldiers fought with the British Army in many parts of the world . More than 200,000 Indian soldiers were killed in the conflict .
 The country would be new country came into partitioned into separate being on August 14, states for Hindus and 1947, a day before India Muslims .
 The name Pakistan violence between derives from two Urdu-language words, pak meaning Independence was to be pure, and stan established in August .
 Sikhs were caught in the middle of fierce religious rioting and suffered a large number of casualties . Sikhs suffered large casualties during the religious riots in the past .
 Nathuram Godse was a Hindu extremist who believed that Gandhi had betrayed his people . He killed Gandhi and shot him in the head after accusing him of betrayal .
 At the start of the century, automobiles were toys for the wealthy . Unfortunately, even as they increased mobility, cars were also also using 1900-1910 .
 They provided fun outings for rich families and excitement for amateur sportsmen in perilous road races . The races provided fun trips to rich families .
 The authorities, regarding cars aS a dangerous nuisance, tried to impose impossibly strict safety regulations . The authorities have been trying to impose strict safety rules .
 Early in the century cars were expected to be driven by a uniformed chauffeur . Wealthy passengers were left exposed to the elements .
 By 1910 the gasolinedriven internal combustion engine, offering better performance and a compact design, had established its Superiority over electric and steam engines . By 1910, the gasoline engine was the most powerful in the world .
 Cars took on a standard layout that would last for decades, with the engine at the front and rear-wheel drive . Cars were the first cars to have a front-wheel-drive layout . Cars would be driven by a single engine, with a front and a rear wheel drive .
 By the 1930s dense traffic was already posing problems in major cities such as London, requiring traffic lights and pedestrian crossings . Henry Ford’s Model T was the first automobile to be manufactured on a moving assembly line .
 Built in 93 minutes, it was cheap enough to be affordable to the wider public . 15 million were sold by 1927, contributing to the degradation of the natural environment .
 Developing cars that would provide a satisfactory performance without guzzling gas and causing excessive pollution posed a critical challenge . Developing a vehicle that would perform without causing excessive gas consumption was a challenge .
 Using mass production, car maker Henry Ford cut the cost of his Model T from more than $800 in 1910 to $290 by the 1920s . The Model T went on sale at $290 in 1910 . Ford's Model T was the first Model T to go on sale in the
 By 1929 the USA had almost 30 million cars, five times as many as the rest of the world . The U.S. had almost a million cars .
 Racing cars continued to capture the popular imagination . But driving was still ph--)-4e .
 British manufacturer Riley had a series of successes in the 1920s with models such as the Brooklands, which was driven by both men and women racers . 29,000 people were killed on American roads in 1930 .
 Building roads specifically designed for cars increased speed and reduced accidents . Interstate highways in the U.S. and German autobahns have increased speed .
 The U.S. Army entered World War II with the Willys Jeep as its new four-wheel drive, general-purpose vehicle . Meanwhile, motor 1940s Wartime Willys JEEP was a motor .
 In the course of the war, more than 600,000 Jeeps were manufactured by Willys, Ford and Willys .
 The 1959 Cadillac Series 62 was the epitome of design excess, with tall tailfins designed to attract maximum attention . The 1959 Series 62 is one of the most famous examples of modern sports car design .
 Europe became the leader in cheap, economical cars, from the Volkswagen Beetle to the British Mini .
 European car makers pushed innovative design features, including rear engines and front-wheel drive . Front-wheel-drive and rear-engine technology are key to the success of European manufacturers .
 Citroén DS caused a sensation with its streamlined body shape and innovative hydropneumatic suspension . These cars began to sell in the USA, as did the Toyotas and Datsuns of a rapidly expanding Japanese car industry .
 It went on to become one of the longest lasting production sports cars . It was the first ever production sports car to be built in the UK .
 Safety features such as seatbelts and airbags, as well as tighter speed limits, were introduced, reducing road deaths . Safety features were introduced in the 1930s to reduce road deaths in Britain .
 Oil crises forced car makers to address issues of fuel economy and pollution . Oil crises and growing environmental awareness forced them to address .
 Alternatives to the internal combustion engine began to be seriously explored, especially electric cars . Electric cars were among the first vehicles to be developed in the U.S. Electric cars are now a reality in the world .
 The launch of the Jeep Cherokee marked the advent of the sports utility vehicle . Ownership of cars continued to expand worldwide and Asian countries, such as South Korea and India, became 1980s owners .
 It became the vehicle of choice for suburban dwellers with large families . Na major car producers. It became popular with people in suburban areas .
 Many people still loved automobiles for speed and style, paying high prices for supercars by manufacturers such as Ferrari and Lamborghini . Supercars are still popular in America .
 By the end of the 20th century, even the standard family car was a marvel of modern technology . Even the standard car was an impressive example of modern car technology .
 Toyota Prius hybrid car combines an internal combustion engine with electric motors . The Prius has a hybrid engine and electric motors that can be driven by a hybrid car . Toyota's Prius is a hybrid vehicle with a hybrid power system .
 The new millennium brought a surge in supercars, high-speed, glamorous models sold at a price only the super-rich could afford . This reduces fuel consumption and harmful emissions .
 Berlin was divided four ways within the Soviet zone . The capital, Berlin, was also divided four-ways .
 The Soviet response was to try to squeeze the Allies out of the city, bringing the city to its knees . The Soviets responded to the Allies' efforts to get them out .
 On June 26, the first C-47 Dakotas carrying supplies landed at Berlin’s Tempelhof and Gatow airports . As each plane landed in Berlin people rushed to unload it .
 Despite shortages, Berliners remained in We nad no g Ul Ns, good spirits . Berliners remain in good spirits, despite shortages .
 On ly fi ou iF candy to children who cheered as planes flew overhead . Children cheered as the planes fly overhead .
 The airlift, initially planned to last a few weeks, was now in its sixth month . Operation Santa Claus airlift was now six months old .
 Operation Santa Claus brought presents to the children of West Berlin . Operation Santa Santa Claus was carried out in the lead up to Christmas . The Allies carried out Operation Christmas in Berlin .
 The millionth ton of supplies arrived in Berlin in February 1949 . The first million ton arrived in 1949 .
 To commemorate this occasion a symbolic sack of grain was handed to the West Berliners . The symbolic sack was handed out to the East Berliners on the occasion .
 Efforts to boost morale culminated in the Easter Parade, when 13,000 tons of coal were flown into the city in one day .
 When the airlift began there were only two | airfields in Berlin . Of new runways in Berlin, there was only two . airfields .
 By July 1,000 tons of # supplies were being . delivered every day, and the runways . struggled to cope . by July .
 Men and women from across F the blockade zone joined in the construction of » anew runway at » Tempelhof to facilitate oe the relief effort . The runway is being built at the airport to facilitate the relief efforts .
 The soviet plan was simple, swift, and effective . It was simple and effective, and the plan was swift . The Berlin blockade began at 9.30am .
 In one night, troops blocked road, river, and rail links, sealing off all access to West Berlin . Troops blocked all roads, rivers, and bridges in one night . West Berlin was the scene of a nightmarathon .
 Electricity, food, and fuel supplies were abruptly severed, leaving the inhabitants facing starvation . The inhabitants of the town were left facing starvation after their supplies were cut .
 The landings were achieved despite rain, fog, high winds, and constant harassment from Soviet fighter planes . The landing was achieved despite constant harassment by Soviet fighters .
 The airlift was now supplying the city with enough fuel as well as food . Airlift now supplies enough fuel and food to feed the city's residents .
 Despite all their efforts, the Soviet forces had to back down and the blockade was finally lifted . The blockade was eventually lifted after a series of years of resistance .
 After 11 months of canned food Berliners were ecstatic, and thousands gathered in the streets to celebrate and thank the Western forces .
 UN General Assembly decided that Palestine would be divided into Jewish and Arab states, with Jerusalem as an international city . Palestine was declared Palestine by the UN in 1947 .
 After the plans for Palestine were revealed, terrorist attacks intensified . Within months the Arab forces were crushed, both militarily and jeysavse .
 Britain evacuated all of its nonessential citizens, including many who had lived in Palestine for their whole lives . In response to the Hotel BOMBING war, the British evacuated all nonessential British citizens .
 A Jewish Jewish Jewish demands for underground army, + their own land and Haganah, accused the Arab nationalists of bias toward the newcomers. the Arabs .
 Rerrorist attacks i ‘Arale were met with increasing violence from Jews . Rerrorists attacked 'Arale' in the 1980s and '90s, but were met by violence .
 In January, Haganah terrorists killed 26 Palestinians in a car bomb attack in Jaffa . Residents were forced to flee after a huge explosion rocked the Semiramis Hotel in Jerusalem .
 Jewish ideal: United Nations ideal | the international community, sending a strong message that the new state would manage its own affairs . The new state of Israel is expected to become Israel's first Arab state .
 In 1949 Israel concluded peace | treaties with all of the 1948. Israel . The ship Altalena sank near Tel Aviv .
 Ben-Gurion ordered the refugees and terrorist Jali OMROMOloMOKst-1NG@)\{-16B attacks continued . Jali was the first Palestinian to carry out the attacks .
 The reluctant cooperation between Nationalists and Communists to fight the Japanese invasion of 1937 evaporated overnight . Both sides scrambled for territory, as both sides scramble for territory .
 The communist People’s Liberation Army, led by Mao Zedong, saw a chance to seize power . The People's Liberation Army was the first Chinese government to take control of China .
 Mao adopted a policy of avoiding Nationalist-held cities so as not to lose men in engagements that they could not win . Mao was outnumbered by the ‘ KMT,’ Mao’s policy was to avoid engagements that could not be won by Nationalist forces .
 He concentrated his forces in rural areas to drum up additional support . Instead of focusing on rural areas, he concentrated his efforts on the rural vote .
 United States President Truman withdrew all aid to Chiang Kai-shek . Nationalists fled as the PLA entered the capital, Nanjing .
 HMS Amethyst was on its way up the Yangtze River to rescue embassy staff in Nanjing, China . It was fired upon by Communists from the shore of the river, killing 22 crew members .
 By 1946 the Communists were in control of north and central China, while the Nationalists commanded the south of the country . By 1946 China had been divided by the Communists .
 Yan’an had been the center of Communist power in China since 1936 . Soldiers of the PLA used it as a training base . The fall of Yan'an is the first major city to fall from power .
 Chiang ' Kai-shek went on the run, joining 2 million Nationalist refugees on the island of Taiwan . Nationalist leader joined 2 million refugees in Taiwan, fleeing the mainland .
 He established the Republic of China and continued to claim sovereignty over mainland China . There was also a claim of sovereignty over China .
 The Nationalist Kuomintang army outnumbered the PLA by more than three to one . The PLA outnumbered the Nationalist . The Nationalists are outnumbered by the PLA .
 Communists had taken control of the most populous country in the world . Communist Party took control of most of the world's largest country .
 The Nationalist regime was riddled with corruption and relied on massive loans from the U.S. to fight the war . The government relied heavily on the loans to fight it's war .
 The KMT won control of the countryside by promising land to the peasants . They welcomed defectors from the KMT and won control by offering land to peasants . The party won control over the countryside with promises of land from peasants .
 Anti-Nationalist protests, such as burning of KMT banners and symbols, became increasingly common . Anti-nationalist protests are increasingly common in Hungary .
 By 1951, the system, known as rN Ole NAM ALV.qh-1AlOlexisting powers and privileges of the white minority of largely Afrikaans, had been established .
 The new regime officially segregated residential areas, education, transportation, and health provision, with blacks and others now classified as nonwhite . Blacks isolated in the worst land with no political representation .
 The regime provoked massive resistance from black South Africans, with numerous uprisings and protests, such as this occupation of white-only railroad cars . As opposition became more violent it was met with extreme state repression .
 It was not until 1994 that the apartheid system was finally overthrown . The South African government was overthrown in 1994 .
 His recorded in 1954, it became famous when it featured as the opening number in Blackboard Jungle, a social commentary .
 They targeted a newly emerging teenage market that had more money and independence than ever before before . They targeted the newly emerging teen market .
 In 1949, the first _ 45rpm single was produced . The rock and roll record was released in 1949 .
 Light and durable, the new records could ' be stacked more efficiently into jukeboxes . Light, durable, they say .
 This marked the they Can dance to, after all those beginning of the split between youth and the Years of Crooness . It marked the end of the years of youth and a beginning to the end .
 Rock and Roll had gone from a musical experiment, largely confined to the south of the country, to a national craze in just a few short years . Rock and roll had gone on to become a national trend in the 1960s .
 The number of fans continued to expand quickly in the USA and across the world . Fans continued to grow in the U.S. and around the globe .
 In March, Little Richard released his debut album, featuring some of his biggest hits . Little Richard's debut album was released in March .
 Little Richard brought white and black audiences together in concert venues that had previously been segregated . Little Richard was an innovative and charismatic performer, Little Richard . Richard's concert venues were previously segregated .
 Elvis for his pioneering song had returned from a spell in the army, “Georgia on My Mind,” but chose to focus on acting over the latest in a series of music . Elvis chose to return to acting over his music career .
 With the deaths of superstars hits in a new ‘soul’ Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochran, and genre that followed on Little Richard’s retirement to become from Chuck Berry to become a preacher, the pioneers began to be of gospel musical replaced .
 They had inspired a new stylings with secular, wave of artists, including female often suggestive lyrics . Singer such as the Supremes and Ray Charles would go Aretha Franklin .
 Rock and roll had on to inspire a new generation of musicians . music would never be the same again . Rock and Roll inspired a new form of expression .
 Hiss was later found guilty of perjury, but was never proven to have spied . He was later convicted of perjury but never convicted of spying .
 Nfelom\/KolOr-hanahiamnalsyel a relatively unknown senator from Wisconsin, NAVEcRSMOKSINsINs1@ARNNALcIO MMA ATS NE AOYANOmbahtccrcinler-
 McCarthy's critics accused him of bullying and trying to suppress freedom of speech . McCarthy’s critics said he was bullying and tried to suppress free speech .
 Humphrey Bogart led blacklisted and never a parade of stars to worked again . The stars were blacklisted for their roles in the 1950s and 1960s .
 PES NO) ae 12/02/1954 PANS MN Kel@r-hanehyas investigation of the Army continued, the lakcyoh@bale fomrVccacdes) alevvaal in full .
 Until this moment, ere were -_ — 3 | | | senator, | think | never eta ae cement Jf . Jf — UE. q really gauged your cruelty. It really gauges your cruelty .
 The Senate voted TELEVISED CLASH WITH McCARTHY, under attack in the KoMercvalsabhccw\V (oOr-banehtmiovarslolulsx-Meym ely ici J June 9, 1954 media, his popularity
 The new weapon was vastly more powerful than anything seen before, dwarfing even the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 . It dwarfed even even the bombs dropped by Hiroshima or Nagasaki .
 As tensions mounted in the Cold War, both sides entered an arms race . Both sides constructed vast arsenals of weapons of mass destruction .
 By the 1980s, both sides possessed stockpiles sufficient to kill the entire population of the Earth several times over . Both sides had stockpiles of enough food to kill an entire population several times .
 Historians argue that the destructive power of the bomb was so great that neither side dared to use it . Some historians argue that it was too powerful to use the bomb .
 The Cold War stayed cold, because the consequences of open conflict had become unthinkable . Cold War was the Cold War, but the consequences were unthinkable .
 A UN force was deployed eventually captured by to keep the peace, but became embroiled in a succession of battles and ceasefires . Lumumba was involved in a series of battles with Tshombe's soldiers .
 Unhappy with UN’s failure to use direct force, Lumumba accepted military aid from Russia . Russia sent troops into Katanga and executed him after he was beaten .
 The land is rich in natural resources, and with an abundant supply of cheap labor, it was prized by colonial rulers . The land was prized for its natural resources and cheap labor .
 African struggle for self-rule began in the British Gold Coast . Indigenous Africans were generally excluded from government posts, oe aH 2 A New Ghana .
 In 1951, activist Kwame Nkrumah won the country’s first election, despite being in jail . In 1951 he won the first election in Ghana, after being in prison .
 R II Regiments from some African education, and training colonies fought for their European rulers during World War II . Many returned home determined to seek independence . On March 6 the church INDEPENDENCE Celebrations erupted across Ghana .
 Workers were given the day off, and many—dressed in traditional costume— daubed themselves with the colors of the new flag and danced in street parades .
 Ghana's revolution inspired other African nations to seek widespread change . Pioneers of a revolution, their joy inspired many African nations .
 Lumumba saw this as an attempt by Belgium to hold on to the richest part of the country, and sought UN backing to expel Belgian forces . He sought UN backed to expel Belgium forces from the country .
 Mobutu Sese Seko ruled the country Zaire for 30 years . He renamed it Zaire and ruled with an iron fist . He a> Africanized his name to Mobutus Seko .
 All political opposition was banned, and he amassed a huge personal fortune . He amassed a system of corruption that left his people impoverished, he said .
 In 1948 communist leader Kim Il-sung, Waith soviet-made tanks supported by the Soviet Union, established and artillery . Its army of 90,000 soldiers was equipped in 1948 .
 South Korea had no tanks and very the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea eal wveapons in North Korea . South Korea J. . had . no tanks .
 MacArthur’s ‘ ft taal . — fee ON Wake Island in the troops broke the North ee ee —_ SG"" Pacific to discuss the Qohasy-hamecoyentententenaner-lntoyal 7 a || oe .
 Despite some successes during campaign on North Korea, flattening 18 of its 22 ofits22 . However, despite some successes, North Korean forces were not able to flatten 18 of the world's largest cities .
 Fifteen nations, including ‘ ) the USA, Britain, and Australia, responded to the UN's call to send 1ngole) OSMROMOLs1iclalemeyelvinal Korea .
 On INKohtcovanlelcyam Mi nalom @lannaletcrs . army inflicted a major (oleiicrelmelmelmelamauantcialerial _ troops) at the Battle as the line of Pyongyang demarcation in 1953 .
 By May the UN front line had moved just north of the 38th parallel and the war entered a prolonged stalemate . By May, the war had entered a stalemate in the region .
 A demilitarized zone was established at the 38th parallel and a UN commission was set up to monitor the peace . A UN commission set up by the UN was also set up .
 Mount Everest was successfully climbed for the first time by New Zealander Edmund Hillary and Nepalese Sherpa Tenzing Norgay . Mount Everest is the world’s highest peak and is the highest mountain in the world .
 For more than 30 years a succession of expeditions have attempted to conquer mountaineering’s ultimate challenge . None of these attempts have reached the peak and safely returned to base camp .
 By May 27, 1953, two members of an expedition led by Colonel John Hunt, the ninth British team to take on Everest, had turned back just short of the summit . Two members of the expedition ran out of time and oxygen supplies .
 Hillary and Norgay made their team’s final ascent from the South Col route . Two days later, Hillary and Hillary made their final ascent . Hillary made the final ascent two days later .
 They briefly paused to take photographs that soon after their descent were seen around the world . Soon after the descent, the pair were seen flying over the world.
 As widespread Soviets sought to tighten their grip on Eastern Europe, liberals in anti-Soviet feeling. Liberals in anti Soviet feeling. Anti-Russian feeling .
 They marched to Radio Budapest, calling for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary . They marched in support of the Hungarian government .
 Insurgents took to the streets, hurling Molotov cocktails at the tanks . Insurgent forces took over the tanks in a bid to topple the government .
 The USSR agreed to tolerate Nagy’s actions . The USSR appealed to the UN new government, and the fighting petered out . Nagy appealed to a new UN government .
 Soviet tanks for assistance against Hungary withdrew fron Hungary, watched by anxious crowds . Soviet tanks were withdrawn from Hungary .
 When the LUhStolntanalccrincialcremnomurst> troops against militant strikers, they were used to fight militants . When the troops were used against militants, they faced a wave of violence .
 The rebels reacted angrily and members of the old Hungarian national flag were rounded up and imprisoned or executed . The rebels were angered by the deaths .
 About 1,000 Soviet tanks rolled into Budapest just before dawn, this time using brute force to olaUEsJamelelcM shvnalercharcval . He pledged that Soviet tanks would be withdrawn and prisoners released .
 Up to 200,000 refugees fled final appeal for help across the border to Austria as the Soviet-backed regime . At 5:15m. Nagy m a broadcast his THE REVOLUTION ENDS .
 An Anglo-French company owned the Suez Canal . The canal was a vital international waterway linking Europe and Asia .
 On July 23, 1952 a group of nationalist army officers, led by General Neguib, overthrew the corrupt, pro-British regime of King Farouk . The revolution overthrew Farouk's regime in 1952 .
 Egyptian troops swiftly took position, in London to discuss the cutting off British and French control . Egyptian troops took position in London, in a bid to take control of the country .
 Britain backed down after a threat from the USA threatened to withhold financial loans . The UK backed down following the USA's threat to withhold its financial aid .
 Muhammad Neguib, soon to become the country’s first president, drove through the streets of Cairo . He was soon to be the country's first president .
 Nasser’s popularity grew after he negotiated the withdrawal of British troops from Egypt . His popularity grew as he negotiated withdrawal from British troops in Egypt .
 Under the agreement, all British forces would leave the country by June 1956 . Under the deal, the agreement would see British forces withdraw from the country .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower cancelled a $56 million grant to help build the dam . President Eisenhower cancelled the grant . The dam was built in 1953 .
 The canal was the main supply route for Gulf oil to Europe, and this action led to emergency gasoline rationing . The action led the U.S. desert desert and raced toward the canal .
 Britain and France carried out bombing raids against ae Egyptian air force bases . ve just never seen great powers make such a complete mess and botch of things .
 Around the world's most famous films have been produced in 11 decades since cinema began . They created stars, and found their way produced in the 11 decades .
 Cinema has been both an art and a pioneer of new technology . Cinema was a novelty at the turn of the century, the first form and the first ever form .
 Films went from silent to talkies, short to feature multi-billion dollar entertainment industry . it revolutionized the industry . From 30 years saw an unprecedented period of growth .
 By World War II, motion-capture and 3-D techniques were a popular pastime . Cinema-going was a well-established pastime.
 By 1930 the silent Hollywood's monopoly of the soldiers and Pathe model, film was finished. the people mounted on back home. a tripod. By 1930, film industry had finished. movie industry .
 British studios won hearts and minds with Went the Day Well and Henry V . In the USA, hard-boiled crime fiction gave rise to film noir, exploring the dark side of the American dream .
 The first Oscars were handed out in 1929 at a ceremony hosted by actor Douglas Fairbanks . Mary Poppins and The Sound of Music appealed to family values . The first ceremony was held in 1929 in Los Angeles .
 European film-makers such as Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman swapped Hollywood glamour for gritty realism . Small, independent films reflected a decade of social change in Europe .
 Ben Hur set out to show that movies were bigger and better, this film cost $314 million . Epics such as Ben Hur were set to show they were bigger than movies . Ben Hur cost $ 314 million .
 The 1950s 1960s drive-in movies were a huge attraction for the new teenage market . Drive-in films were a big attraction to the new teen market .
 They showed low-budget films and sci-fi ‘quickies’ that would appeal to young people . The films were shown to be shown at the centre of the film festival .
 Television had an adverse effect on cinema attendance . Television had been seen as the main reason for cinema cinemas to screen .
 Hollywood responded with cinemascope, which showed films such as Ben Hur in a wide-screen format . Hollywood responded to the growing demand for wide-screens .
 Leone redefined the Western, turning clean-cut cowboys into brooding anti-heroes . Leone's film is one of the most iconic Westerns ever seen . Leone turned the Western into a brooding, dark and brooding character .
 Hollywood still dominated, but had to compete with European cinema, independent films, movies made for the internet, and the massive presence of Bollywood in India .
 General Charles Telmex. ielit-Manetomievantesl' _ leader of the Free French, POLICE TACKLE PROTESTERS was seen to be the only . person to be stopped for identity checks .
 Right-wing one who could guide the by the FLN led to extremists marched to demand that Algeria was not ruled out of the country . Algeria is Algeria .
 Coty accepted Coty’s offer and became Prime Minister elect, but he ai, drove a hard bargain . Dozens were arrested in Paris .
 He asked for unrestricted — powers for a period of Sipqu ano laumatcme nace malate) authority to draft a new constitution for the French Republic . The French Republic is a French republic .
 On June 2, 1958 the National _ Assembly accepted » television journalists waited to capture every moment as ' developments rapidly unfolded'
 France and the FLN signed a treaty ending colonial rule in 1962 . In a referendum, France voted to grant Algeria its ripe Algeria its own independence .
 They were furious with the French fofoyi{ciaahantcyalemie)analelamrlcqnere) more positive action to S| stop the FLN and their nationalist revolt .
 Shortly after becoming Prime Minister, De Gaulle visited Algiers, the capital of Algeria, where he was greeted by cheering crowds . He was greeted with cheering crowds when he became Prime Minister .
 Che Guevara, an Argentine revolutionary, believed that only armed struggle could solve the problems of poverty and inequality in the region .
 At allie | landed on the coast of Oriente Province on December 2, 1956 . Most of the revolutionaries were either captured or killed . They landed in Oriente province .
 Castro and his men retreated to the Sierra , Maestra Mountains to the south . Castro's men retreated from the mountains . Castro was forced to retreat .
 Che traveled to Bolivia with 50 volunteers in 1966 to spark a new revolution . Castro became Prime Minister and his regime was recognized by the United States .
 He was captured by government forces on October 7, 1967 and executed the next day on the orders of Bolivia’s military ruler General Reneé Barrientos . Largely spurned by the local population, he was captured and executed .
 Che traveled to Congo in 1965 to foment a rebellion against the authoritarian regime of President Mobutu Sese seko . Che fought for independence from Congo .
 Che was initially impressed by rebel leader Laurent Kabila, but rebel forces were divided by internal rivalries, and Che lost faith in the revolt . Che was impressed by the rebel leader, but he lost his faith in his cause .
 They harassed the government with guerrilla attacks and . gained widespread attention and support . The government was overthrown in 2003 .
 Che fled to Mexico during the coup, angry at seeing Guatemala’s populist dream crushed by outside forces . Che fled the country to Mexico, where he fled to escape the coup .
 Batista’s troops crushed The revolution is not an apple that falls when It is ripe . Batista's troops crushed the revolution, but the revolution was never a success .
 Following the Cuban revolution, Castro declared his willingness to support revolutionaries around the globe . Castro declared himself willing to support revolutionists around the world . He was assassinated in September 1968 .
 He travelled widely, attending UN summits and meeting world leaders, advocating armed struggle for socialism . He also met world leaders and advocated armed struggle .
 Che Che became a hero of left-wing intellectuals and radical youth around the world . Che was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In Mexico City, students campaigning against the one-party rule of the government carried HONORED MEMORY banners . In Cuba, Che remains banners bearing his image. a national hero and is still widely revered .
 His body is interred in a grand mausoleum in the Cuban city of Santa Clara . His body was buried in the city's Santa Clara.
 Che was held up as a heroic example of revolutionary reform . Che is held up in protests across the globe as a hero in the wake of his death .
 In Mexico City, Che met Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro . Che met Fidel Castro in Mexico City . Che and Fidel met at the hands of Che .
 Castro was in self-imposed exile, having been released from prison after attempting to overthrow Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista’s regime in 1953 . Castro was released from jail in 1953 after trying to overthrow Batista's regime .
 He formed the 26th of July Revolutionary Movement, supported by his brother Raul and Che, who had become a committed Marxist . Raul, Che and Raul were also involved in the movement .
 Two days later the brigade of exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs, on the south coast of Cuba, and were decisively defeated by Castro’s forces . Two days after they landed, the brigade landed in Cuba and were defeated .
 In a television address seen around the world, he announced the presence of missiles and ordered a naval blockade to prevent Soviet ships from reaching Cuba . In a televised address, he ordered a blockade .
 Nearly 1,200 of the invaders were captured by Castro’s troops in s Cuba . The U.S. naval blockade of Cuba led to the Cuban invasion of Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco propelled Castro closer to the ' USSR, and was a huge embarrassment to U.S. President John F Kennedy . Bad weather delayed the surveillance flight until October 14 .
 U-2 spy plane obtained clear photographic evidence of medium-range missile sites within striking distance of major U.S. cities .
 The tension mounted as an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba, killing the pilot . The U.S. and Russia are in the midst of urgent negotiations between Washington and Moscow .
 He had taken power in Cuba by ousting the pro-American Batista dictatorship in 1955 . He openly mocked CIA plans to kill him, and openly mocked them .
 Cuban workers, including women, were armed and organized into defense groups . All Cuban workers were armed, organized into groups .
 The CIA recruited anti-Castro exiles who were secretly trained in camps in Guatemala in preparation for the invasion of Cuba . The CIA, meanwhile, recruited exiles, who were trained in the camps .
 In 1962 the USA placed United States intelligence medium-range Jupiter discovered that the missiles, armed with Soviet ship Kasimov, nuclear warheads, in photographed off Cuba, Turkey, threatening . The missiles were carrying IL-28 Soviet interests .
 Beagle bombers capable of carrying nuclear warheads . Soviet leader bearing nuclear Nikita Khrushchev warheads . Beagle bomber was carrying nuclear weapons .
 Fearing a persuaded Castro to soviet arms buildup, allow Soviet strategic Kennedy ordered a U-2 nuclear weapons to spy plane to fly over and be based on Cuba observe activity in Cuba . U.2 spy plane was based in Cuba and was sent to observe activity .
 Faced with the threat of nuclear war, the two sides reached a compromise . U.S. and Russia reached a deal to prevent nuclear war .
 In return for Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba, Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles . In exchange for Kennedy's promise not . to invade . Cuba, the missiles were removed from Cuba in return for a return to the missiles .
 1960s were an era of enormous change in Cuba . Observed by American naval ships, Soviet freighters, carrying missile systems, sailed away from Cuba .
 Europe emerged from the shadow of World War II, and economic growth was widespread . Europe emerged after the war, and the economy grew in the 1950s .
 At the same time, the Cold War was beginning to take hold, with proxy conflicts in Korea and Vietnam . At the end of the war, the U.S. was in the midst of a war in Vietnam .
 A fresh optimism, and increasing affluence, saw the emergence of new music, politics, and fashion . New music and politics were also emerging in the 1990s .
 If American rock and roll had dominated REBELES WITHOUT the music scene of the 1950s, the Sixties belonged to British .
 The Who rebelled against the post-war austerity and crossed the Atlantic to perform to hysterical crowds of their parents . First The Beatles, then bands such as The Who and The Rolling Stones crossed the border .
 London became the center of the Mod subculture, which was all about clothes, clubs, Jamaican music, and mopeds . London was the birthplace of the first Mod .
 The Rockers rode motorcycles and listened to rock and roll . Their bitter rivals were the Rockers, who rode motorcycles . They were rivals .
 His sensational, jazzinfluenced style made him one of the most innovative and influential musicians of his day . He was one of his most influential musicians .
 Underground Underground Press defied censorship laws and traditional notions of propriety . New publications defy censorship laws . Underground publications defied censorship .
 London offices were often raided and its staff prosecuted for obscenity . A young band from Liverpool made a name playing gigs at The Cavern Club .
 Not long after this early appearance, drummer Pete Best was replaced by Ringo Starr, completing the iconic lineup . Pete Best is replaced by Starr in the early 1960s .
 Activist Betty Friedan published The Feminine Mystique, renewing the campaign for gender equality . Activist Friedan was the founder of the Second World War II movement .
 The new movement did much to give women control of their own social and sexual lives . It fought the assumption that that a woman should be dependent on her husband .
 Andy Warhol put himself at the forefront of the movement . Warhol was an established artist at the time of his rise .
 He was fascinated by celebrity culture and his studio, the Factory, became famous for its starstudded parties . His studio, The Factory, was known for its celebrity parties .
 British designer Mary Ouant shocked the Establishment by launching the miniskirt, which left the wearer’s legs exposed up to the mid-thigh . Performers such as Bob Dylan advocated a new left-wing politics .
 The ‘Quant look’ was soon seen throughout the world . Despite, or perhaps because of, the initial scandal, the “Quant’s look” was seen everywhere .
 Twiggy, one of Quant’s early models, popularized a new, more androgynous look for women . Quant is based in Los Angeles, California, and based in New York .
 An estimated 400,000 people listened to the greatest musicians of the day perform live . An estimated 800,000 fans tuned in to the performances .
 The festival came to epitomize the Sixties, even as they gave way to a new, more cynical decade . The festival became a symbol of the 1960s, even though it was a more cynical era .
 In November 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated during a campaign visit to Texas . He was assassinated in full view of watching cameras .
 Oswald was charged with the murder of President Kennedy just before midnight . Oswald had been charged with President Kennedy's murder . Oswald was accused of killing President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Governor of Texas John Connally was also struck . Sitting just in front of Texas Governor was struck by a plane crash . Governor Connally died in the crash .
 Secret Agent Clint Hill leapt into the car to shield the President . Lee Harvey Oswald’s palm print was later RUSH TO HOSPITAL . Oswald's palm print later was later later found in the palm print .
 Medics arrived in just a few minutes, but there was little the medics could do . Medics were called to the scene but could not save the boy .
 Kennedy was planning to run for re-election in 1964, and his visit to Dallas was designed to gather support . Kennedy was also planning to visit Dallas in 1964 .
 He and his wife Jacqueline disembarked from Air Force One at Love Field airfield, just outside of the city .
 The pink outfit and pillbox hat Jackie Kennedy was wearing would become fixed in people's recollections of the day’s tragic events . Jackie Kennedy wore the pink outfit to the memorial service .
 Walter Cronkite removed his glasses to inform the nation that President Kennedy had died of his wounds at 13:00 Central Standard Time . President Kennedy's death was the first time the nation had heard the news of his death .
 The killing was one of the first national news stories to be broken on television . It was a national news story breaking the news of the killing .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested less than an hour after Kennedy’s death . Oswald was hiding in a theater in Dallas, Texas, when he was arrested .
 Oswald was being transferred to the A NATION MOURNS county jail, a Dallas . More than 800,000 nightclub owner named people lined the streets . Jack Ruby ran forward of Washington for and shot him in the funeral and stomach .
 Ruby’s motives for body was interred in killing Oswald remain unclear . Ruby's motive for body interred at Arlington National unclear .
 The arrested, but died of . pneumonia in 1966, by 19 heads of state, and before his case could . come to trial . and children . and . children .
 JFK's visit was due to start with a grand procession by motorcade through the city, ending at the Dallas Trade Mart . Kennedy’s motorcade was to be followed by the assassination of JFK's assassin .
 The journey was widely advertised in Dallas newspapers to allow crowds to gather by the roadside to greet the President . The journey had been expected to take 45 minutes .
 Lyndon B Johnson sworn in as the 36th President of the United States on board Air Force One . Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson was sworn in on the presidential plane .
 Jackie Kennedy, still wearing her bloodstained pink outfit, was at his side . At his side stood Jackie Kennedy still wearing the outfit .
 The plane took off for Washington, carrying ' the casket containing Kennedy’s body back to the White House .
 Warren concluded Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy, Ruby acted alone . Oswald and Ruby were killed by Ruby, Warren concluded .
 A further inquiry suggested that at least two gunmen fired at the President, but could not identify any definitive evidence of conspiracy . The inquiry could not find definitive evidence that the President was shot at .
 Americans still believe that the investigations were seriously flawed . Many Americans still think that the investigation was flawed .
 When three civil rights workers were murdered in Mississippi, federal investigators brought 18 people, including the local sheriff, to trial .
 Black people could be summarily hanged for an alleged crime, sometimes with the collaboration of local police . In the worst cases, black people were summarily executed for a crime .
 Nine black SIAULOKSVANACMMGLC(O MROMIARI AlORre) white school at Little Rock, Arkansas . Nine black students attended the school .
 Riots erupted as Governor Orval Faubus ordered the National Guard to stop the students . Governor Faubuus had to order National Guard in order to stop students .
 The Governer’s orders were overturned by President Eisenhower, who sent paratroopers to ensure that local forces complied . President Eisenhower sent troops to ensure compliance .
 President Kennedy K.Ghato mum olcrer-Naalom eynvce)ry| ™ to the campaign . President Kennedy .
 Police used tear gas, . fire hoses, dogs, and baton charges to suppress the protests . Police use tear gas . and dogs to 4 suppress protests .
 A group calling seamstress named Rosa itself the Montgomery Parks boarded a bus in Improvement Association Montgomery, Alabama, was established . The Montgomery Parks bus was established in 1963 .
 She was a member of the charismatic president of the . National Association for the . Reverend Martin Luther PANO Aicchaersiaals)al mel @ze)
 She was arrested. from across the nation. She rode her way through the South.
 Four black gents nel \Koyanel Carolina defied racial segregation in restaurants by sitting at a white-only counter . Four black men sat at the counter at a restaurant in North Carolina .
 Their action triggered a wave of ‘sit-ins’ in restaurants across the South . The sit-ins were sparked by a series of protests at a restaurant .
 Dr. Martin Luther King inspired the crowd with a speech setting out his vision of a country without racial prejudice . Dr. King was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi, in 1968 .
 Have a dream that my four itt 3 children will one day live in’a natior where they will not be judged, the color of their skin, fut | e) th content of their character . Five years later, King was assassinated .
 Indigenous people were herded onto reserves and denied ownership of their ancestral lands . They were denied ownership and herded into reserves .
 As many as one in ten Aboriginal children were removed from their families and put into white homes . One in 10 Aboriginal children removed from families were removed and put in white homes. One in ten were taken from Aboriginal families and placed into white houses .
 In 1963 Aborigines presented rights, social injustice, the Stolen Generation. the government with a petition education, and health calling for land rights. They became known as In 1963. The Stolen generation .
 Referendum + Wales to campaign to give Aborigines citizenship rights . They traveled —– sa pe pe pe c a around the country F —_ . _ , i towns of New South South Australia .
 Their supporters swelled to 2,000, and the site became known as the Aboriginal to them . The Aboriginal community became known for their support . The site was known as 'the Aboriginal'
 In 1949 the Commonwealth Electoral Act was amended to give the vote to Aborigines who had served in the war . It was amended in 1949 to give Aborigine who served in war .
 Between 1997 and 1999, state governments apologized to the Stolen Generation . Australia's then-prime minister apologized for the crimes .
 The USA was determined to prevent the spread of communism across the border . The USA wanted to prevent communism from spreading across the country .
 The scene was set for what would become the leader of China, in his campaign to become one of the defining struggles of the Cold War .
 Vietnam by Ho Chi Minh. S104 0) Ol) GK16 macovaeMl\Coyanal lexcrerovantomeolaanaanenanicianna ieler-vuetsjar .
 The USA was not crisis as a crucial test of id _ they nervously awaited Sieeimelenico)hi . United States resolve in the Cold an invasion by the pill .
 Their charm and talent had even won over the older generation, and seemingly the Establishment, too, determined to be associated with their youthful brilliance and global success . They have won over older generation and the Establishment .
 Their visit to Buckingham Palace, London, was a major news event . Police struggled to hold back crowds of hysterical fans that had gathered outside .
 Chairman Mao died on September 9 at the A proletarian party Peer end crina must get rid of the stale Senoa of mourning . Many believed that Jiang Oing, Mao’s wife and the architect of the Cultural Revolution, would take power .
 At the age of 72, Mao was eager to dispel any notion that he was unfit to rule . Mao's death in 1968 marked the end of Mao's reign in China .
 This is the start of a campaign to turn popular support into a cult of personality . It is the first time a campaign has been launched to turn public support into cults .
 NIXON IN CHINA unaware of events . in China . In China .
 Printing presses were pushed to the limit, churning out millions of copies . Millions of copies were printed by printing presses across the world .
 Lin Biao, head of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and Mao’s greatest ally, insisted that every soldier should read it . Mao's greatest ally insisted that all soldiers should read the book . The book was published by Mao's former ally, Mao's great ally, in
 Millions of young people from the cities were sent to work side by side with peasants in the countryside . Millions of people were sent home to the countryside to work alongside peasants . The lost generation was sent out to work with peasants .
 The wealthy “ and well-connected could ©"" usually find ways to stay at home .
 This collection of quotations from Mao’s speeches and writings was the foundation of his personality cult . The Little Red Book is a collection of quotes from Mao's speeches .
 Every Red Guard carried a copy of the book, and extracts were displayed on vast posters .
 Behind the scenes Mao’s health was failing, and the political elite were preparing to battle to succeed him . However, behind the scenes, Mao was preparing to step down from power .
 Hua ordered the arrest of Jiang Oing and her followers, the radical faction known as the Gang of Four . Hua ordered all expectations, but the arrest was not expected .
 Their downfall was enthusiastically welcomed in Beijing, and marked the end of the excesses of the Cultural Revolution . The downfall of the Communist Party was greeted in Beijing .
 Gang of Four were tried and convicted of anti-party activities . Gang of four members of the Communist Party were convicted of their anti-Party activities . Party members were jailed for life in prison for life behind bars . Gang was convicted of life in jail for life on charges of espionage and
 Mao’s reputation officially unblemished, but the scars of his last years in power would take decades to fade . The four became scapegoats, leaving Mao's reputation at risk . The scars of Mao's last years would take years to fade.
 Palestinian guerrilla groups began carrying out attacks against nee in Sinai in Sinai a the Gaza strip since ; Israel . Israel .
 The aftermath oo ame ferocity of Israel’s response would take them completely by surprise . However, when Arab forces prepared to mount an assault, the the the . the . aftermath of the . assault would surprise the Arab forces by surprise, say experts .
 Just infantry, and paratrooper 19 Israeli planes were lost in the onslaught . The Israeli military said it had moved swiftly into Sinai .
 The Israeli attack concentrated all its efforts on breaking through heavily fortified Egyptian positions in Sinai and the Gaza Strip . The attack concentrated on breaking into heavily fortified areas in Sinai .
 Syrian shelling from Golan Heights, the high rocky plateau overlooking northern Israel, was intense . Israeli Prime Minister Levi Eshkol, y, y i on the closing of the Straits of TIRAN, May 19, 1967 .
 Once the war in Sinai ended, Israel diverted resources to the northern battle zone . Once the conflict ended, the Israeli government diverted resources from Sinai .
 Named in honor of its | designer, Major Uziel Gal, the Uzi submachine gun had a high rate of fire and was standard issue for frontline Israeli soldiers in the Six-Day War . Named in . honor of the designer of the gun, Major . Uziel . Gal
 Nasser closed the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping, thereby blockading the port of Kilat, Israel's only access to the Red Sea . Nasser also stopped the flow of oil from its main supplier, Iran, Iran .
 Nasser’s calls for a pan-Arab alliance against Israel began to bear fruit . SIX-DAY war began in 1967 . Nasser's calls for an Arab-Arab Alliance against Israel came to fruition .
 The buildup of Arab forces on Israel’s borders continued as Iraq joined the military alliance . King Hussein of Jordan signed a mutual defense pact with Egypt, and Jordanian tanks moved toward the West Bank .
 Israel’s frantic quest for an international diplomatic solution failed . Israel's frantic quest to solve the problem failed, with the collapse of the Arab Spring .
 King Hussein ordered the Jordanian army to shell targets in Israeli-held West Jerusalem and the suburbs of Tel Aviv . King Hussein ignored Israeli pleas that Jordan should remain neutral .
 Israel launched a fierce counterattack and two days later, Israeli paratroopers took the Old City of Jerusalem . Two days after the attack, Israel took control of the city, Israel launched an offensive .
 Egypt's military chief Field Marshal Mohamed Abdel Hakim Amer ordered all units to retreat . Egypt's army chief says all units have been ordered to retreat from the situation .
 Thousands killed, others surrendered as Egyptian army raced back, pursued by Israeli forces . Thousands of Egyptians were killed and others surrendered .
 Israel had doubled its territory at the expense of its Arab neighbors . Claiming to have acted in selfdefense, Israel has doubled its borders . Israel says it acted in defense of its neighbors .
 More than 600,000 Palestinians living in the West Bank came under Israeli administration . More than 6,000 people living in West Bank under Israeli control .
 Israeli forces continued to advance after taking the Old City of Jerusalem . Area occupied by Israel after 1967 war Disputed frontier WEST BANK SEIZED .
 Jordanian forces retreated across the Jordan River and by the end of June 7 the entire West Bank was in Israeli hands . The West Bank is now in Israeli control .
 Social diverse range of music, from pure beauty to pure . noise . Political identity became tied to musical taste. noise. noise .
 It was an era of contrasts, with some artists sticking to their roots . By the end of the century, music stars were some of the tradition .
 As musical influences from all over the world’s richest and most influential people, we look at our musical influences . As a result, we have a list of the world's richest people and influential people .
 This was A ballet score composed by Igor helped by the rise of popular Stravinsky, it was a new musical music such as blues and jazz idiom .
 Jazz emerged from New Orleans, New York, but Chicago in caused a riot . Chicago was the first major city to stage a jazz festival .
 Nothing, it particular became its home, where stars such as Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald and Nat King Cole rose to prominence .
 Electric guitars redefined music for the 20th century . Frank Sinatra synonymous with to people’s Te rock and roll, , homes .
 Les Paul created many of the earliest models, including this 1940 prototype . Les Paul also created many other models of the 1930s model .
 Parents swayed to the sound of Julie Andrews (The Sound of Music, 1959) But their kids were dancing to a different tune . Julie Andrews was the star of the film .
 Charlie Parker experimented with bebop, James Brown mixed gospel with blues . Elvis Presley played rock and roll, and Johnny Cash established himself as king of country .
 America dominated the music scene into the early 1960s until The Beatles crossed the Atlantic and stormed the U.S. charts . America dominated America's music scene until the Beatles stormed the charts .
 Nirvana captured the plight of disillusioned youth, and Smells like Teen Spirit became an anthem for the loser generation . Nirvana's "Smells Like Teen Spirit" was released in November .
 Willi.i.am from the Black Eyed Peas hosts a club night in 2010 where electro is the new disco . 1970s glam rock was camp, over the top, and sardonic . In the 21st century, digital music is more important than digital music .
 Ife would have had no idea there was Ife on this planet . Rock and roll on the radio is one of the most popular forms of music .
 The internet and indie labels offer even amateur musicians an audience, and a shot at the big time . The internet offers an incredible range of musical choice at the touch of a button .
 Pop stars such as Madonna took the world by storm, helped enormously by the video revolution . The video revolution was the beginning of the 1980s .
 The war was deeply unpopular, and the war was never won . Americans were killed in the war .
 Protesters faced the guns and bayonets with flowers with flowers . The demonstrators attempted to entertain themselves .
 The Year of Protests 1968 was the year of protests in France . Protests against authoritarian regimes and rigid systems in Paris reverberated around the world . The year of protest was 1968 .
 Students took to the streets in cities from Rome to Prague and Mexico City . The largest of the demonstrations began with a small group of activists in the London, Paris and Paris .
 Students returning from the the actions of students ‘eB disciplinary hearing clashed with at the Sorbonne. Paris, inspired by the students 'eB. Paris' over Paris. Students returned from the . actions of . students 'Eb' disciplinary hearing . over Paris . Students
 A number of protestors first time workers and | were left unconscious and the students united ina ‘ ‘ massive protest forcing and tear gas . the closure of airports and rail stations . The streets were filled with smoke at streets filled with . smoke massive protest forced and tear . gas .
 Around 800,000 marched through | the streets, demanding de Gaulle’s resignation .
 Demonstrations against police paatality took place in several universities across Italy in the winter of 1967 . GRAFFITIT'IN 2 IN PARIS, MAY 1968 a 03/16/1968, a 3-month-old photo of the events .
 8 million workers joined the strike in car plants and factories . The message reached those outside Paris, and within a few days 8 million joined . The strike was the first of its kind in France since 1968 .
 The movement soon had a leader in Daniel Cohn-Bendit, a young German studying sociology at Nanterre . The movement became known as the "Red" movement .
 It swiftly descended into chaos when mounted police charged at the demonstrators . The incident was the first time mounted police had charged at demonstrators .
 Marchers gathered at the Arc de Triomph in Paris and cheered by spectators who lined the streets . Marchers gather in the streets of Paris to take part in the demonstration .
 Ina televised address to demanded that citizens back his program of reform . brink of civil war .
 Armed with Molotov cocktails, demonstrators in Paris set fire to the French stock exchange . Protesters set fire at the French government's stock exchange in Paris . Protesters were armed with Molotsets and Molotets .
 The protest shifted to the heart of Paris when Cohn-Bendit was told to attend a disciplinary board in the center of the city .
 An embarrassed President Charles de Gaulle ordered the arrest of the ring leaders . The arrests were made after a series of embarrassing incidents in France .
 Fearing the worst, the government announced an early election . Fears the worst and the government announces an early vote .
 Crowds gathered in support of the French president, but the movement lost steam . Crowds gather in support for the president in Paris .
 In the following months, student protests took place in Spain, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the USA, and Mexico . The spirit of revolution a crossed the globe . In the USA and Mexico, student protesters took place .
 As the people sought new freedoms, they posed a challenge that the neighboring Soviet Union could not tolerate . The Soviet Union would not tolerate the people seeking freedom .
 Anti-Soviet opinion escalated and people took to the streets to show their discontent . Anti-Russian opinion escalated in the 1960s .
 Czechoslovakians sent messages in Russian to the invaders . Such graffiti was common as Czechoslovakia was invaded by the Soviet Union .
 Pamphlets and posters spread information about the occupation . of desperate people standing defenseless against the tanks drew worldwide sympathy for the rebellion .
 Around 500,000 troops, mostly from the Soviet Union, poured into Czechoslovakia . These reforms were later known as the ‘Prague Spring,’ and made Dubcek a national hero .
 They quickly surrounded all | key party, government, army, and media i | buildings in Prague . They quickly surround all key government, military, government buildings .
 After signing the Moscow Protocols that reversed his reforms, he was allowed eon | to remain in office until April 1969, when he was replaced, expelled from the Communist party, and given a job as a forestry official .
 Riots erupted in 1969 when student Jan Palach burned himself to death in protest at the occupation . Riots in 1969 erupted in protest against the occupation of the city .
 4 Czechoslovakia remained | a soviet satellite state until 1989 . Nonetheless, 4 Czechs remained in the Soviet Union . Czechsoslovakia was a 'soviet state' until 1989.
 Dubcek tried to assure the Soviets that he was still loyal, but Russia crossed the border in July . Russia moved tanks up to the Czechoslovakian frontier and in July crossed into Czechoslovakia . Despite attempts to assure him he was loyal, the Soviets moved tanks to the
 In protest, Czechoslovakians staged a one-hour strike . After Dubcek’s exit, officials of the communist party took over .
 Czechoslovakia witnessed a mass exodus, as thousands escaped to refugee camps in Austria and attempted to enter Western Europe . Thousands of Czechs fled to Austria and tried to enter western Europe . Czechsoslovakia was one of Europe's most prosperous countries .
 It was taken as the unmanned Lunar Orbiter 1 was about to Hehe ey-)aihelemnal-miuKereyal . During its 16th orbit, it was taking pictures of the moon .
 Ground control waited anxiously while the crew of Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders were out of contact as they made the maneuver . Ground control was waiting anxiously for the crew to make the move .
 U.S. scientists faced the (ol ate NiKcyale(omeyimelbnllonhalemr-mqelel coir) powerful enough to reach the Moon and a spacecraft that could safely travel there and back .
 The Saturn V was the most powerful rocket ever to send an unmanned spacecraft into Earth’s orbit . The rocket was launched by the Saturn V in 1964 .
 Sputnik 1 was the world’s first artificial satellite . It provided an extra boost to send Apollo on a trajectory for the Moon . The simple satellite took 98 minutes to orbit the Earth .
 It sent back valuable data on conditions in space and the upper atmosphere . The mission was the first of its kind to carry out a mission to orbit Earth .
 Its success came as a surprise to the Americans, who were unaware of Soviet advances . The success of the Soviet Union was a surprise .
 Project Gemini saw the USA set the record for the longest complete 10 piloted missions solo space flight of five days . Valentina Tereshkova in 1X6 became the first American to walk in space woman .
 The two when he exited his Gemini 4 cosmonauts were branded spacecraft for 21 minutes . The two who exited the spacecraft were branded as astronauts . The astronauts were branded astronauts in the spacecraft .
 Russia’s ‘Romeo and Juliet’ space team. leKomcounalemnalom-y-40\-1als)acers) space team . Russia's “Romee and Juliet.’
 In June 1970 Baader, Meinhof, and some of their associates trained at a Palestinian guerrilla base outside Amman, Jordan, Jordan . Baader trained at the base .
 RAF members Jan-Carl Raspe and Holger Meins were killed in a U.S. shootout . On their return to Berlin, they mounted a series of bomb attacks against police, publishers, and United States military bases .
 Despite this setback, a new generation of activists joined the RAF and their acts of terrorism continued . The RAF was forced to withdraw from the RAF in 2003 .
 She was brainwashed by her kidnappers, she began participating in ' their activities' Her kidnappers kidnapped her and forced her to join their activities .
 RAF was linked to dozens of bombings, along with the murders of several policemen . By 1972, when she was finally arrested, the RAF had been linked to several bombings and murders .
 They demanded the release of six terrorists and RAF members . They were duly freed and flown to Aden, Yemen, where they were flown in .
 Baader began his crusade by targeting places that he + i perceived as symbols of consumer capitalism . Baader's crusade began targeting places where he +i perceived as symbolizing consumer capitalism.
 One infamous activist a demanded the release was Venezuelan-born Ilich fe C revol uti on of all Baader—Meinhof Ramirez Sanchez, better known defendants, but this as Carlos the Jackal . One of the most famous Baader defendants was Carlos theJackal .
 Two of Israeli businesses and individuals were shot in Europe . Two of the hostages were shot .
 All of the terrorists two French counterintelligence agents were captured without agents sent to question him . His most notorious exploits APRIL Ai Nos were still to come .
 Baader and Meinhof became heroes for many young West Germans . RAF activities did not end until 1998, when it disbanded .
 In Italy, the terrorist organization Brigate Rossi sought to bring about armed revolution . The terrorist organization brigate Rossi was founded in 1968 .
 The Bengali army streets of the capital, officer, Ziaur Rahman, Dhaka, amid scenes of seized the radio station violence . Shortly weapons, took to the afterward, the .
 Mujib was flown to a of the situation in West Pakistan prison . Meanwhile, Pakistan to take control of the country . Pakistan is to take over the situation after the coup .
 Popularly known as Sheikh Mujib, Rahman headed the Awami League that led the Bengali opposition to West Pakistan’s ruling elite . Prime Minister Indira Gandhi appealed for international help and planned military intervention .
 The Awami League won nearly all the seats in East Pakistan in the national elections held in the following month . Blaming the central government for failing to help the victims, the party won the election . Blamed the government for not helping the victims in the aftermath .
 Sheikh Mujib has a clear majority in the regional assembly . The result gave him a majority of the regional parliament . The results were announced in a televised broadcast .
 Mujib appealed to Bengalis to resist the government, stopping just short of calling for independence . order degenerated » into a rampage of / terror and bloodshed . MuJib appealed for Bengalis not to resist government, but stopped just short to calling for independent .
 Dhaka’s Hindu minority was singled out for the worst of the violence .
 Yahya Khan launched preemptive airstrike into northwest India on December 3, but inflicted little damage . His successor, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, immediately ordered Mujib’s release .
 Indira Gandhi ordered nine army divisions to cross the border into East Pakistan . Mm. wa the Pakistan army to join the Mukti Bahini, | an underground army of Bangladesh aa freedom fighters .
 Leaders of the Awami League | established an interim government in Calcutta, India . Leaders established the interim government of the state .
 With air links to West Pakistan cut off and Dhaka blockaded from the sea, the Pakistan army surrendered . With 90,000 troops handing themselves over to Indian forces, the Pakistani army handed itself in .
 Sheikh Mujib traveled to London, where he addressed the world's media . returned to Dhaka, greeted by euphoric crowds .
 On January 12, he formally took office as Prime Minister of the Mukti Bahini fighter, was issued in 1981 to commemorate the 10th anniversary of Bangladesh's independence .
 Amin took great pleasure in taunting Uganda’s former colonial rulers, giving himself the titles of Conqueror of the British Empire . Amin announced that all Asians who were not Ugandan citizens must leave the country within 90 days .
 Around 60,000 secondand third-generation immigrants from India—holders of British passports—were affected . Around 60 per cent of those affected were second and third generation Indian immigrants . The decision was made in a bid to protect the British passport .
 Most fled to Britain, where they faced an uncertain future . Forced to abandon their businesses and property, most fled to the UK . Most of the refugees were forced to leave their homes and businesses .
 Denis Hills, a British on his behalf, was sentenced to a death sentence in 1975 . Denis Hills was the only person to speak out against the death sentence . Hills' death sentence was the result of the death penalty . Hills was a British citizen .
 Amin launched an attack on neighboring Tanzania in October 1978 . Amin's forces attacked neighboring Tanzania . Amin was in control of the country .
 The Tanzanian army, backed by the Uganda National Liberation Army, captured the capital, Kampala, and Amin fled . Amin fled oa the country . Amin was captured by the Tanzanians and Amin was forced to flee to Tanzania .
 He imposed subject living in Uganda, for describing him as a ‘village tyrant” in a book he was writing, he said . He was writing about Uganda's Ugandan president .
 Amin released Hills only when British Foreign Minister James Callaghan flew to Uganda to intercede and the uncrowned King of Scotland of Scotland . Amin's release was only after a British intervention by Amin's Ugandan government .
 His regime was noted for gross human rights violations, ethnic violence, and political repression . He was responsible for the deaths of more than 100,000 people . The rule of this erratic and cruel leader was far from a joke .
 Amin turned away from the West, seeking ties with the USSR, Fast Germany, and Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi . Amin turned to the West in the 1970s and '80s . Amin sought ties with Russia, Germany and Libya . Amin was killed by the Soviet Union and the
 Amin offered the terrorists supplies and the support of his armed forces . Amin also offered them supplies and support from his army . Amin was in charge of the Taliban in the 1980s .
 Israeli commandos freed hostages in daring rescue operation . Amin fled Uganda, leaving its economy in ruins . Yusufu Lule was sworn in as interim president .
 President Milton Obote fa dy was out of the country when Idi Amin unleashed a wave of killings . Amin feared that killings as he purged the army of Obote loyalists . Amin was afraid that killings would take place during the purge .
 More than 6,000 people are thought to have died during Obote's first year in power . Obote was about to put him on trial for misuse of army during his first year of power .
 Ugandans initially welcomed his leadership after years of corrupt misgovernment under Obote . Ugandan President Yusususuwa was elected in 2009 . He has been accused of corruption in Uganda since then .
 He was capable of brutal sadism toward his enemies, using torture and massacre to further his political whims . He was able to torture and kill his enemies in order to gain political power .
 He was also known as an eccentric, granting himself a series of extravagant titles . At the same time, he was known for forcing four British businessmen to carry him on a throne .
 He ordered the killings of the Anglican Archbishop of Uganda, Janani Luwum, and two cabinet ministers, who dared to denounce his acts of violence . He kept all opposition at bay, ordering killings of all opposition to him .
 An official tribunal said the soldiers had been shot at first, a finding overturned by a new inquiry in 2010 . A new inquiry overturned that finding in 2010 overturned by the new inquiry .
 The Catholic Republic was furious that the Catholic Republic would have a say in Northern Irish affairs . They were furious that it would be the first time they had a say .
 In the aftermath of Bloody Sunday, support for the IRA increased, and protesters frequently with British troops . Irish nationalists responded with outrage, sparking riots .
 1972 was 496—the highest IRA HUNGER STRIKES by locking up suspected militants at the infamous Maze Prison just outside Belfast . In response British Prime Minister Edward Heath suspended the Northern Ireland by suspending direct rule .
 Several of the inmates, led by Bobby Sands, went on a jakohalege) Kem 04/10/1998 PEACE DEAL REACHED 1Dyhe)Koyank-inlem-vaKelance .
 The Good Friday Agreement was signed by Northern Irish political parties, as well as the British and Irish governments . The agreement was signed in Northern Ireland by Northern Ireland's political parties .
 It received resounding joke) e)bNk-harsj0he)ele)arm-nalel paved the way for an end to violence over the following years . The joke received a resounding response .
 Catholic Bogside were often accused of being as brutal as the fofenis-vaauaal-VelMmelaneveayeln-vel Hioyceal terrorists, and secretly Rome gbl-)l melal-mrale)i-saler-e .
 In 1973, hundreds were RALLY AGAINST injured as a car bomb INTERNMENT exploded outside the A poster by the Old Bailey law courts in INCoyaratsiealshasdk-nare| |oyalo loyal hau GoW Lsure hale)
 Eight men wearing sweatsuits and carrying automatic rifles scaled the fence and headed for the Israeli quarters . Die Heiteren Spiele wanted to emphasize the peaceful face of modern Germany . At 4:30 am eight men wearing . sweatsuits scaled the . fence .
 The men belonged to Black September, a Palestinian paramilitary organization . The men are believed to belong to the Black September .
 Two team members had been shot dead in the apartment and nine were taken hostage . Five coaches, two wrestlers, and two weightlifters were among the hostages . Two weightlifting team members were shot dead .
 Palestinian terrorists break into the Olympic village and take 11 hostages from the Israeli team . Palestinian terrorists broke into the village and took 11 hostages, including 11 Israeli team members .
 The fate of the attackers and their hostages would scar the memory of the Games and horrify the world . The future of the Olympic Games Games would also be scarred by the tragedy .
 The hostages were killed in their rooms yesterday morning, nine were killed at the airport tonight . They've now said that there were 11 hostages . The hostages are believed to be at least 11 people killed .
 i, s 09/05/1972 Palestinians demanded transportation to Cairo . Palestinians demanded transport to Cairo. i. 1972 Palestinians were transported to Cairo for transport .
 German police pretended to agree, but in reality they were preparing a trap . The German police said they were prepared for a trap, but it was not a surprise .
 The Games were suspended for the following morning as 80,000 spectators and 3,000 athletes attended a memorial service in the Olympic stadium . The following morning they were told two helicopters would take them to a nearby airport, where they were driven to the airport .
 Armed police responded swiftly by surrounding the building, even as the hostage-takers spelled out their demands . Many criticized the Olympic committee’s decision to let the Games continue the previous ' day .
 After an evening at the theater, the Israeli team returned to their apartment building in a relatively isolated part of the Olympic village . The Israeli team went to the theater at the end of the evening to watch the performances .
 The organizers had purposely kept security light to ensure a relaxed atmosphere . Only a chainlink fence surrounded the village was erected .
 German officials kept up continuous communication with the terrorists in an attempt to negotiate the hostages’ release . German officials have been in constant communication with terrorists since the hostage crisis began .
 Palestinians threw a grenade | into one helicopter, killing four hostages, and shot dead all five hostages in the other . helicopter . Police snipers opened fire, killing 4 hostages in one helicopter .
 The bodies of the Airport in Israel, where a State funeral was held, were laid to rest . The bodies were taken from the airport .
 Photographs of the murdered athletes were circulated around the world . They were released after Black september hijacked . 4s] A MURDERED ATHLETES .
 The violence of their final hours contrasted sharply with the Olympic message of peace and cooperation . Violence of the final hours of the Olympics threatened to blow it on board. Violence of violence against the athletes threatened to undermine the message .
 In 1973 he was overthrown in a right-wing coup led by General Hien dice i Augosto Pinochet . Pinochet was leader of a repressive en eet am military dictatorship that lasted two decades .
 At noon, jet fighters attacked the palace with bombs and rockets . seeing their chance, a group of army officers attempted a coup .
 Tanks opened fire on official buildings, but loyalist troops defeated the uprising . Loyalist troops defeat the uprising in a landslide .
 After being sworn in as the head of a four-man junta, Pinochet declared that . the coup had . been necessary to save Chile from the yoke of Marxism, he said . Pinochet .
 He ordered an immediate purge of Allende’s supporters and other left-wingers . 'oe Democratic rule was — indefinitely suspended. ‘oe Democratic . rule was . indefinitely suspended .
 Officials claimed that two-thirds of Chileans were in favour of the 1973 vote . But the vote was widely seen as rigged .
 Allende arranged state visit from Fidel Castro, communist leader of Cuba . Controversy deepened when Allende invited Castro to state visit . Allende was forced to resign from Chile .
 With Allende beside him, Castro visited copper mines and addressed vast rallies of workers . Castro was in Chile at the time of his visit .
 In Santiago, a group of right-wing women marched through the streets banging pots and pans in protest . Right-wing groups are known for their anti-immigration policies in the past .
 Suspected dissidents were rounded up, and ' many were tortured and executed' Other detention centers sprang up around the country . 'Many were tortured or executed'
 This time, however, the popular Opposition was too strong, and he was defeated . This time he was beaten by popular opposition .
 He lost the subsequent presidential election but remained in command of the army . He ensured that the abuses committed by his regime were not investigated .
 It was 10 years before an attempt was made to call Pinochet to account . Pinochet was arrested 10 years later, but was never charged .
 During a visit to a London hospital, he was arrested at the request of a Spanish judge . The judge sought his extradition on charges of human rights abuse . He was arrested in Spain at a request of the Spanish judge who sought extradition .
 The day chosen for the attack was Yom Kippur , the holiest day of the | Jewish year . The attack occurred on the day chosen to be the holiest of the year .
 American action involved airlifting replacement tanks, artillery, and ammunition supplies in U.S. military transport planes to Israel . This bec ause of oil was caused by a shortage of fuel .
 Egyptian territory, and the Golan Heights, bordering Syria, are located in the Mediterranean region . Egyptian territory is located near the border with Syria . The region is also known as the Israeli-occupied Syrian border .
 Sadat and | his allies planned a surprise attack aay to retake the disputed territories . They were supported with funds and material from at least nine of the region’s Arab states .
 Arab members of OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) imposed an embargo on oil shipments to Europe and the USA in retaliation for the American military airlift . Aqaba 10/20/1973 | OIL EMBARGO IMPOSED Arab members .
 The embargo, which lasted until March 1974, sparked an economic recession . The embargo was imposed by the West in 1973 .
 As oil supplies began to run out, Britain became one of many countries that imposed fuel rationing .
 Henry Kissinger arranged for an exchange of Syrian and Israeli prisoners of war as part of a disengagement agreement . The exchange was part of an agreement between Israel and Syria .
 Israel agreed to withdraw to the Purple Line and a UN buffer zone was set up in the Golan Heights . Israel withdrew from the line and agreed to a buffer zone in the Israeli-occupied area .
 Egyptian attack began with an intense aerial assault on Israeli positions in Sinai, on the east of the Suez Canal . Yom Kippur war crossed the border with Egypt on Monday .
 advance troops established five bridgeheads across the ; canal . By dusk advance troops had established five bridges across the canal .
 One division crossed the Suez Canal south of Ismailia, where it advanced to within 65 miles of the Egyptian capital . The Suez—Cairo road is 65 miles from Cairo, Egypt .
 UN-brokered ceasefire came into effect as Israeli forces were on the point of destroying the Egyptian Third Army, cut off in Sinai . The Egyptian army was cut off by Israeli forces in the Sinai region .
 Israeli troops remained on the west side of the Suez Canal until the following January . Israeli forces remained in the area until January .
 Israel agreed to return Sinai to Egypt in return for Egypt’s recognition of Israel as a nation . Sinai was returned to Sinai in exchange for Egyptian recognition of the Israeli nation .
 An RKG-3 antitank grenade of the type supplied to the Egyptian army by the USSR during the Yom Kippur War . The grenade was supplied to Egypt by the Soviet Union during the war .
 Richard Nixon was the only American President ever to resign from office . Nixon scandal led to the trial and conviction of a number of top White House officials .
 He celebrated the win with Vice President Spiro Agnew, who would be forced to resign for income tax evasion in 1973 .
 The hearings went on for a year, and were broadcast live on television from start to finish . The hearings were held in Washington, D.C. and broadcast live for the first time .
 In a key conversation recorded on June 23, 1972, he had asked for the FBI’s investigation into the break-in to be stopped . He had been confronted by furious crowds calling for the investigation to be halted .
 James McCord worked for the committee to re-elect Richard Nixon . Two days later The Washington Post revealed that the “burglers’ had been planting bugs .
 Washington Post reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward received a tip-off that senior White House staff had known about, and approved of, the break-in . President NIXON, TAPED CONVERSATION, JUNE 23, 1972 .
 President Nixon said no one in the White House or Nixon’s Administration had been involved in the break-in . White House counsel John Dean was later revealed to be high-ranking high .
 He electrified proceedings by stating that Nixon was involved in the cover-up and knew about payments used to buy the silence of the Watergate conspirators . It emerged that he had recorded meetings at the White House during which the cover up was planned .
 The President fought hard, agreeing only to hand over edited transcripts of the tapes, numbering 1,200 pages . The President agreed to hand the transcripts over to the White House .
 Former British colony, Cyprus gained independence in 1960 following years of resistance to colonial rule . Republic of Cyprus was established under a set of complicated treaties .
 When tensions between the island’s Greek Cypriot majority and Brocident Atenbichon Makancettn continued to simmer . The island is now home to the island's Greek and Turkish Cypriots . The Greek-Cypriot island is home to a
 A Greek Cypriot proposed constitutional changes that were armed forces of mainland Greece and Turkey became M.M. The island was threatened with war when the government of the island withdrew from the government .
 Many crowded into the Turkish quarter of Nicosia in tents and shacks, creating slumlike conditions . The Turkish quarter is one of the most densely populated parts of Cyprus .
 Turkish settlements were looted and destroyed in Cyprus . Some 20,000 people fled the worst areas of violence in the country .
 British soldiers, backed by UN peacekeeping troops, stepped in and monitored activity along the Green Line . As the situation worsened, British soldiers backed by peacekeepers stepped in .
 In June 1964, they once again threatened an invasion, launching air strikes on Cypriot ships . The Turkish-Cypriot invasion of Cyprus took place in June 1964 .
 Only a warning from U.S. President Lyndon B Johnson to Turkish leader Ismet Inonu pursuaded them to withdraw . The Greek Cypriots will march on to complete the final victory .
 The homemade weapon was used by the Greek Cypriot guerrilla group EOKA, first against British rule, and then against Turkish Cypriots .
 The House of Representatives passed a bill forming a National Guard . All male Cypriots between 18 and 59 years eligible for military service .
 Relations between the junta and President Makarios became increasingly strained after the latter decided enosis was no longer possible in the short term . Relations between Makarios and junta became strained after Makarios decided it was not possible .
 Greece organized more pro-enosis Cypriot groups to subvert his government . Pro-Enosis groups subverted his government in Cyprus . The Greek-Cypriot leader's government was overthrown by pro-easternist groups .
 The Greeks and Turks called it an invasion, while the Turks claimed it was a peacekeeping operation . The Greeks called it a 'invasion' and a 'peacekeeping' operation .
 Turkish troops had occupied the northern third . of the island and 5,000 a | Greek Cypriots had fled a their homes . By the time a ceasefire was put in place three days later, Turkish forces had J occupied the . northern third , J of the . island .
 Communal violence erupted in Nicosia, Cyprus’s capital, when a Greek Cypriot patrol killed two Turkish Cypriots on the edge of the Turkish quarter . The National Guard absorbed the National Guard .
 Fighting broke out along the line separating the Greek and Turkish quarters, known as the Green Line . As the news spread, fighting broke out .
 On July 15, a bloody coup, supported by Greece’s military regime, replaced Makarios with enosis activist and militia leader Nicos Sampson . The coup was supported by the military regime .
 Makarios evaded capture and fled to Britain . Fierce fighting broke out between the supporters of Makarios and his detractors . Makarios escaped capture .
 Sampson proclaimed the establishment of The Hellenic Republic of Cyprus in 1953 . Sampson declared the country's independence in 1964 . Cyprus was the first republic of Cyprus .
 When a bloodless army coup ended nearly 50 years of dictatorial rule in Portugal, crowds threw carnations at soldiers . Crowds thrust carnations into the barrels of their guns .
 Euphoria soon gave way to months of political confusion and failed governments . Euphoria was replaced with months of chaos and failed government .
 Civilian crowds flooded the streets in support of the rebels in Syria . Civilians were in the streets supporting the rebels .
 They passed red carnations to the soldiers as a symbol of peaceful revolution . Red carnations were passed to soldiers by the soldiers .
 Lisbon radio station broadcast a banned political song on April 25, 1974 . Just after midnight, the song was broadcast by a Portuguese radio station .
 Tanks rolled into Lisbon and by dawn the army had taken control of government offices . The army took control of the government offices in Lisbon .
 The only shots exchanged were outside PIDE (Portuguese security police) headquarters, where four people died . Four people were killed in clashes between police and protesters .
 Portugal was engulfed in a wave of strikes in early September . The government was forced to step down after a series of strikes . Portugal has been hit by strikes since September .
 A major section of the army remained under the control of radical left-wing officers .
 Koa Mme.mmanr-V.@hale me alc mecoalnbalorelmalcr-hyavmelonatelalcscmneye).¢ its toll on Foreman . However, things played out differently in the ighalomua
 By the seventh round, Ali began to dominate, and floored Foreman in the eighth . Foreman floored Ali in the final eight rounds .
 Mmarsarcomm-comm-halemcyo(ei0ha-le mm alls status as a true sporting icon . Against rel loo leksyanaarola, marsarrelaarola is a true sports icon .
 When the Palestine Liberation Army was expelled from Jordan seeking revenge for an in 1970, it established a new base in Lebanon . They were expelled from the Jordan in 1970 .
 Muslims welcomed the PLO's decision to join the fight against Gemayel . The PLO was welcomed by Muslims who believed it would help them in their struggle against the regime .
 The smoldering hatred militia responded between these groups exploded into a civil war that included amen invasions, assassinations, and many atrocities . Both sides were responsible for many atrocities on both sides of the war .
 The Syrian presence failed to stop PLO guerrilla attacks on Israel . Israeli troops assaulted PLO positions in southern Lebanon after two years of uneasy peace .
 Palestinians had been any foreign armed persuaded to leave by U.S. diplomat Philip Habib . Palestinians were forced to leave their homes by the United States diplomat .
 Sire EGGERS presence on our land. guerrillas, led by Yasser Arafat, left Beirut and headed for Tunisia. Sire Sire Eggers .
 International sympathy for Lebanese Muslims evaporated when Islamic militants detonated two bombs at the barracks of the peacekeepers . President-elect was elected in 1982 .
 The USA responded with outrage, and the entire peacekeeping force was withdrawn . The U.S. pulled out of the UN's mission in 2010 .
 UN responded by sending a task force to help restore government control . The UN responded to the situation by sending an international task force . The task force has been called to help the government restore control .
 Israel pulled out, handing the area over to its Christian allies . Israel grudgingly pulled out of the area, handing it over to Christian allies.
 Israeli ambassador to the United Kingdom, Shlomo Argov, was shot and seriously wounded in London . Israel blamed the PLO for the attack on Argov .
 Three days later they attacked Lebanon once again, laying seige to the capital, Beirut .
 Phalangist militiamen, seeking revenge, turned on Palestinians in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps . The camps were targeted by the militants, who were seeking revenge .
 Syria launched a major assault on the Lebanese government, destroying the Presidential Palace and army headquarters . Fighting continued for several years, until Syria launched an attack on the government .
 Many blamed his death on Syrian agents and, in the popular protests, Syrian forces left Lebanon . Many blamed Syrian agents for his death . Syrian forces have since withdrawn from Lebanon .
 Protests against the war and for global peace became part of the counter-culture movement . Protests were against World War II and against global peace .
 U.S. forces finally withdrew from the region after eight years of bombing campaign . Vietnamese soldiers and Vietnamese soldiers continued fighting . United States forces withdrew from Vietnam in 2003 .
 This limited offensive defeated the main force of the South Vietnamese Army . It was a limited offensive against the main South Vietnamese army .
 The South’s forces began a hasty retreat, which quickly became a rout across the country . on Saigon, the South Vietnamese capital, and soon surrounded the city . The South Vietnamese forces began to retreat, and the rout quickly became rout across country .
 Three days later, they took Saigon with little resistance . Saigon was captured by the Vietnamese army on April 30 .
 With the south Vietnamese government declared dissolved, the Vietnam War was finally over . With the South Vietnam War declared over, the war was over in Vietnam .
 Survivors appeared on TV, and the massacre prompted outrage around the world . Survivors appeared in television, and survivors appeared on television .
 Hue, in South Vietnam, was leveled in intense street-to-street fighting . Hue is a city in the heart of the country's most populous province . Hue was a major city in Vietnam's communist South Vietnam .
 In one strike napalm was plunged into conflict dropped on Trang Bang, against their will . Many soldiers | | intensified, and in one air were conscripts, .
 MARSHALL MCLUHAN, MAY 16, 1975, of the remaining U.S. citizens. y, y, of remaining United States citizens .
 About 7,000 people were taken by helicopter from the United States 4 Embassy roof . About seven,000 were taken from the roof of the U.S. 4 Embassy .
 A Portuguese colony, it became independent in 1975 after long years of violent struggle . It became independent after years of struggle, raising hopes of its people .
 Within days, fighting broke out again, plunging the country into Africa’s longest-running conflict .
 As statues of Portuguese leaders tumbled, it represented a victory for the Angolan independence movement . The statues were toppled in a bid to topple Portuguese leaders .
 Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola declared itself the ruling party on Independence Day . Dr. Luiz was the first president of Angola since independence .
 Dos Santos signed a peace accord with the leader of » UNITA, Jonas Savimbi, to end the fighting . Dos Santos, who was in charge of UNITa, signed the peace accord in 1994, in 1994 .
 Savimbi dragged Angola back into war with the MPLA in 1992 . The MPLA won the longawaited election in 1992, but the war resumed in 1994, when the war broke out . Savibbi won the election in 1996, but then went on to kill himself .
 The election was intended to end the war, but the violence grew worse . The vote was meant to end it, but it did not end it .
 UNITA seized control of Huambo, Angola’s second largest city, in a battle that cost 12,000 lives . The battle that took place in Huambo was the deadliest of the country's civil war in the 1990s and 2000s .
 By 1993 1,000 people were dying each day from deplorable living conditions and indiscriminate bombing . By 1993, more than a million people had died in the country .
 dos Santos and Savimbi's presence was dependent upon a public handshake . Their presence in Brazil was dependent on a handshake between the two men . dos Santos' presence in the country was dependent only upon a handshake with Savimba .
 UN forces hoped to oversee disarmament and withdrawal of troops . The UN forces hope to oversee the withdrawal of the troops .
 The civil war led to the proliferation of landmines across Angola . Angola's civil war ended in 2006 .
 More than 4. million people were internally displaced and 500,000 killed . More than 5 million people are internally displaced . 500,500 people were killed in the conflict .
 Although rich in natural resources, the Angolan economy was left in tatters by the prolonged war . The country is rich in oil, diamonds, agriculture, ' and fisheries .
 Agriculture was hit by the proliferation of ® landmines throughout the | country . Agriculture hit by proliferation of the proliferation .
 Trade activities stopped, education ignored, and corruption and greed fed the ruling elite . Trade activities ceased, education was ignored and corruption was ignored .
 The flags of the MPLA party and the new independent Angola are held aloft . Angola is now an independent country .
 Only elections... can provide a final solution... in the end, the ballot must decide, not bullets . Only elections ... can provide the final solution, says CNN.com .
 1970-1979 Khmer Rouge was a communist guerrilla force formed to resist French colonial rule in Cambodia . It was formed in the 1970s and '80s to resist colonial rule of Cambodia .
 Cambodia was in the throes of civil war in the 1970s . Destabilized by war in neighboring Vietnam, the country was in a state of war .
 The Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, seized control of the country in 1975 . The country was renamed Democratic Kampuchea in 1975 and renamed after the war .
 Their brief rule would become infamous as one of the most brutal regimes of the 20th century . Their brutal rule would be known for their brutal treatment of the poor .
 The war was marked by extreme brutality on both sides and casualties were high . It was also marked by the brutality of both sides .
 The people, mostly refugees from the civil war, joyously welcomed Pol Pot’s troops as liberators, tragically unaware of the horrors that the new regime would unleash . The people were tragically unaware that Pol Pot would unleash his new regime .
 Thousands of Buddhist monks were stripped of their robes and forced into labor brigades . Thousands of monks stripped of robes were stripped and forced to labor brigade .
 Anyone suspected of being middle class or an intellectual (which could mean simply wearing glasses) faced execution . It could also mean someone wearing glasses or wearing a mask .
 Khmer Rouge fled to mountains on the border with Thailand . As their tanks entered Phnom |* Penh, the Khmer . Rouge . fled to the mountains .
 Cambodia's ruler Prince Sihanouk allowed North Vietnamese soldiers to operate from within Cambodia during the Vietnam War . The U.S. intervened in order to stop the Vietnamese invasion .
 A joint US-South Vietnamese operation invaded Cambodia in an attempt to flush out Vietnamese communists . Shortly after, a joint US and South Vietnamese operation was launched in Cambodia .
 The start of a new era was proclaimed, and an eight-point program was announced o “purify” Cambodia from capitalism and foreign influences . Cambodia was declared to be a rural, classless society .
 Phnom Penh’s entire population of 2 million people was marched into the countryside at gunpoint and forced to work as rice farmers . The country's entire population was marched to the countryside and forced into work as farmers .
 Tuol Sleng, a school in Phnom Penh, was the iconic temple city of Angkor Wat, dating back to the early 12th century, halting restoration work . Khmer Rouge soldiers occupied the school in the 1970s, occupying it .
 Many feared that these historical symbols would be destroyed, in converted into a prison . Many feared it would be turned into a jail .
 At any one time it held 1,000 prisoners, who were brutally tortured and murdered . At any time, the prison was held at least 1,200 prisoners .
 Out of an estimated 17,000 prisoners incarcerated there, only 20 survived . a manner similar to the Cultural Revolution in China . Only 20 prisoners survived .
 Approximately | new Vietnam-backed one-fifth of the population | government . Approximately . new Vietnam backed one of the . government .
 Tuol Sleng is a genocide museum . Today, Tuol . Sleng . avoided died and tens of capture but was never thousands were orphaned . Thousands of thousands of children died .
 Photos of its victims, including many children, hang on its walls . in the Pol Pot years .
 Greater understanding led to breakthroughs in diagnosing and treating disease . Greater understanding of human disease led to better diagnosis and treatment .
 The turn of the century was an exciting time for medicine . Technology accounted for some of the greatest changes, with the emergence of robotic robots .
 A, B, and O Transfusion—donation of blood from one person to another— became much safer, because donor and recipient blood types could be matched . Donations were much safer because of matching blood types . Donors and recipients were able to donate blood to each other
 Transfusion practice was greatly improved by the classification of blood types in 1901 . New vaccines greatly reduced the incidence of 1910s blood transfusions .
 Karl Landsteiner’s discovery of distinct blood types paved the way for safer blood transfusions, blood banks, and organ transplants .
 Advances in the understanding of body chemistry made it possible to identify and treat diseases caused by vitamin deficiency and hormone imbalance .
 Frederick Banting discovered a means to manufacture the hormone insulin, revolutionizing the treatment of diabetes . Banting's discovery of insulin revolutionized diabetes treatment .
 Genetic engineering had far-reaching implications for human health . Condition would be widely treatable by the end of the century surgery, surgery .
 By the end of the century, diseases that had killed millions throughout history were curable, but in some cases eradicated altogether . By the time the diseases had been eradicated, they had been curable .
 In 1935, Gerhard Domagk proved that the sulfomide dye Protonsil stopped the multiplication of bacteria, allowing the body’s own bacteria to thrive . In 1950, the world's first drug to treat bacterial infections was the first to treat it .
 German scientist Paul Ehrlich believed a drug-borne “magic bullet” could kill the bacteria responsible for a disease without causing harm to the patient . The drug-based "magic bullet" was believed to be the work of a German scientist in the 1950s .
 Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin developed a preventative vaccine for polio . He discovered Salvarsan, the first curative treatment for syphilis, but the drug had mixed effects .
 Alexander Fleming discovered the first antibiotic, penicillin . The real breakthrough came in the discovery of penicill, which was discovered by Alexander Fleming .
 By 1940, the drug had been isolated, and its bacteriakilling properties began to revolutionize the treatment of infection . The drug was isolated in 1940, and it revolutionized the treatment .
 His pioneering work paved the way for the transplant of lungs, kidneys, and liver in the following decades . The pioneering work led to the transplant success of lung transplants .
 British scientists Frances Crick and James Watson published their discovery of the double-helix DNA structure in 1953 . It led to the the development of gene therapy, instrumental in treating genetic illness .
 Diagnostics took a leap forward in 1975 with the introduction of the computerized axial tomography scan, which produced images of the brain . Diagnostics also took a step forward in the 1970s with the creation of the axial imaging scan .
 The development of increasingly sophisticated instruments in the . saved vastly more lives than have been lost in all the wars in history .
 Smallpox was officially beaten in 1979 . later part of the century enabled less-invasive robotic and keyhole surgery to replace traditional methods .
 The red ribbon campaign has helped raise awareness and promote safer sex . The campaign is based on the idea that safer sex is safer .
 In 2010, doctors were able to sequence a patient’s complete genome to reveal the genetic source of some diseases, a landmark in the advance of personalized medicine . The results were a landmark step up in personalized medicine, with a patient's complete genome sequence .
 Their aim was to rescue a communist-backed overthrow of President 2 Daoud’s nationalist government under threat by the growing number of segtave rebels .
 CIA covertly imported weapons in what proved to be one of the CIA’s deposed and killed longest and most expensive operations . Amin weapons were imported by the CIA in one of its longest and expensive operations in the world .
 The Soviets sent in a detachment of tanks to assist the government in fighting the growing insurgency . The Soviets were fighting a growing insurgency in the country .
 U.S. President Jimmy Carter denounced the invasion as an act of Soviet imperialism . Jimmy Carter called the invasion a "act of Soviet Imperialist imperialism"
 He announced that American athletes would boycott the 1980 Olympics in Moscow in protest . He persuaded 64 other nations to join him in the boycott .
 An estimated 6 million, more than a fifth of the population, left their homes between 1979 and 1992 . More than 6 million people left homes in the UK between 1979-1992 .
 President Mohammed Tureki, loyal to the Khalq party, began purging Parchamis . The two sides agreed to share power, but the Khalk party took control of the state .
 Hundreds of KGB agents dressed as Afghan soldiers attacked the presidential palace and assassinated Amin Amin . Babrak Kamal was installed as President of Afghanistan . Amin was assassinated and replaced by Babrak .
 The USA supplied them with advanced weaponry such as the shouldermounted Stinger Missile, . which shot down dozens of Soviet helicopters . The U.S. supplied the Soviet Union with the Stinger missile .
 In May 1988, Pakistan, Afghanistan, the USA, and the USSR signed . an agreement to withdraw vr. troops from the Soviet Union .
 It left Afghanistan in chaos, paving the way for the radical Islamic Taliban movement to take power in the 1990s . The Taliban movement took power in Afghanistan in the late 1990s and the Taliban took control of Afghanistan .
 Ayatollah Khomeini had been exiled but continued to call for an end to the Shah’s reign . His key opponent, Ayatullah Khomenei, was exiled but had been calling for a change .
 Street battles raged between pro-Khomeini faction and supporters of the imperial regime . The two sides vied for authority as the two sides fought for authority .
 On February 11, 1979 the jubilant revolutionaries celebrated their historic victory . J 41/02/197 * REVOLUTION SUCCEEDS .
 Khomeini was SAAVAc. appointed Iran’s political and religious leader for life . He was appointed by the Supreme Council of Islamic States and Islamic Revolutionists .
 Shah's supporters were tried and executed, while others fled the country . Shah’s supporters were executed and others fled . Shah was the prime minister of Iran in 1979 .
 Many organized a massive protest, but it was crushed by the regime . iWalcwe)ar-lalmmnyivaavem atavem . atave| lexcrereyaatom baler qer-toynere phys .
 When security forces opened fire on demonstrators, it ended all dialogue between the protestors and the imperial regime . The imperial regime's shooting of protesters ended dialogue between protesters and the regime .
 The Jake lalmnashole\s(ove maat-Ranrl| —— IW Varckomnalomerolenalnays YATOLLAH K (oKetsxersyalekslemnalne virtual civil war)
 Army officers abandoned Bakhtiar’s regime . Fresh demonstrations broke o)UhAmalctohamh-)aleohamer-nalel unwilling to massacre fellow Iranians .
 In February Khomeini made a dramatic return to Iran, welcomed by millions of ecstatic supporters . In February he returned to Iran for the first time since 1979 .
 A regime as ruthless as that of that of the Shah. They hanhe)arsfe)aKeleme (e)e)leyarsialns MALO MROVAMORGSLOMMAcVARMmnAl . The regime is ruthless as the Shah
 He introduced Sharia and urged his followers to turn against the West, especially the USA, which had supported the deposed Shah’s regime .
 Jimmy Carter agreed to let the Shah enter the USA for cancer treatment . Iranian anger at the U.S. reached fever pitch when the Shah was allowed to enter the United States .
 Khomeini supported their act, seen as an attack on American imperialism . Freeing the hostages was seen as a top priority raised when U.S. President Jimmy ordered the release of Carter .
 Iranian oil imports have been halted since the start of the Iranian oil embargo . President Obama did little to alleviate the situation . However, it little he could do except to alleviate it .
 Eight U.S. servicemen killed in crash in Iranian desert . Helicopter and military plane collided in the desert, killing eight American servicemen .
 52 hostages were still the Iranians waited until deprived of their freedom, after Ronald Reagan’s despite the Shah's death inauguration as President on July 27, 1980 to free the hostages .
 Students paraded blindfolded hostages in front of television cameras . In a defiant gesture, the students paraded the blindfolding hostages . The hostages were paraded by television cameras in defiance .
 They demanded the Shah be expelled from the USA and stand trial in Iran . The Shah was forced to leave the U.S. and Iran in order to face trial .
 When the USA offered medical treatment to the Shah, a group of outraged Iranian students stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, taking dozens of hostages .
 In return for their release, the USA agreed to unfreeze Iranian assets worth $8 billion, and give the hostage-takers immunity . In return, the U.S. gave the hostage takers immunity in exchange for the release .
 The return of the hostages gave a huge boost to Reagan's presidency . The incident strained the relationship between the U.S. and Iran .
 The Sandinista Liberation Front —named after revolutionary hero Augusto Sandino, 12/27/1974 07/19/1979 SANDINISTAS entered Managua on July 19, 1979 .
 The five-member Junta for National Reconstruction took power the next day . The Junta took power in the aftermath of the collapse of the Great Depression .
 The Nicaraguan Revolution was founded by a group of Marxist students in 1961 to fight oppression . The revolution was overthrown by President Somoza in 1933 .
 The FSLN was a thorn in the side of the Somoza regime, and its members were regularly arrested and imprisoned . Although small in size, the FSNN was regularly arrested .
 Rebels stormed a L party and kidnapped several guests, including members of the Somoza family . Rebels stormed the party, kidnapping several guests . The Somoze family was among those kidnapped .
 They secured a $1 million ransom and the release of 14 political prisoners . They secured $1million ransom and release of prisoners . The prisoners were freed in exchange for political prisoners' release .
 The money had been earned from illegal sales of weapons to Iran . To make matters worse, the money had also been made from illegal weapons sales to Iran.
 More than 10,000 people died when a massive earthquake struck Managua, capital of Nicaragua . The quake destroyed most of the city and left thousands homeless .
 Millions of dollars of international aid flowed in, but most of it never reached the victims . Most of the aid went instead into government coffers .
 Somoza’s blatant misuse of the funds drove up support for the Sandinista rebels . The funds were used to fund the opposition to the overthrow of the government .
 By the beginning of July 1979, Sandinista guerrillas controlled most of Nicaragua . Heavy fighting broke out all over the country, and by the end of 1979, most of the country was controlled by the rebels .
 A group of prominent intellectuals, priests, and businessmen publicly stated their support for the rebels . The USA broke off military aid to somoza’s regime .
 Illiteracy rates said to have fallen from more than 50 percent to 13 percent in the first two years of the government's first two-year rule .
 The new government faced opposition from the Contras, a guerrilla army who opposed the Junta’s left-wing politics . The Contras opposed the government's left-leaning politics .
 President Ronald Reagan authorized the CIA to covertly support the Contras . Fearful of communist influence in the region, the U.S. backed the Contra . The Contras were killed in the 1980s .
 These leaflets were recovered by Contras during the Wal against the Junta and put on display %, as evidence of the i Sandinista party’s communist and pro-Cuban sympathies .
 Contras and FSLN agreed to negotiate to end the war in Nicaragua . Contras had destroyed Nicaragua's economy by the end of the conflict . The Contras were the last of the Contras to take control of the country .
 Once a member | of the Junta, she m® had resigned in ; Protest against Ortega’s policies . Once a . member of the . Junta had resigned .
 In May 1982, | * bitter enemies and had fought repeatedly over an Iranian counterattack [a le 2 restored the pre-war ee ‘ their shared border for many years . Their shared border was restored in May 1982 .
 Iran declared its coastal waters to be war zones and launched attacks against two Iraqi air bases . Iran declared the coastal waters of Iraq's borders to be a war zone . Iran also launched attacks on two air bases in Iraq .
 Iraq began attacking Iranian ships to undermine Iran’s ability to fight at sea . Iraq attacked Iranian ships in an attempt to undermine their ability to defend themselves .
 Chemical ¥. weapons were unleashed against the civilian | ‘Bb eleyelbukcintoyatsmoya Gunqentcyal towns.’
 He justified it on the basis of a territorial dispute over the Shatt al-Arab waterway that lies between the two states . The waterway is a key waterway in the region .
 Iranian forces have been waging relentless attacks on Iraqi forces in Iraq and Syria . Their forces were faced with relentless attacks by mass waves of Iranian troops .
 After eight bloody years, the UN negotiated a ceasefire in Geneva, which both sides accepted . Both sides accepted the ceasefire, which was agreed by both sides .
 Half a million people had died and neither side had achieved its aims . Neither side achieved their aims. Half-million people died in the war .
 The scene was set for popular rebellion against LECH WALESA Soviet rule . The scene of the rebellion against Soviet rule was set to be the scene of a revolt .
 Shipyard workers in the Polish city of Gdansk went on strike . The touchpaper was lit when shipyard workers were on strike in the city .
 Gdansk Agreement, he led workers’ representatives to form a national labour union . He led workers' representatives in a national Labour Union . He has been in charge of Ukraine's largest city in the world .
 More than 10 million workers, intellectuals, and students bravely joined the union . Solidarity was born and more than 10million workers joined union .
 After martial law was imposed, posters such as this were printed in secret .
 He encouraged dialogue and urged Solidarity members to avoid inciting civil war . Solidarity member urges Solidarity not to incite civil war against each other .
 The Polish Catholic Church did a great deal to keep the flame of Solidarity alive . The Catholic Church was a major source of support for the Solidarity movement .
 Even as people took to the streets to celebrate, there was a political stalemate . Even though people were celebrating, the political a stalemate remained .
 Solidarity | * he "" could not threaten | the communist regime, but the communist government had failed to destroy Solidarity or fix the economy . Solidarity: "Communist government had . failed to . destroy or fix . the economy"
 Lech Watesa galvanized the workers to stay at the yard and work with the wider populace to engineer a general strike in Poland . The general strike was the first general strike to take place in Poland since 1968 .
 They drew up alist of demands | Including freedom of the press and the right to form independent trade unions . They also drew up a list of demands .
 The communist government capitulated, signing an agreement ratifying many of the workers’ demands . The agreement was ratified by the communist government . It was the first time the government agreed to ratify the agreement .
 Thousands of Solidarity members, including Watesa, were arrested . Troops poured onto Poland's streets, the country’s borders were sealed, and thousands of members arrested .
 He who puts out his hand to stop the wheel of history will have his fingers crushed, says historian . He says he will be crushed if he tries to stop history .
 Polish Prime Minister Jaruzelski acceded to pressure from the West, from Solidarity, and the failing economy, and held democratic elections in 1989 . Poland's first free elections in Eastern Europe was held in 1989, 1989 .
 Walesa became Poland's first postcommunist president in 1990 . Solidarity triumphed, and Walesa was the first post-communist Polish president .
 John Hinckley, Jr. opened fire on March 30, 1981, as the President was leaving the Hilton Hotel in Washington, D.C. He was killed by a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 Reagan was swiftly bundled into his Waiting car by a secret service agent . Reagan was quickly bundled into the waiting car by the Secret Service .
 The shooting left police officer Thomas Delahanty and Press Secretary James Brady wounded . The shooting also left the press secretary and police officer wounded .
 At first it seemed that Reagan had not been taken to the hospital . Reagan was taken to a nearby hospital .
 John Hinckley's would-be assassin was found mentally unstable at trial . He was found to be mentally unstable after being found guilty of attempted murder .
 With Argentina’s economy in ruins, the military regime staged an audacious invasion of the British-held territory in an attempt to unite their country . The invasion was an invasion of Argentina in a bid to unify the country .
 Argentines could rely on mainland airfields, but British aircraft would have to be launched from carriers . The Argentines would have had to rely on a mainland airfield .
 The Falklands conflict introduced the modern guided missile to warfare . Argentines used Exocets to sink HMS Sheffield in the Falklands .
 British troops took more than a thousand prisoners of wat. retaliated by attacking HMS Sheffield, killing 20 men and injuring 20 men . Although and hit large warships vastly outnumbered, 4 with incredible force. the British troops .
 The Argentine invasion took the British entirely by surprise . This put an » end to any hopes of a diplomatic solution .
 Images of survivors being rescued shocked the British public and strengthened the cause of antiwar campaigners . Images were taken in the aftermath of the first British attack on the Falklands .
 Sea Harrier jets dropped cluster bombs on airstrip to prevent Argentine jets from using it . Westland Sea Helicopters airlifted thousands of British troops from aircraft carriers Hermes and Invincible .
 The small . islands put up some the government was ' resistance but were accused of neglecting hopelessly outnumbered the islands . The small } OFFENSIVE In Britain, contingent of Royal the invasion created a . Marines .
 Argentine Special Forces cut off diplomatic ties with Britain . The Argentine Special government immediately ms, Forces made the cut off . The British © Argentina . Argentina .
 It stomachs in the dirt— began to assemble a humiliating image large naval taskforce that was published of 30 warships, 6,000 all around the world troops and auxiliary within hours .
 Argentine Commander Mario Menendez signed . a Surrender document and his troops laid down their arms . On June 14, Argentine Commander . Menendez agreed to surrender to the U.S. Navy .
 Increasing leisure time brought a demand for different kinds of sportswear . Sportswear is a popular form of clothing worn by men and women in the UK .
 Paris set the tone for style in the 1900s as French designers dominated the world of haute couture, creating exclusive hand-tailored outfits for wealthy and titled clients .
 Dresses were ornately decorated, and to achieve the fashionable S-bend silhouette of the day, women forced themselves into tightly laced corsets . Women forced themselves to wear tightly laced dresses .
 He introduced narrow, straighter shapes that allowed greater freedom of movement . The tight “hobble skirt” one of his innovations, reduced women to taking mincing, tiny steps .
 Venetian designer Mariano Fortuny was famous for his flowing shifts of finely pleated silk that clung to the body . Another innovator, Mariano . Fortuni, famous for flowing shifts, was also famous .
 At the beginning of the century, the aristocracy led the way in fashion . The aristocratic style of clothing was a major fashion trend .
 Dior launched the ‘New Look’ dress with a tiny waist and full skirt . Hollywood stars such as Louise Brooks became fashion icons . The number had fallen to 18 by the year 2000 .
 French tennis star Suzanne Lenglen shocked the staid English public by appearing in an above-the-calf tennis dress at Wimbledon .
 Parisian designers were limited to 13 ft of cloth for a coat and 3ft for a blouse during World War II .
 Famous for sportswear, Schiaparelli introduced knitwear to fashion and designed the first wraparound dress .
 French designer Andre Courreges, launched in 1964, earned the name Space Age . The futuristic white and metallic outfits earned the moniker Space Age in 1964 .
 1980s saw a return to designer clothing with an emphasis on power dressing, epitomized by padded shoulders . The 1980s was a period of power dressing with a focus on padded shoulders and power dressing .
 Designers such as Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, and Versace dominated fashion . Designers like Ralph Lauren and Calvin Klein dominated fashion.
 Manolo Blahnik reintroduced a century of stiletto heels but sneakers were also widely worn .
 Women chose clothes for casual smartness and comfort, with jeans the most ubiquitous item of all .
 Vivienne Westwood created the punk fashions associated with the Sex Pistols in the 1970s . The fashion world can truly be a jungle .
 Mary Quant and Andre Courreges were credited with inventing the mini skirt . The mini skirt was the decade's most iconic garment .
 Quant’s 1 innovative clothes a hi, appealed to the | young generation of Swinging London . seen everywhere, although they were not always welcomed . Quant's 1 innovative clothing a hi was launched in 2007 .
 By the end of the decade, the hippy look, with floor-length skirts, colorful psychedelic prints, and sheepskin coats, was becoming popular .
 In marked contrast to this were studded leather jackets and spiked hair of punk fashion . Punk fashion was a form of rebellion in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Thousands died within hours of the leak, and thousands more fell ill in the following months and years . Thousands of people fell ill after the leak .
 The Bhopal disaster became infamous as one of the worst industrial accidents in history . The tragedy was one of India's worst ever industrial accidents .
 A week later victims were still arriving at a rate of one a minute . The hospital was overwhelmed. told what to do in the gas leak .
 Farmers lost their entire livelihoods as crops died, and soiland | _ water were polluted . Farmers lost JOURNALIST, DECEMBER 4, 1984, their livelihoods .
 At the Hindu ame nae lonalersmant-nanv of the victims were burned on mass pyres . At the . Hindu ama nae . ame . nae was burned in mass . pyres at the time .
 Mourners at the Muslim Joluhar-limencelenalemae-tamelenme)i were forced to dig up old graves to bury victims of the gas.i . The victims were buried in a new burial space .
 Water leaked into a tank containing 40 tons of methyl isocyanate in Bhopal in 1970 in reaction produced large amounts of toxic gas .
 The poisonous cloud floated across the sleeping city, where many lived in slums close to the plant . Many lived in the slums near the plant, including slums in the city .
 Panic spread iAaicelulesamnal-manlolalmur-ialem oy’maale)aauialemAalcMcindc\ol Romy i\ic) Rom el ale) .¢o10 MiValA am ele)isVe
 Methyl isocyanate, an ingredient of pesticides, was started in 1979 . In 1979 the factory started in Losbalomr-Ne(om-hestelunaunauns .
 He was urged by the Indian government to leave the country within 24 hours | for his own safety . The Indian government urged him to leave India within a day .
 Lawyers immediately filed claims for $3.3 billion against 1Uhableyam@r-hde)le . The legal battle would go on for years, while victims of the disaster Sinabrereitqq\omnemaclelvalle their shattered lives .
 At least 3,000 died in the first few days, and thousands more suffered terrible injuries . Thousands more suffered horrific injuries . At least 2,000 people were killed in the initial days .
 It took until 1989 for a legal settlement to be agreed, and several more years for compensation to reach the victims . The settlement was reached in 1989, but it took several years to reach its victims .
 Millions of millions of dollars were donated in aid in just a few days . Millions of people were displaced in the north and resettled in the south .
 International community accuses Ethiopian government of spending aid money on weapons and supplies for its troops . International community condemns Ethiopian government for sending aid to refugee camps .
 Cattle suffered as they grew lAaiievatclarcvalomelonelenaloig and eventually died . Cattle suffer as they grow and died .
 Getting aid to war-torn northern Ethiopia was ats} Q\AwaWicengeleje)nalemoaeneene)e)ilctcmirers . Getting aid was challenging as turbulence kicked up the desert sand .
 Thousands swarmed to meet the first planes, sometimes fighting over food . There were concerns that the money would be squandered by the Ethiopian government .
 The West criticized Ethiopia for its socialist policies, suggesting the famine could have been averted . The West has criticized Ethiopia's socialist policies in the past . Ethiopia's famine was largely due to a lack of food aid .
 The Ethiopian government stepped up its war with rebel movements in Eritrea and Tigray . As Ethiopian feeding centers swelled with people desperate for food .
 Live Aid led a fund-raising crusade, culminating in the massive Live Aid concert . Live Aid for Africa was held in Africa's capital, Washington, DC .
 The world's most famous stars played at Wembley Stadium, London, and John F Kennedy Stadium in Philadelphia .
 Two billion people watched, and money poured in, but the (orchanyeyble pal are Vom binAlomloyaler term effect, and provoked debate about the best way to help African people .
 Perestroika, or restructuring, promised to allow Glasnost Transforms Transforms the USSR greater economic efficiency . The restructuring was intended to allow the Soviet Union to greater efficiency .
 Glasnost, or openness, permitted unprecedented freedom of the press and political expression . The country's openness allowed unprecedented freedom for the press, political expression and press freedom .
 His proposals faced opposition from both diehard communists and pro-democracy campaigners . However, implementing them would prove a huge challenge .
 Gorbachev confirmed his commitment to transforming foreign relations, aS economic strain forced the USSR to seek peace . The Soviet Union sought peace in the 1980s .
 In April 1988 Afghanistan and Pakistan signed an a accord, with the USA dt ~ and Soviet Union as guarantors . The two countries signed an accord with the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Glasnost had made it possible for people to criticize the government . On May 15, the last troops began to leave .
 A mass demonstration in Moscow’s Red Square during October Revolution celebrations embarrassed Gorbachev . However, a mass demonstration during the October Revolution embarrassed the former Soviet leader .
 Protestors demanded an end to communist rule, calling for multiparty elections . They denounced Vladimir Lenin, the architect and first head of the Soviet Union . Demonstrators also denounced Lenin .
 He pledged to bring a new dynamism to the stagnant economy . months later he announced Perestroika, a radical restructuring to allow greater economic freedoms .
 Calls for independence 3 from the Soviet Union | were increasing in the Baltic States . The Baltic States are currently in the process of forming a state of independence .
 Civil unrest in Azerbaijan led to a soviet crackdown, in which dozens were killed . Dozens of Azerbaijanis were killed in the soviiet crackdown .
 Armenians interpreted Glasnost as an opportunity to unite with Nagorno-Karabakh, a region within Azerbaijan demanding independence . Armenians had interpreted the move as a chance to unify with the region, which has been in dispute with Azerbaijan .
 Despite problems at home, Gorbachev's increasing openness with the wider world led to international plaudits . Despite problems in the 1980s, the Soviet Union was still open to the world .
 He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1990 and was feted by international leaders as a champion of democracy . He won a series of Nobel Peace Prizes for his role in Afghanistan .
 Moscow is hit by shortages of food and basic consumer goods . However, in Moscow, his celebrity status is regarded with more reserve .
 His greatest critic was Boris Yeltsin, chairman a | i % of the Russian government, who a — ‘i insisted that communists . should no longer dominate the government .
 In June 1991, democratic elections in June 1991 were held in the Soviet Union . In 1991, the country voted for the first time in 24 years .
 An experimental safety procedure went badly wrong, resulting in the worst nuclear accident the world had ever seen . The Chernobyl nuclear power complex at Chernobyl in the Soviet republic of Ukraine appeared to fulfill promise .
 Thousands of workers were employed in the construction project, which was hampered by the continuing danger of radiation poisoning . The test caused a power test causing a power explosion .
 The sarcophagus was completed before the end of the year, but the vast cost put significant strain on the already struggling soviet economy . The vast cost of the project was estimated at $1 billion .
 Firefighters had succeeded in putting out the smaller blazes, but were unable to reach the fire in the reactor core . Firefighters were able to put out the small blazes but couldn't reach the core of reactor .
 Army helicopters were called in to dump sand, clay, , lead, and boron into the reactor to smother the flames . Army helicopters doused the flames with sand .
 High levels of radiation were detected in the nearby city of Pripyat, was extinguished, two some 53,000 residents were evacuated . They dropped more than 5,000 tons of material .
 They were told to pack for three days; most never returned . They were weeks later . Most never returned to their homes .
 USSR F from entering human faced a daunting task in food . European governments took action to prevent of the disaster .
 Farmers were ordered to destroy crops of Reactor 4 . Farmers were dealing with the remains of the reactor 4 .
 More than 130,000 people were permanently evacuated, and all land within a 19-mile radius was declared off-limits . Land within 19 miles of land was declared an area of land off limits .
 Controversy still rages today over long-term health effects of the disaster . Claims that cancer rates in the region have risen significantly since the disaster occurred .
 The explosion had burst open the reactor vessel, exposing the radioactive elements inside to the air . The explosion was caused by an explosion inside the reactor that burst open .
 The explosion started a fire in the center of the reactor . Graphite control rods inside the reactor were still burning . The + smoke carried particles of radioactive dust into the atmosphere .
 The worst affected disaster to the USSR and contaminated area —– Twere those who had attended the initial blazes, receiving death threats from the wider world .
 Much of the city remains empty, . a4 a stark reminder of the disaster . As the years passed, a few of the former residents returned illegally to their homes .
 In 1986 he held a crooked election, and in just a few days he was ousted by a people-power revolution . This was marked, not by violence, but by sheer force of will, he says . In 1986, he held an election which was crooked, but was marked by
 The day after the election, |, ivalel ke wr accusations of fraud, Marcos declared himself the winner . Amid the accusations, he declared himself a winner and declared himself president .
 Hundreds of Filipinos stormed into Malacanang | Palace to view the opulence enjoyed by their former leader . Thirty computer workers also walked out from an election tabulation center, protesting the tampering of election results .
 One room housed the 3,400 pairs of shoes that belonged to First Lady Imelda Marcos . The room was filled with shoes belonging to the former First Lady .
 The President had reportedly stolen billions of dollars from his people . The President allegedly stole billions of pounds from his country .
 Aquino and Marcos defiantly staged separate inaugurations . Marcos had lost all credibility. Aquino had lost his credibility. Marcos lost credibility.
 He fled with his family and supporters to Hawaii . Realizing the futility of his stand, he fled to Hawaii with them .
 He suspended freedom of the press, suppressed popular protests, and ordered the arrest of opposition leaders . President Vladimir Putin has been accused of authoritarianism in Russia .
 At a general election held in 1981, he was reelected as President, but opposition parties claimed that the election was fraudulent and boycotted the vote . He was re-elected as president in 1981 .
 Many believed that Marcos had ordered Ninoy’s assassination . Marcos believed that he had ordered the assassination of Ninoy .
 In 1983 the @ deteriorating election, Ninoy’s widow, Cory Aquino, challenged in the Philippines the Marcos government . The widow of Ninoy's widow, economic situation 'Cory Aquino' challenged in 1983 .
 She became a potent symbol of opposition to the corrupt Marcos family . She persuaded him to return home after he was forced to resign .
 It condemned the elections as fraudulent and urged a non-violent struggle for justice . Led by Cardinal Jaime Sin, it condemned the election as fraudulent .
 Even the most conservative elements of the Church eventually joined the anti-Marcos campaign .
 On February 22, Juan Enrile, former Minister of Defense, and General Fidel Ramos, commander of the Philippine Paramilitary Constabulary, defected from the Marcos administration . On February 23, Juan enrile and General Ramos defected .
 Cardinal Sin made an appeal on the Catholicf run Radio Veritas for . citizens to support the rebels . Cardinal Sin appealed to the Catholic Church to support rebels .
 The revolution was largely peaceful in the early 1980s . The revolution in the U.S. was a relatively peaceful affair .
 The few shots fired were mainly in the air, and there were minimal reports of casualties or looting . There were no casualties, looting or casualties .
 The people demonstrated their contempt for the former leader by breaking into the presidential palace and destroying portraits and furniture . The people demonstrate contempt for former leader with the break in .
 Space Shuttle Tragedy went tragically wrong. Olamel-heher-lavayAsta Rclolome-halr-1UKeNlJaleroMelmaanilhteyatsmlele).¢o\el ace)ar-tom
 A mere 73 seconds after liftoff from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, the shuttle was torn into pieces . All seven astronauts on board were killed in the crash .
 It soon became clear that something was wrong as smoke puffed from one of the booster rockets . Smoke puffed out of booster rockets as the rocket was launched .
 Less than a minute into the flight, flames burst from the rocket, causing a fuel tank to explode . A fuel tank exploded in the rocket's fuel tank .
 President Ronald Reagan addressed the astronauts . Christa McAuliffe was a teacher selected to give lessons from space . President Reagan spoke to the astronauts in a speech .
 Mela@iAlerlm @liabalem-r-r1 had failed, allowing an escape of hot gas that caused 1 alomsy.¢ 0) ssLo}A mm \ Paton Wari ce)ON lem ake.m .
 On one momentous night it was breached, uniting people who had been kept apart for a generation . It was a moment of unity uniting those who'd been separated for decades .
 On October 3 the board a Soviet ship at process of reunification Malta’s Marsaxlokk between East and West Harbor . Bush met Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev for the momentous event .
 The conflict had Germany had spanned four decades, formally concluded, and at times had threatened to engulf the a new Europe in violence . The war had been officially concluded, but it was marked by the birth of the West .
 By nightfall, hundreds of thousands of Berliners, East and West, had begun converging on the wall . Hundreds of thousands converged on Berlin's wall .
 East German border guards let the crowds pass . Crowds of thousands pass through the border crossing .
 In May 1989 Hungarian Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth ordered guards to start dismantling barbed wire fences along its border with Austria .
 Fast Germans began traveling to Hungary in order to get to the West via Austria in the 1930s . Fast Germans now travel to Hungary to try and get to Europe .
 This tide of popular rebellion was the culmination of years of opposition to the division of Berlin . Berlin was divided between Berlin and Berlin in the early 1930s .
 Communist rule in Fast Germany was already tottering as the USSR faced economic ruin . Fast Germany had already been hit hard by the collapse of communism .
 West Berliners on the other side welcomed them with joyful hugs and bottles of champagne . West Berlin residents welcomed them to West Berlin with joyful embraces .
 Friends and family members who had been separated for decades were finally reunited . Friends and relatives were reunited after decades of separation .
 Ecstatic crowds join in on the demolition work, hacking large chunks out of the 28-mile barrier . People attacked the wall with large chunks of the barrier . Crowds hacked large chunks from the barrier, hacking it out .
 The protests began among university students in Beijing, but soon spread across the nation . The protests started in Beijing but spread across China .
 They ended on June 4, with a dramatic crackdown by soldiers from the People's Liberation Army . ‘ha.’
 Officials of the Beijing People’s Government were outraged at the students’ conduct . Officials were outraged by the students' conduct, officials said .
 Deng Xiaoping ordered a crackdown on the demonstrators . The crackdown was ordered by the Communist Party of China's ruling Communist Party Party .
 Troops brought into Beijing and ordered to suppress the protests . Troops were brought in to suppress protests . It was a tense time for Beijing . The protesters launched a .
 First Sino-Soviet summit in » and the movement gained movement threatened further movement . Sympathetic citizens first . citizens first Sino . Soviet-Sino-Chinese summit in . » and movement gained . movement .
 It was an opportunity not just to mourn but also to express dissatisfaction with the slow pace of reform . It was a chance not just mourned, but also expressed dissatisfaction with slow pace .
 The embarrassed society, including Buddhist government found itself monks and important intellectuals . Buddhist society was constantly rearranging intellectuals .
 In the midst of the violence, one man became an icon of peaceful resistance, blocking a column of tanks by standing in their path . The man blocked the tanks by blocking them in the middle of the street .
 The photograph became a defining image of the protests, but such acts were powerless to prevent the army’s advance .
 Thousands of students traveled to Tiananmen Square despite being warned that they risked severe punishment . Thousands were warned they risked punishment if they traveled to the square .
 Deng decided that martial law was the only way to disperse protesters . In June the troops the students the students protested . Deng decided to impose martial law .
 He sent received orders to reclaim troops into the city Tiananmen Square at any cost . But citizens rushed from their homes toward the center of the city .
 Soldiers lay down on the street in opened fire on people who tried to stand in front of tanks, and prevent their advance . People tried to prevent the tanks from advancing, soldiers lay down in the street, and opened fire .
 Thousands of protesters were set up in the surrounding suburbs and pitched street battles . The troops pulled back to took place between civilians and the outskirts of Beijing the army .
 The army claimed a great victory against the unarmed student protesters . The army said it was a 'great victory' against the protesters .
 Deng appeared in public and made a speech praising the heroic efforts of the military officers . Deng made the speech in a bid to thank the officers for their bravery .
 It was an act of political desperation, and he gambled that the West would not intervene, he said . It was a gamble, and the West will not intervene. It was the act of desperation, he added. He gambled .
 His actions unleashed a massive military response by the international community . His actions, however, unleashed a huge military response .
 Stuart Lockwood was made to pose with Saddam Hussein during a televised propaganda stunt . Five-year-old was forced to pose for a photograph with the Iraqi dictator .
 By drawing Israel into the conflict, Saddam hoped to split the coalition and win the backing of Arab nations who would come to Iraq’s aid, he said . By drawing the conflict into Israel, he hoped to win backing from Arab nations .
 Warbah Abdali i ‘\ IRAN Bubiyan Qasr as Sabiyah ersten made it vulnerable to Bae attack . However, positioned to the south of Iraq and east of Saudi Arabia, its location is vulnerable to attack .
 There had been repeated spats with Iraq Ash Shuwayknkn_/* over oil production and . tnedebt owed by Iraq Tere ‘ea Aion for financial assistance given during its war . with Iran in the 1980s .
 As the tension mounted, saddam released the captive foreign nationals but refused to withdraw his troops . Wafrah asr | 06/12/1990 | FLEEING REFUGEES .
 Kuwaitis fled in the thousands across the desert to Jordan, in dusty cars and trucks stuffed with belongings . Kuwaitis are fleeing the country in the hope of being reunited in Jordan .
 Refugees reported food shortages and brutal treatment by Iraqi soldiers . Food shortages reported by refugees . Iraqi soldiers are accused of brutality against refugees .
 It was a grim reminder to the West of their reliance on oil from the Middle East . It was also a reminder of the West's reliance on the Middle Eastern oil .
 The Iraqi army was crushed, and its troops began a headlong retreat . SADDAM HUSSEIN, Highway of Death, was crushed by the Iraqi army .
 The main highway out of Kuwait was packed with fleeing vehicles laden with plunder from Kuwait City . Kuwait City was the scene of the looting of the country's capital .
 Thousands of Iraqi soldiers were killed and wounded as the road was attacked from the air . Thousands of Iraqis died and wounded in the attack on the road .
 After repeated threats, Irag invaded its oil-rich neighbor with an army of 10,000 troops and hundreds of tanks . The invasion was followed by repeated threats from Irag, which has invaded its neighbor .
 After two days of combat, most of Kuwait was Overrun . U.N. demanded withdrawal of Iraqi troops and issued a trade embargo .
 The USA formed a coalition of 34 nations, and a huge logistical operation began as allied forces massed in Saudi Arabia . The U.S. formed a massive logistical operation in the country .
 When Iraq ignored the deadline, the coalition began Operation Desert Storm with a massive air offensive against Iraqi strategic positions . The coalition launched a massive offensive against Iraq in the fall of 1991 .
 Baghdad's skyline lit up with anti-aircraft tracer fire during the attack, but the city suffered heavy damage . Baghdad was hit hard by the attack .
 They were issued gas masks, anticipating the use of chemical incident, there were relatively weapons by Iraq . There were relatively no weapons by the Iraq government, but they were given gas masks .
 Saddam's brutal aggression had been defeated by concerted global action . Saddam Hussein's brutal invasion of Iraq was defeated by the world's most powerful powers .
 Botha Tutu was awarded F W. de Klerk the Nobel Peace Prize President of South Africa . He told white colleagues in 1984 for speaking he called for a new, The to adapt and proposed out against the nonracist society, | that “coloreds and regime.
 It senta without apartheid Indians” should have powerful message to divisions. ‘It senta Without Apartheid Indians’ should have message to divide.” ‘I’m not a racist Indian. It’s not racist. It sends a powerful message
 He lifted the ban on Botha’s government ban on protest marches, parliament, parliament . Botha lifted the restrictions on parliamentarians in South Africa . The South African parliament has been banned from parliament .
 South Africa had been subject to economic, cultural, and academic boycotts, and banned from of of South Africa. participating in sporting events. South African athletes were banned from participating in South Africa’s sporting events .
 De Klerk and Mandela, now leader of the ANC, began negotiations to dismantle the apartheid regime . Mandela and Mandela met in 1994 at the beginning of their negotiations .
 On May 4, 1990, they agreed a plan to tackle violence and all | —— establish stability . The plan was agreed to end violence and establish stability in the country .
 Millions of South Africans, both black and white, waited patiently to vote in the first multiracial elections held in for South African politics .
 On June 16, 1976, a march by 10,000 — JP 7 Pr students, protesting . against the use of . Afrikaans as the main teaching language in schools, ended in bloodshed .
 The death of anti-apartheid activist Stephen Biko in police custody caused immediate controversy and international outrage . It was the STEPHEN BIKO killed by police . The death was the worst violence seen in Biko's life .
 He urged a policy of truth and reconciliation to heal the old divisions and unite white and black South Africans . He urged the government to take steps to heal old divisions in South Africa .
 Mikhail Gorbachev fought to implement reform, but was resisted by both hard-line communists who wanted to EET ocl ve the old ay and radical reformists . As leader of the Communist Boris Yeltsin, President of calling for faster changes .
 Ordinary citizens rushed to the Russian Parliament to protect the building from attack . Mikhail Gorbachev attempted critic of Gorbachachev, saying his actions were not justified . The Russian Parliament was attacked in 1991 .
 Years of liberal reform had lessened the menace of the old regime and people felt more confident in protesting . People were less confident in protest after years of liberal reforms .
 TV crews broadcast the rebellion, encouraging others to join in . to radically reform the USSR. to radically change the country's political system . The rebellion was broadcast by TV crews .
 Yeltsin clambered on board a tank to deliver a speech urging the troops not to fire on their own people . The speech is one of Russia's most famous moments of its time in Soviet history .
 Thousands of people worked through the night to build defenses, constructing barricades and forming human chains . Despite warnings that more tanks were on their way, thousands of people gathered to form human chains and barricades .
 Faced with massive popular resistance, and with the eyes of the world upon them, the hardliners backed down . El 08/19/1991 he F me THE COUP IS DEFEATED .
 Without the support of the military, the plotters could not take power, the military says . The plotters would not have been able to take power without the military's support .
 Gorbachev was unwell and that the rebels represented the official government, the truth started to emerge . While their outlets claimed that Gormachev was . unwell, the . truth soon began to emerge. The truth was starting to emerge, as the truth emerged .
 Soviet citizens woke up to news reports that Gorbachev had been taken ill . Soviet citizens wake up to reports that the former Soviet leader had taken ill. Soviet citizens awoke to news of the illness . Soviet citizen wakes up to the news of Gorbach's illness .
 CIS failed to fulfill the hopes for greater post-Soviet collaboration . They tried to coordinate policy on a range of economic issues, including trade and energy supplies .
 Tanks rolled through END OF THE USSR | decided, whatever order was given, | wouldn’t shoot . End of the USSR decided not to shoot .
 Gorbachev had been politically destroyed by the revolt . He had been 'humiliated' by his actions .
 Yeltsin insisted he read out the names of those who had plotted against him in parliament . Yeltsins insisted on reading out the list of those he had plotted to kill him . He insisted he would not read the names .
 Kara Sea is the region of Russia, Ukraine and Georgia . It is also the Caucasus region of Georgia and Armenia .
 The old state was formed of an uneasy alliance of ethnic and religious groups, which now sought independence . The state is now a state of its own .
 The scene was set for bloody civil war as the old socialist republic fragmented . Heres supporters cracked down on independence movements, cracking down on independent movements .
 Croats and Muslims in the region laying siege to the capital, Sarajevo . Croats, Muslims in region lay siege to capital, city of Sarajeva, in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Croatians and Muslims lay siege of the capital in the city of
 The USA issued an ultimatum through INPaW MO ehetsstcjnnatemoyalmnarcy withdrawal of Serb forces . The U.S. issued a withdrawal order to Serb troops .
 Radovan Karadzic endorsed the expulsion of more than a million Croats and Muslims from Bosnia . A ceasefire was declared, enforced by iN PAW OR rebalesp .
 Co Roy 34154 alee Mohe-haat-lnlom o)leinoM-velelmnal-mrate) war, and Croatian ie forces. Co Roy .
 Several Serbian i 4 army was accused of a . launched a series of airstrikes against the Serbian military in leaders, including MiloSevi¢, . MiloSeva¢, | IARSMODVAeMmerNeal ey-Hleneme)i Ter Ga ¥ ¥ ,
 Croatia proclaimed independence in July 1991 . The largely Serbian Yugoslav Army, assisted by Serbian paramilitary groups, overwhelmed Vukovar .
 As the / eck 3 Ljubljana before the storm. UN GENERAL SECRETARY KOFI ANNAN, y y y 09/18/1997 emai “
 Serbian military and paramilitary groups, determined to rid the country of Muslims and Croats, herded captives into concentration camps . Serbians were determined to remove Muslims, Croats and Muslims from the country . Serbian military, paramilitary groups sheded captives to concentration camps, herding them into
 Women were raped repeatedly, in an attempt to ensure that they produced Serbian offspring . Serbian women raped repeatedly to ensure they produced offspring . Women raped repeatedly in an effort to ensure their offspring were produced .
 In the town of Srebrenica, more than 8,000 people, mostly men and boys, were murdered and their bodies buried in mass graves . Most of the victims were boys and men, mostly from the Muslim side .
 This picture shows some of the VAUROLOLOLOMSIUhavAhico) asco) qer-(e nom ant-Nae) .
 It was a Shameful moment for the UN, and paved the way for more aggressive military interventions by the international community in following years . The UN has been accused of shameful actions in Iraq .
 As drought and famine added to the misery, the United Nations intervened to help end the crisis . The U.N. intervened to end the drought and end the famine in Somalia .
 Their presence escalated into one of the most ill-considered humanitarian missions ever carried out . Their presence, however, escalated into an ill-conceived humanitarian mission . The U.S. State Department of Defense says the mission was a humanitarian effort .
 Bush proposed that United States troops lead an international UN force to end the crisis . Bush: U.S. troops would lead a UN force that would end the conflict .
 He remained defiant, speaking out against UN intervention and presenting himself as a victim of aggression . He has remained defiant .
 The search for Aidid was abandoned; instead, the UN sought negotiations with the warlord . Aidid is believed to have been killed in 2012 .
 Bitter clan rivalries led to civil war and fighting spread across the country, destroying agriculture and inflicting famine . An estimated 300,000 ; people died of starvation that year .
 Their principal aim was to secure the distribution of food and protect supplies from bandits . They were also protecting supplies from the bandits .
 Food supplies flowed, gangs were suppressed, and seeds and livestock were distributed . Within months food supplies flowed and gangs were subdued .
 He m deployed Task Force Ranger, an assault force which included a helicopter unit, to the capital Mogadishu .
 Task Force Ranger’s attack on the Olympic Hotel in Mogadishu, in search of Aidid, resulted in a drawn-out battle in which two Black Hawk helicopters were shot down . United States President BILL CLINTON QUOTED in the ECONOMIST, J
 A ceasefire agreement in 1992 allowed a UN monitoring mission into Somalia to oversee the provision of humanitarian aid . The UN monitored a UN mission to oversee humanitarian aid in Somalia .
 UN convoys were hijacked, food was looted and exchanged for weapons, and aid workers were attacked . However, the UN says convoys are hijacked and food is looted . Aid convoys and convoys have been hijacked and attacked by the rebels .
 The bright blue beret is the distinctive symbol of UN peacekeeping forces . It marks them out as protectors and mediators rather than combatants . UN peacekeepers are protecting and mediating rather than combatting .
 In Somalia, however, they became increasingly embroiled in the local conflict . They became increasingly involved in the Somali conflict .
 24 UN soldiers military presence from Pakistan were somalia. On June 5, 1993, scale down the American. 1993, 24 UN troops military presence in . Pakistan .
 American killed while inspecting troops began to pull out of somali weapons . UN opted for storage site instead of a storage site .
 Chechnya was declared independent in 1998 . But the Russians were determined to maintain control in the province at any cost . The conflict sparked a bitter campaign of war and terrorism in the region . Chechenya is now a Russian-controlled region .
 Basayev entered the Russian region of Stavropol Kray and took 1,500 people hostage in a hospital in Budennovsk . The Basaysev took over a hospital from a local hospital in the region . The Russian region is known for its anti-government protests
 More than a hundred were killed in a botched assault by Russian troops trying to free the hostages, but the Chechens escaped . An estimated 60,000 people were thought to have died in the war .
 Aslan Maskhadov, a Chechen military leader, was elected as the President of Chechnya . But he struggled to control deep unrest in the region .
 Boris Yeltsin, the Russian President, called a state of emergency, and ordered the military to prepare for action . Yeltsins: "The Russian President is preparing for action. The military is ready for action"
 In December Russian troops entered Chechnya, under orders to end its bid for independence and arrest Dudayev . In December, Russian forces entered the region under orders from the Kremlin .
 Chechnya once again descended into lawlessness when violence broke out between proand anti-Maskhadov factions . MARTIAL law was imposed in response to violence between pro and anti-maskhadov forces .
 On May 1, 1998 Russia's presidential representative in Chechnya, Valentin Vlasov, was kidnapped, spurring Maskhadov to impose martial law . Maskhadova imposed martial law after the kidnapping of the Russian presidential representative .
 Chechnya held parliamentary elections in a bid to show that it is becoming more stable . Russia-backed elections were held in an attempt to show the region is becoming stable .
 Ramzan Kadyrov becomes Prime Minister of Russia . United Russia, the party favored by Russia, took the majority vote in the vote .
 Russia blamed Chechens, but Chechens believed it was a pretext for starting another war . Russia blamed the Chechens for the collapse of the Soviet Union . The Chechens believe it was the pretext for a war .
 Russia declared Chechen rebels were terrorists and threatened to eliminate them . Russia declared that the Chechen rebel group was terrorists . The Chechen government has been accused of corruption .
 In 2004 they attacked a school in the city of Beslan in the Russian province of North OssetiaAlania, taking more than 1,200 hostages . Many of them were children .
 Her death on CALLS TO NEGOTIATE with CHECHEN symbolized Russia's tightening SEPARATISTS, SEPTEMBER 2004 .
 Rwandan President Juvenal ee ees Hutus ae 2 Habyarimana, a Hutu, lost popularity . Opposition to the Patriotic Patriotic re ie regime escalated .
 Members of militia the UN cut its force in ae ® roamed the countryside, killing as they went . Members of the militia theUN cut its . force in the . countryside . The UN cut the force in . ae .
 The situation deteriorated as the RPF mobilized a response to the Hutu aggression . Despite reports from 4/— the International Red * ni ik Cross that more than 2 i 100,000 Rwandans / had been killed, the * FOREIGNERS EVACUATED .
 UN personnel authorized to intervene, helped Americans and Europeans leave Rwanda . U.S. and Europeans watched helplessly helplessly .
 It quickly overran government forces in Kigali and the southern town of Butare . The government forces are in control of the country's capital, but have not been able to stop the violence .
 RPF leadership announced its intention of forming a new government, forcing more Hutus to flee . More Hutus are forced to flee the RPF . RPF leaders announced their intention to form a government forcing more to flee.
 The civil war was declared over on July 18, and a government of national unity was formed . Civil war declared over in July 18 .
 For thousands who had fled the country, the news of peace came too late . For thousands of refugees, it was too late for them to find peace in Syria .
 Children, some as young as nine, were used as soldiers and became a common feature of the war . Children were often used as children in the early years of WWII .
 The » » machete was the weapon of choice, inflicting horrific wounds on the victims . The » machette was used to inflict horrific wounds .
 Hutus rather suffering was unrelenting, ~ than Tutsis, trying to escape from the RPF, disease . Poor sanitation spread as poor sanitation spread . Hutus were Hutus, rather suffering rather than suffering .
 Thousands faced as many as 300,000 people in humanitarian crisis in a single camp . The Red Cross and which made rapid other aid agencies worked progress against the tirelessly to provide food and Rwandan army. medical assistance .
 Memorial sites sprang up at the scenes of the worst atrocities in the conflict . In the aftermath of the conflict, memorial sites sprung up in the aftermath .
 5,000 people lost their lives in a horrific attack near Kigali, Rwanda . The genocide took place in the country's capital, the capital city of Kigli, in 1994 .
 More inventions have been devised since 1900 than in the rest of human history . In fact, it is estimated that more inventions were invented since 1900 .
 A whirlwind of new advances brought humanity from a largely rural existence to a “global village” of mass connectivity . The world is now a "global village" of mass communication and connectivity .
 As the 21st century took shape, there seemed no limit to what technology could achieve . For those who could afford it, technology could be a reality TV star .
 Electric heat and light replaced gas and candles, and devices such as the vacuum cleaner, designed in 1902, transformed housework . The vacuum cleaner was invented in 1902 .
 In the kitchen, the problem of preserving food was solved by the invention of the refrigerator . The refrigerator was invented in the 1930s to preserve food .
 This device, from 1929, uses an electric motor to churn clothes in a drum . It is one of the world's most famous washing machines .
 Television created whole new genres of entertainment and spread them to millions of viewers . Lightbulbs had been available since the late 19th century but only entered widespread use in 1910s . New models became more reliable and longer lasting .
 The first commercial public radio station was established in the USA in the 1920s . It was the first commercial radio station in the US .
 Numerous technicians worked on the ENIAC, the world's first fully electronic computer . EnIAC was the world’s first fully-electronic computer .
 The first television images in the 1920s were fuzzy and dim . The power of the 1930s television was the beginning of the television revolution .
 The rocket weapons used by Germany during the war became the basis of the Space Age . In 1957, the Ssoviet’s Sputnik I became the first artificial satellite .
 Computers finally came into their own as transistors were superseded by transistors . Transistors are tiny sandwiches of silicon crystal that could be used to build microchips .
 In the 1980s and 1990s computers became more accessible, moving into schools and homes . In the 1990s and 2000s computers were available in schools, homes and schools .
 IBM presented the first personal computer in 1981 . Apple launched the Macintosh in 1984 . IBM's first personal computers were released in 1981, and Apple's first was the Macintosh .
 The rapid advance of computers has transformed almost every aspect of human life, from work and learning to shopping and socializing .
 Satellites provided communication links that could span the Earth, and played a pivotal role in the development of global telecommunications . The first satellite satellite was launched in 1961 .
 The first wind farm was built in the USA in the 1980s, part of the search for new sources of energy less damaging to the environment . Polaroid’s instant camera was cheap and accessible in the 1960s .
 The new color film inside the camera could be developed in under a minute . Digital revolution could be the beginning of the digital revolution .
 It became possible to share ideas and information around the world at the touch of a button . It is now possible to send photos and videos to people around the globe .
 Mobile phones kept the world connected even on the move, and the invention of smart smart ... sufficiently advanced technology is Indistinguishable from magic .
 Cordless phones became a must-have accessory in the 1960s . Author Arthur C. C. Clarke wrote a series of science fiction novels .
 Lewinsky shared details of the affair with a coworker, Linda Tripp, who secretly recorded the conversations . Over the next 18 months, the affair was recorded by Tripp .
 Clinton was at the time being sued for sexual harassment by a former employee in Arkansas, Paula Jones . Clinton was in the midst of being sued by Paula Jones for harassment .
 United States President Bill Clinton had been dogged by rumors of sexual indiscretion . Bill Clinton was dogged for years by allegations of sexual infidelity .
 President Obama faced political ruin when reports emerged of an affair with a White House intern . He lied about the affair under oath . The White House president lied about it under oath.
 Lewinsky angrily denied having an 3 and Tripp, wanted to affair with Tripp . With his wife Kenneth Starr, who Hillary by his side, had been sent the Clinton called a press taped conversations conference where he angrily denied the affair .
 In response, arguments to justify their . pursuit of the President political vendetta . In response to the President's . pursuit . of a . pursuit, arguments . to justify the pursuit of . a political . vendetta. President .
 During the trial, perjured himself during ‘ of the stain was, she was labeled the most the Paula Jones case. indeed, Clinton. indeed,. indeed, . indeed the hated woman in America . He lashed out at Starr . The news caused for betraying her friend’
 A 10/23/1996 AFFAIR COMES TO LIGHT . Photographers caught Lewinsky and Clinton hugging each other at a fundraiser .
 It was published in full by the press and posted on the internet, where millions read the explicit details . Millions of people read it in full, and millions read it online .
 On the charge of obstruction of justice, the Senate was split fifty-fifty on the charge . The Senate split 50-50 on the obstruction charge, with the majority of the vote split 50 .
 Democrats staged a walkout to protest the impeachment, but they failed to stop proceedings . Clinton was acquitted .
 In 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States of America by Islamic fundamentalists stunned the entire world . EI 19909/11 and the War on Terror 2001-2011 are the focus of this week's EI .
 The USA and its allies invaded Afghanistan in an attempt to bring the perpetrators to justice . The USA, its allies and their allies invaded the country in a bid to find the perpetrators of the crimes .
 It 9545 | a Maromitoyacel was in shock. Ve-teyP-tele) | BUSH DECLARES WAR 0) \\ it 9545 .
 Intelligence services had lthal.¢stem Malou lnaeleiinlctomyivalnal al-Oaeda, and Bush told the U.S. to prepare for war . Bush said the United States was preparing for war in Iraq .
 Controversially held without trial, they were interrogated about their suspected involvement in terrorist networks . Controversy over their alleged involvement in terror networks .
 The Taliban, a powerful Islamic militant regime, refused to hand over Bin Laden . The Taliban is known for their refusal to hand him over .
 His arrest was regarded as the most significant SJhale(omaakomolcrennanannannannare| of the War on Terror . His arrest is regarded as a significant moment in the history of terrorism .
 As the President and his team waited, news came in that Bin Laden was dead . News came in on the day of the death of Bin Laden .
 Unconventional mortgage products and a steep rise in consumer credit had increased debt around the world . When bad news from a French investment bank, BNP Paribas, began to realize how serious the situation was .
 Depositors lined The giant United States mortgage to withdraw money lenders Fannie Mae and in a run on the bank Freddie Mac were bailed that only ended when out by the government the government on the advice of the ~ ee guaranteed that United States Treasury Secretary — savings were safe .
 Its collapse stunned the world, prompting Western governments to inject billions into their own banks in an attempt to stop the crisis from spreading . Western governments injected billions into themselves banks in a bid to stop it spreading .
 In Lithuania, the economy sank into a deep recession, sparking anger among its citizens . Lithuania has been hit hard by the recession, prompting anger among citizens . The country is now in a state of emergency measures to combat the recession .
 In 2009, about 7,000 protesters gathered in front of Lithuania’s Parliament, in Vilnius, and violent clashes with police ensued . In early 2009, a large number of Lithuanian protesters gathered outside the Parliament in Lithuania .
 Leaders of the G-20 group of the world’s major economies met for the first time in the USA to head off a global financial meltdown . The leaders of the group met in the U.S. in the wake of the financial crisis .
 Hosted by President George W Bush, they presented a united front in finding a solution that would calm the jittery markets and boost business confidence . Hosted in a joint effort to find a solution to calm the markets .
 Angela Merkel initiated a $50-billion economic rescue package for financial institutions in Europe . The German Chancellor, Angela Merkel, initiated the bailout package in the hope of jump-starting economic growth . The bailout package is controversial .
 The move angered many who felt the money would have been better used for education and childcare . Many felt the move was a waste of money .
 Reality dawns that bankers gambled on trillions of dollars worth of risky investments that had substantially dropped in value . Reality dawned that bankers had gambled with trillions in risky investments .
 Iceland's three major banks collapsed in 2008, sinking the country into severe recession . Iceland's economy has been hit hard by the collapse of its banks .
 Iceland's government resigned and crowds protested in front of the Parliament in Reykjavik . Crowds protested after the government resigned .
 The crisis had begun to bring down not just banks, but whole countries . The crisis was bringing down the banks, and whole countries, as well as banks .
 Unemployment soared in countries across the Western world . S.S. S|}
 As governments struggled with debt, protesters marched against cuts to public services . Demonstrators marched against public services in London .
 Greece's debt has left the country's economy in ruins . One of the worst affected countries was Greece, where debt had left the economy in ruin .
 Greece, Portugal, Spain, Ireland, Ireland and Italy came under pressure to lower enormous sovereign debts and cut budget deficits . The crisis is the result of the crisis in the eurozone .
 Greece was offered a bailout by both its European partners and the International Monetary Fund to help it avoid a default . After weeks of negotiations, Greece has been offered a bail out of its crisis-stricken economy .
 Amid concerns about the survival of the Euro, a rescue plan was devised as Ireland and Portugal also sought a bailout . The rescue plan is devised as the Euro was threatened with a collapse .
 Hundreds of billions were given out in a series of deals, but the Eurozone remained fragile . The Eurozone remains fragile, but it is still fragile .
 An extraordinary series of uprisings spread from country to country, as popular resistance overturned a series of authoritarian regimes . The protests began in Tunisia and quickly spread throughout the Middle East and North Africa, affecting 17 countries .
 After 18 days of protests, President Hosni Mubarak was forced to resign, and was arrested for ordering the killing of demonstrators . Muammar Gaddafi attempted to repress dissidents with a similar program of violence, sparking a civil war .
 Anti-government protesters in Bahrain attempted their own rebellion, but were international aid in suppressed with brutal force by the police and army overthrowing Gaddafi . His opponents, the National Transitional Council declared themselves the legal government .
 Gaddafi was captured and killed in his home town of Sirte . The National Transitional Council took control of major cities, and captured him .
 Thousands of Libyans waving the new flag of Libya filled Tripoli’s Martyrs’ Square to celebrate the liberation of the nation .
 As he lay dying in a hospital, he was visited by President Zine el Abidine . His story spread, and he was later visited by the president of Zine El Abidine's government .
 Protesters throughout Tunisia demanded democracy, clashing violently with police . Demonstrators clashed with police as they demanded democracy . Tunisia is one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 In the capital, Algiers, thousands of citizens defied government warnings not to rally . Thousands of citizens called for democratic reforms and the removal of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika .
 Bank employees and hospital staff led strikes, demanding better pay and benefits . Bank employees, hospital staff demand better pay, benefits . Hospital staff and bank employees led strikes in London .
 Further uprisings took place in Yemen, Jordan, Morocco, Lebanon, Oman and Saudi Arabia . Uprisings met with brutal violence by state security forces .
 Some regimes were forced to implement modest constitutional reforms . The Yemeni government of Ali Saleh collapsed in 2012 .
 Some of the worst violence against civilians was seen in Syria . Some of Syria's worst violence was seen against civilians .
 As protests escalated, the Syrian army began a crackdown, killing thousands of civilians by shelling rebel towns and cities . Thousands of civilians have been killed by the army in Syria .
 Ennahda vowed to prove that Islam and democracy were compatible, promising to be a model for a new Arab world . The moderate Islamic party won the election in a landslide .
 Governments in Tunisia and Libya had fallen, but Egypt remained under army rule despite the departure of Mubarak .
 Leaders of Iraq, Sudan, and Yemen promised democratic reform, but dissent rumbled on . The leaders of Iraq and Sudan promised reform but dissent continued .
 In Syria, Assad’s regime continued its brutal suppression of protesters . The Syrian government continues its brutal crackdown on protesters .
 As religious and sectarian divisions began to widen, the outcome for the region remained uncertain . The outcome for Syria remains uncertain .
 UN resolution enables member states to take measures to prevent attacks on civilians . UN resolution passed in December allowing member states in Syria to take action to prevent civilian attacks .
 A multinational coalition provided logistical assistance to the rebels . A no-fly zone and naval blockade enforced by the coalition enforced in Syria has been imposed .
 The international community recognized the National Transitional Council as the legal representative of Libya but Gaddafi refused to relinquish power . Gaddafi's regime was overthrown in 2011 .
 The end of the war was declared on October 23, 2011 . Hostilities continued into at least at Sal ~ October, when he was captured and killed by rebels . The end was declared in 2011 .
 There was much celebration, but tensions between tribes loyal to Gaddafi and militias continued .
 Francis Wong for visualization and design development; Dharini, Shaila Brown, Damilare Olugbode, and Alka Thakur for editorial assistance . Phil Fitzgerald for colour work on images; Sean Hunter for research; Angela Baynham for proofreading; Laurence
 Smithsonian Enterprises: Smithsonian Enterprises . Smithsonian Enterprises Carol Le Blanc, Vice President Brigid Ferraro, Director of Licensing Ellen Nanney, Licensing Manager Kealy Wilson, Product Development Coordinator.
 Chris Hellier / © DACS 2012, © FLC/ ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2012 .