 How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb informed audiences that the U.S. government had recklessly managed its war on communism . How I learned to stop worrying and love the bomb was a classic novel .
 President John F Kennedy’s management of the Berlin wall crisis and his response to the alliance between Cuban dictator Fidel Castro and Khrushchev threatened to incite a nuclear war .
 Kubrick believed the government’s dependence upon nuclear weapons increased the likelihood of using such weapons during cold war crises . Kubrick believed that the government's dependence on nuclear weapons led to the use of such weapons in the Cold War era .
 In an essay published in Films and Filming in 1963, Kubrick expressed his hope that Dr. Dr. Stanley Kubrick would be able to return to the set . Kubrick wrote that he hoped that the film would be released in 1964 .
 Strangelove would alter the public’s perception of the government and encourage changes in nuclear policies . The film would change the public's view of nuclear policy .
 He utilized all of the tools of filmmaking and storytelling to convey this warning to audiences . He used the tools to convey the message to audiences, including the use of humor .
 The screenwriting team utilized several characters to mock American officials and explore themes associated with their cold war policies . The screenwriters explored themes of the Cold War .
 All of the film's major characters were based upon well-known figures in America’s war on communism, despite the disclaimer stating the opposite at the outset of the movie . The film's disclaimer stated that the film was based on the war against communism .
 Characters’ actions and appearances were intended to inspire comparisons to their reallife counterparts . Although the portrayals seemed absurd, characters’ . actions and . appearances . intended to . inspire comparisons .
 Diplomat and politician Adlai Stevenson served as the model for President Merkin Muffley .
 Muffley’s failure to prevent a nuclear catastrophe warned audiences that a communications breakdown might hinder efforts to avert disaster . The world created by Kennedy might face greater crises, he said .
 Curtis LeMay, commander of the Strategic Air Command, was the model for General “Buck” Turgidson . LeMay was also a proponent of the use of nuclear weapons .
 Kubrick examined relationship between sexuality and violence through Turgidson . Kubrick examined the relationship between sexual violence and violence . Kubrick's film was released in 1999 .
 The screenwriters used LeMay and Robert Welch, founder of the John Birch Society, as the models for General Jack D Ripper .
 Kubrick mocked the international communist conspiracy through Ripper . He further explored the relationship between sexuality and violence . The film suggests man’s equal desire to wage nuclear war and achieve sexual satisfaction .
 Dr. Strangelove was based upon a composite of scientists Edward Teller, Wernher von Braun, and nuclear strategist Herman Kahn . The film was released in 1964 . It was based on the work of Teller and Braun .
 Dr. Strangelove offered audiences evidence of the dangers of man’s overdependence upon technology, particularly during the nuclear age . The film, which was released in 1964, was a classic of the Cold War .
 Kubrick hinted that a nuclear war was unavoidable if the U.S. did not alter its cold war policies . Kubrick hints that the United States must change its policies to avoid nuclear war .
 Kubrick and his screenwriting team fashioned Muffley’s character and appearance on that of Adlai Stevenson, who was more liberal than Kennedy in terms of cold war politics . Kubrick and the screenwriters used Stevenson's character to create the character .
 Kennedy narrowly averted nuclear conflicts during the Berlin crisis of 1961 and the Cuban missile crisis . Determined to win the cold war, Kennedy had narrowly avoided nuclear conflicts .
 Kubrick could not use Kennedy as a model for Muffley without drawing criticism from Columbia Pictures and audiences that he intended to persuade . Kennedy would appear to be the best model for a film about the dangers of nuclear war .
 Production Code Administration chairman Geoffrey Shurlock’s letters expressed 2 Charles Maland, “Dr. Charles” Maland . Charles was ‘Dr. Maland’ and a member of the U.S. Council of Standards of Standards and Organization . Charles Mal
 “Nightmare Comedy and the Ideology of Liberal Consensus,” American Quarterly 31 : 709. “Liberal Consensus’s Ideology” is the result of a “nightmare comedy”
 Kubrick selected Stevenson as a symbol of the Kennedy administration, albeit the more liberal faction of the administration . To avoid criticism, Kubrick chose Stevenson to avoid criticism .
 Stevenson often disagreed with the president’s determination to win the cold war . During Kennedy's presidency, Stevenson disagreed with his father's decision to fight the Cold War .
 Audiences may have recognized Muffley’s less confrontational diplomacy . ‘I’m not afraid to say yes,’ he says. ‘‘’. Audiences recognize his lack of confrontational humor .
 Despite this posture, Muffley could not prevent Ripper’s nuclear strike . Despite this, Ripper's nuclear strike was not successful .
 Kubrick hoped audiences would realize that even a peaceminded president could not avoid a nuclear conflict with the Soviet Union in the environment created during Kennedy’s presidency . One might conclude that Kubrick hoped that audiences would . realize that . even a peace-loving president could . not avoid
 In the early 1960s, the world witnessed two dangerous crises between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and the United States . The two countries were at the height of the Cold War in the 1960s .
 The world anxiously watched as German soldiers constructed the Berlin wall in August 1961 . The Berlin wall was built in 1961 .
 The U.S. made preparations for a military conflict with Russia . In response, the United States prepared for a possible conflict with the Russian government .
 President Kennedy threatened to use nuclear weapons in the event of a Soviet attack on the U.S. President Kennedy made the threat in response to the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 These crises proved that nuclear disaster had become a real possibility by the early 1960s . Although these crises ended peacefully, they proved to be peaceful .
 In 1961, the Berlin crisis threatened to escalate into a nuclear conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Berlin crisis was the height of the Berlin-era tensions .
 During the summer of 1961, the Soviet Union and the United States prepared for a conflict over Berlin . The two countries were preparing for a war over Berlin in 1961 .
 Letter from Geoffrey M Shurlock to Stanley Kubrick was signed by Stanley Kubrick 21 January 1963, Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences Library, .
 Khrushchev announced that the Soviet Union would end the moratorium on nuclear testing established in 1958 . The Soviet Union ended the moratorium in 1958 after the war of Czechoslovakia .
 On 25 July, Kennedy declared that the United States would initiate civil defense preparations in order to withstand a Soviet first strike . Kennedy declared on 25 July that the U.S. would be prepared for a first strike by the Soviet Union .
 During the second weekend in August, as the East German army began construction of the Berlin wall, Kennedy and advisor McGeorge Bundy began discussing the possibility of using nuclear weapons . Kennedy and Bundy discussed the idea of using a nuclear weapon .
 Special advisor Dean Acheson had suggested Kennedy consider this option . Kennedy had been advised to consider a military option .
 On 27 October, tanks under General Lucius Clay’s command faced off with Soviet tanks at the East Berlin-West Berlin border . General Clay's command was under fire from Soviet tanks in the battle .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev demonstrated their capacities for creating and resolving crises, but Dr. Kennedy was not ready for a crisis . Dr. John Kennedy and Dr. Richard Nixon were able to create crises in the 1960s .
 Dr. Strangelove suggested to audiences that a crisis might not always be averted . 'Strangelove' suggested that the film was not always averted, but that it might be possible .
 American U-2 surveillance planes photographed Soviet missile installations in Cuba on 14 October 1962 . The U.S. surveillance planes were used to take pictures of missile installations .
 The U.S. established a blockade around the island of Cuba . While the world waited, the United States set up a blockade .
 President Kennedy announced that Sovie t missiles were in Cuba, an act he labeled an offensive measure exercised by Khrushchev . President Kennedy labeled the move an act of war against the Soviet Union .
 President Obama promised that he would not invade Cuba in exchange for the removal of the missiles . He finally promised to remove the missiles from Cuba if he removed them from Cuba .
 Throughout the crisis, Kennedy and the Executive Committee discussed several possible scenarios that included the blockade, an air strike, an invasion, and nuclear war .
 Kubrick’s scenario was not necessarily fiction . Audiences would remember these tense standoffs and realize that Kubrick's scenario wasn’t fiction .
 Dr. Kennedy narrowly avoided a nuclear war during these conflicts, Dr. John Reagan narrowly avoided it .
 Dr. Strangelove warned that cold war crises might not be settled peacefully . The film was based on a Cold War novel by Dr. Martin Luther King II .
 Kubrick’s scenario: President approved Wing Attack Plan R in order to give the U.S. credibility and assure the Soviets that the elimination of the American chain of command would not prevent retaliation . In Kubrick's scenario, the president had approved the plan to stop Soviet retaliation .
 Plan R prevents Muffley from arresting General Ripper, recalling the bombers, and averting disaster . Comically, the security measures of Plan R prevent Muffleys from arresting Ripper and recalling bombers .
 The plan closes all forms of communication between Burpelson Air Force Base, the bombers of the 843rd Bomb Wing, and the president . The plan will also close all communication between the president and the base .
 This situation suggests that a communications breakdown might prevent the peaceful resolution of a crisis, despite the efforts of a peaceminded president . A communications breakdown could prevent a peaceful resolution, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Kubrick satirized this problem in the phone conversations between Muffley and Premier Kissoff . Kubrick also satirized the problem in his film, which was released in 1996 .
 A hotline was installed after the Cuban missile crisis, providing a direct phone line between the White House and the Kremlin . To prevent communications breakdowns between the leaders of the U.S. and Russia, a hotline was established after the crisis .
 Strangelove's hot-line provides audiences with little confidence in the security measure . The line will be available at 7 p.m. ET .
 Muffley struggles to convey the gravity of the situation to his Russian counterpart . Kissoff’s advisors have difficulty locating him, and Muffleys struggles to communicate the situation with his counterpart .
 During Peter Sellers’s mostly improvised conversation with the inaudible Kissoff, his lines resemble a quarrel between young lovers rather than a conversation between world leaders attempting to avert a nuclear war .
 Muffley and Kissoff exchange greetings and the Soviet Premier turns down the music that disrupts their conversation . The president attempts to explain the situation in a letter to the Soviet premier .
 One of our base commanders, he had a sort of sort of—well, he went a little funny in the head. Now then Dimitri, you know how we’ve always talked about the possibility of something going wrong with the bomb…The bomb, Dimitri…The
 A breakdown in communications could lead to the loss of important time and a costly conclusion to a cold war crisis . This exchange suggests that a breakdown of communications could cost the U.S. a costly end to the cold war .
 In Kubrick’s scenario, every second counts . Kissoff's apparent drunkenness hinders attempts to avert a nuclear catastrophe . Muffley's attempts to avoid a nuclear disaster are thwarted .
 Kubrick, George, and Terry Southern attempted to illustrate the inevitability of nuclear catastrophe through Muffley . They openly criticized SAC commander General Curtis LeMay as one of the authors of that catastrophe .
 LeMay seemed more concerned with winning the cold war and displaying the might of the SAC arsenal than preserving peace . Turgidson's priority was preserving peace, a priority shared by LeMay . LeMay was more concerned about winning the Cold War and displaying SAC's might than
 LeMay advised Eisenhower to launch an all-out nuclear attack against the Soviet Union in 1956 . During the Suez Crisis in 1956, LeMay told Eisenhower to use nuclear weapons against Soviet Union .
 LeMay assured the president that SAC could destroy Soviet nuclear capabilities and that losses would not exceed accident rates . LeMay: SAC was able to destroy Soviet capable capabilities .
 During Kennedy’s presidency, LeMay advocated an aggressive stance against communism . LeMay supported the research and 8 film quotations from the film .
 The SAC commander had advised Kennedy to invade Cuba after the Cuban missile crisis had been settled . He had advised the president to do so after the crisis was settled .
 When the president refuses to order an unprovoked attack against Russia, Turgidson sulks like a child scolded by a parent . He sulks when Obama refuses to attack Russia, he sulks .
 The screenwriting team mocked Kennedy’s claims as a product of cold war hysteria that ignored the reality of the situation . The screenwriters failed to recognize the hopelessness in the situation, just as Turgidson’�s warnings fail to .
 The year after Kennedy chastised Eisenhower for permitting the “missile gap,” surveillance photographs revealed that the Soviets never possessed superior numbers of missiles . The Soviets never had superior missiles .
 Despite this information, Kennedy continued to increase military spending and expanded the US 10 Beschloss, The Crisis Years, 544, says . The crisis years were the '50 years of Kennedy's presidency .
 Kubrick suggested that the President’s advisors, particularly his military counselors, preferred to wage war rather than prevent it . Kubrick suggests that the decision was made by the President's advisors, rather than war .
 Kubrick utilized General Turgidson to explore the relationship between sexuality and violence . The film was directed by Stanley Kubrick in the 1960s .
 General Turgidson is driven equally by his desire to wage war and satis fy his sexual urges . He's driven equally equally by desire to war and desire to be sexually active .
 Turgidson is preparing to sleep with mistress and secretary, Miss Scott, when he is informed that Ripper has ordered the 843rd Bomb Wing to attack the Soviet Union .
 Turgidson decides to “mosey over to the War Room” to assess the situation, promising to return before she can say “Blast off,” a reference to a rocket launch and ejaculation .
 During a debate in War Room, Turgidson receives a call from Miss Scott, who wants him to return to their suite . Miss Scott wants him back to the suite .
 She questions his interest in her; he promises that he deeply respects her as a person and promises to marry her . She questions him about her interest in him; he tells her that he loves her and respects her .
 Turgidson excitedly supports Strangelove’s mine-shaft plan, which will require male inhabitants to abandon the practice of monogamy . Despite this promise, he says he is not opposed to the plan .
 Kubrick suggested men who wielded nuclear weapons were simultaneously driven by their desire to wage war and make love . Kubrick suggested that men wielding nukes were driven by desire for war and love .
 General Jack D Ripper was constructed from the models of LeMay and John Birch Society founder Robert Welch . General Jack Ripper is constructed from . LeMay's model .
 Ripper displays LeMay’s desire to use nuclear weapons in order to win the war on communism . Ripper is the brainchild of LeMay who wanted to use nukes against communism .
 Ripper’s claims that 12 Walter LaFeber, America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945-1990 , 213. More importantly, Ripper's claims that . 12 . Walter LaFber was a member of the 12th World War III .
 Welch founded the John Birch Society in December 1958 . Welch was a conservative conspiracy theorist . Welch founded John Birch society in 1958 .
 The Society was organized to combat communism in America, reverse liberal political advances of the New Deal and the Fair Deal, and revitalize American morality . The Society fought communism in the U.S.
 Welch assembled a number of prominent businessmen and anti-Communists to discuss the various ways in which the nation could combat the many forms of Communist infiltration and subversion . Welch assembled some of the nation's most prominent businessmen to discuss how to combat Communist infiltration .
 Welch claimed he had proof that Communists controlled unions, mass media, Congress, the Pentagon, and the White House . Welch claimed that he had nine years of research . Welch said he has proof that the Communists controlled shipping and communications unions .
 Ripper's theory about communist infiltration satirically parallels Welch’s comprehensive conspiracy theory . Welch's conspiracy theory is based on the theory of communist infiltration in the U.S.
 General Ripper orders bombers to attack Russia in order to stop Communist infiltration of U.S. society through the process of fluoridation . Group Captain Mandrake says he has ordered the attack .
 Ripper claims that the Soviets began poisoning the American water supply in 1946 . The Soviets began using chemicals that sapped 14 Phillip L Gianos, Politics and Politicians in American Film .
 Ripper warns that salt, flour, fruit juices, soup, sugar, milk, ice cream are all future targets of fluoridation . Ripper also warns that “salt, flour” and “fruit juices” are future targets .
 Kubrick suggested conspiracy theories threatened rather than defended the nation’s interests . Kubrick suggested that conspiracy theories threaten rather than defend the nation's interests . Ripper's actions were linked to organizations such as the John Birch Society .
 Kubrick intentionally selected 1946 as the starting point of this communist plot . Kubrick intentionally chose 1946 as a starting point for the plot .
 He implied that Communism must replace capitalism in order to avoid future wars . The Communist Party implied that communism would replace capitalism to avoid wars .
 The Canadian government arrested twenty-two people on charges of atomic espionage . Evidence that the Soviets had successfully infiltrated the U.S. government was evidence . One week later, 22 people were arrested .
 Winston Churchill warned in March that Communism had begun its advance westward across Europe . In March, Winston Churchill delivered a speech in which he warned of the threat .
 In the late 1940s and early 1950s, Americans began developing theories of communist subversion and infiltration . Americans developed theories of Communist subversion in the late 1950s .
 Testimonies and stolen atomic documents suggested that some of these accusations were valid .
 Congressional investigations, particularly those conducted by the House Committee on Un-American Activities and Senator Joseph McCarthy, supported the theory that communists were among America’s cultural, financial, and political ranks .
 Fears of communist plots to sabotage the nation’s water supply, transportation routes, and power supply had accompanied these investigations . Fears were raised that communist plots would sabotage water supply and transportation routes .
 McCarthyism in America (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1998), 154, 160 . McCarthyism was first published in the 1970s and 1980s .
 An early theory of subversion claimed that sexual deviants were susceptible to seduction and blackmail by leftist organizations . The theory was based on a theory that leftist organizations blackmailed deviants .
 This theory suggested that deviants’ moral weakness allowed communists to control their actions . This theory was based on a theory of deviants' moral weakness allowing communists to take control .
 Congress, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the media began investigating homosexuals and promiscuous women for “treasonous” activities . As a result, Congress, FBI and media investigated homosexuals and women for treasonous activities .
 Kubrick challenged this theory and explored the relationship between sexuality and violence by portraying Ripper as a sexual deviant . Kubrick challenges this theory by portraying the rightwing conspiracy theorist and author of the world’s destruction .
 Ripper informs Mandrake that in order to avoid communist subversion, he no longer engages in intercourse with Mandrake . Ripper tells Mandrake he is no longer engaging in intercourse .
 The general’s abstinence might be considered deviant, yet Ripper believes that his behavior enables him to challenge the communist conspiracy . Ripper says that his abstinence may be considered a deviant yet he believes that it will help him challenge the government .
 Kubrick explored relationship between sexual desire and violence with General Ripper . Kubrick explored the relationship between desire and violent violence in the film .
 The late nineteenth-century serial murderer stalked and brutally murdered prostitutes in London’s White Chapel district . His name invokes the memory of the late nineteenth century serial murderer that stalked .
 Throughout the film, Ripper smokes a cigar, a phallic symbol that is repeated among many of the film’s military officials in the War Room . Ripper smoked a cigar throughout the film .
 General Ripper explains to Group Captain Mandrake that he has ordered the 843rd Bomb Wing to attack the Soviet Union in order to halt the communist plot of fluoridation . Americans’ “precious bodily fluids” were being poisoned and sapped .
 Kubrick hinted that Ripper’s sexual dissatisfaction led him to seek pleasure in the next logical avenue — nuclear war . Kubrick hinted in the film that the Ripper sought pleasure from his sexual dissatisfaction . Kubrick said Ripper may have sought pleasure in nuclear warfare .
 Kubrick suggested that sexual confusion could unleash a brash act of violence, such as Ripper’s unprovoked war on communism . Kubrick believed that there was a relationship between sexual desire and violence . Kubrick's belief that sexual desire could lead to violence .
 The screenwriters selected Herman Kahn, Edward Teller, and Wernher von Braun to provide the models for Dr. Dr. Hans von Braun . The screenwriting team selected the screenwriters .
 Strangelove proves more threatening to the safety of the world than either Turgidson or Ripper . The film is based on the work of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
 Kahn’s On Thermonuclear War, commissioned by the RAND Corporation, analyzed the intricacies and scenarios of nuclear war . The RAND Corporation analyzed and predicted the outcomes of various scenarios .
 Kubrick devoured the text in order to understand the details of nuclear war . According to longtime producer James Harris, Kubrick devored the text to understand .
 Strangelove analyzes each situation by assessing possible losses and damage, searching for a favorable option, even though this option might lead to the loss of millions of lives . The film is based on the work of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the 1960s .
 Strangelove, commissioned by the “Bland Corporation,” believes that the Doomsday Machine is not a practical deterrent . The inability to control the device once it is activated makes it not a deterrent, the author says .
 Kissinger urged that the U.S. develop a variety of nuclear weapons to increase the credibility of the nation’s deterrence . Kissinger published Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy in 1957, urging that the United States .
 Kissinger warned of a growing missile gap that allowed the Soviet Union to achieve certain victories in the cold war . Four years later, Kissinger published The Necessity of Choice, in which he warned of the gap .
 Strangelove suggests that Americans relocated to mine shafts will be overcome by a feeling of nostalgia for the life they leave above ground . He suggests that those relocated to the mines will feel nostalgic for their life in the mines .
 Strangelove’s response is absurd because it lacks any consideration for the sorrow caused by the loss of loved ones or the pain of re-emerging into a world devastated by a nuclear apocalypse .
 Teller had immigrated to the U.S. after fleeing Nazi persecution in 1935 . Teller was forced to flee the Nazi persecution of Nazi persecution .
 The Hungarian-born scientist joined the Manhattan Project in 1943 . He participated in the development of the atomic bomb and formulating ideas about a hydrogen bomb .
 Teller eventually became obsessed with idea of perfecting the hydrogen bomb . Teller became obsessed over idea of a hydrogen bomb in his quest to perfect the bomb .
 After he successfully developed a hydrogen bomb in 1952, Teller continued to actively support the expansion of America’s nuclear arsenal . Teller's hydrogen bomb was developed in 1952 .
 Teller and his fictional counterpart, Strangelove, shared an enthusiasm for the development of weapons of mass destruction . They believed they contributed to the nation’s superior position in the cold war .
 Wernher von Braun was the only model used to construct Dr. Dr. Terry Southern . Southern told biographer Lee Hill that von Braun made Dr. Southern's rocket scientist .
 Dr. Strangelove, who had abandoned his Nazi background to work for the U.S. in the United States, was a Nazi sympathizer . He was known for his anti-war efforts in the early 1950s and '60s .
 When the Soviets and Americans invaded Germany, he surrendered to the Americans . He began developing the U.S. Army’s rocketry program . He surrendered to Americans when the Soviets invaded Germany .
 Kubrick believed that a precarious bond had been formed between man and the machines . Kubrick's film was released in 1996, and was released on October 25, 2001 .
 Strangelove, this relationship linked and satisfied man’s sexual and violent desires, is a relationship between man and woman . The film is based on the relationship between a man and a woman in a relationship with a woman .
 Ripper, Strangelove and Turgidson appear to be determined to witness a nuclear war, despite the consequences .
 Turgidson and Strangelove become excited when they discuss the possibility of war and the postwar world of sexual gratification that will have to be created . The film was released in 1964 .
 In 2001, Kubrick depicted an ape discovering that a bone could be used to defeat competitors for food . Kubrick depicted a bone being used by an ape to defeat a competitor .
 This film suggested that throughout history, man has sought to develop more destructive means to crus h his enemies . It suggested that man has tried more destructive ways to defeat his enemies.
 The Doomsday Machine represents the destructive divorce of man and machine, says Kahn . Kahn had dismissed the Doomsday Machine as uncontrollable .
 Ambassador de Sadesky claims that a sane man would not detonate the Doomsday Machine . Yet the Soviet government decided to build this weapon despite the ambassador’s objections .
 Kubrick argued sane men should not build such weapons, yet they were forced to do so by their own definitions of situations . Kubrick argued that sane men would not be building such weapons . Kubrick argues that sane people should not be allowed to build weapons .
 In order to convey man’s uncontrollable desire to possess the most powerful weapons, Turgidson wishes that the United States possessed a doomsday device .
 Kubrick further examined this ‘marriage’ in 2001, in which the supercomputer HAL turns on his creators and murders three of the crewmembers . Kubrick also examined the "marriage" in 2001 in which HAL turned on his creator and murdered three crew members .
 Kubrick also portrayed this deadly marriage between man and machine with the internal struggle of Dr. Dr. Martin . Kubrick portrayed the marriage between the machines and man in the film .
 His human hand and his mechanical hand wrestle for control over his mind and soul . His hand and the mechanical hand wrestles for control of his soul .
 At times he shouts German phrases meant to represent the voice of his mechanical half . At times, he shouts .
 Dr. Strangelove frees himself from his wheelchair at the end of the film, announcing that he can walk again just before the Doomsday Machine detonates .
 Kubrick's message is that man has no hope of controlling the advanced machines he has created . Kubrick’s message was that man can’t control the machines he created .
 Audiences needed to overturn the government’s nuclear policies and abandon the dependence upon weapons of mass destruction in order to prevent a Strangelovean apocalypse . Audiences need to overturn government's nuclear policies .
 A number of films challenged the cold war consensus in 1964 and offered audiences different interpretations of the dangers facing the nation . The films were released that year's 50th anniversary of the Cold War .
 Strangelove depicted a military plot to capture the president, who had recently signed a nuclear disarmament treaty with the Soviet Union which angered some military officials . The film, which was released in 1964, depicted a plan to capture him .
 The plot is uncovered and officials involved resign, disgracing the military . The plot was uncovered and the officials involved resigned . The military was disgraced by the plot .
 Kubrick and George brought a lawsuit against the producers of Fail-Safe, charging that they had violated copyright laws . The lawsuit was based on a lawsuit filed by the brothers of Dr. Strangelove and Dr. George .
 In this 43 film, a computer malfunction orders one wing of bombers to attack Moscow . The film is based on a computer attack on the Soviet Union .
 The president instructs the Soviets to shoot down the bombers just as Muffley had ordered to avoid nuclear war . The president then instructs them to shoot them down just as he ordered .
 Despite radio orders from the president to return to base, one bomber releases its nuclear bombs over Moscow . President Vladimir Putin orders him to return from base .
 Fail-Safe vindicated the president for his willingness to sacrifice an American city avoid nuclear war . Fail-safe vindicated President Obama for sacrificing a city to avoid a war .
 Strangelove indicted the politicians as well as their military and scientific advisors . Seven Days in May indicted the military for warmongering . Fail-Safe only questioned the effect of the arms race on the security of the world .
 Strangelove suggested that the public’s faith in U.S. leaders was misplaced and would ultimately lead to the world's destruction . The film also suggested that faith in the U.K. leaders would lead to world destruction .
 Kubrick criticized military officials and scientists who advised the president for their roles in the impending doom . Kubrick criticized the military officials who advised President George W. Bush for their role in the war . Kubrick also criticized the president's decision to take action against the government .
 The film’s genre, satire, allowed audiences to view their world from a distance not provided by Fail-Safe and Seven Days in May .
 Strangelove inspired public debate about the picture that included discussion of the government’s war on communism .