 Many Americans still remember what appeared to be a nuclear poker game between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in October of 1962 . Evolving Historical Perspectives. William J Medland .
 For more than a quarter century, the Cuban missile crisis has been studied, analyzed, and reflected upon by hundreds of people . Hundreds of people ranging from historians to journalists, from participants to observers .
 In the brief space of this article, it is not possible to review all of the principal interpretations of the book . The book is published in the U.S. State of the Arts .
 What is presented here is a synthesis of the views of the participants and some of the counterviews of scholars . The views of participants and counterviews from scholars are presented here .
 The article will conclude with a review of three recent works on the crisis . The article concludes with an analysis of the crisis crisis in Syria .
 The United States wanted the United Nations to endorse its response to missiles in Cuba . Article Two of the U.N. Charter ruled out the use of land aggression and surprise atta . The U.S. did not want to respond in a way th violated the UN Charter .
 Participants view positively t results which followed in the aftermath of the crisis . Participants view positive t results following the crisis which followed . The participants view positively .
 Scholar writing on this subject tend to take a contrary perspective, a . perspective that represents a revision of traditional views held by the participants . However, scholar writing on such a subject tends to take the contrary perspective .
 The Soviet objective was to force a settlement of the Cuban issue within the context of the Cold War . According to an early revisionist account by Leslie Dewart, the Soviet objective is to force an agreement .
 The Soviet Union sought to det an attack on Cuba while simultaneously compelling the U.S. to negotiate a settlement of the Berlin problem in favor of the communists . That is, the Soviet Union wanted to attack Cuba while negotiating a deal with the United States .
 Ronald Steel claims that the President's concern about the Berlin issue led him to misread the Soviet motives . Yet Ronald Steel says that he misread Soviet motives in Berlin .
 President Kennedy personalized issues and converted them into tests of will . According to Thomas Paterson, President Kennedy personally converted issues into tests . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He left little room for bargaining but instead issued a public ultimatum . He seemed willing to destroy millions in the process .
 Participants view the successful resolution of the crisis and its subsequent consequences as very positive . Many scholars take exception to this perspective . Many view the ultimate results of the AmericanSoviet confrontation as negative in both the short and long term .
 While the crisis initiated d6tente between America and Russia, it served as an impetus for a new nuclear arms race, a new stage in the competition for massive nuclear weapons .28 Thus, the world became a much more difficult place to disarm .
 As a result of the crisis America gained a renewed confidence in its military power and in its politics of escalation which soon turned to arrogance . This arrogance in turn led the U.S. to escalate its action in Vietnam .
 The essential revisionist perspective was formed within a decade and a half following the 1962 crisis . The key to revisionism was formed in the 1960s and '60s .
 The composite perspective of the revisionists is one of a president rejecting diplomacy via private negotiations for a policy of public confrontation . The revisionists are one of President Obama's policies, they say .
 Critics claim Kennedy rejected a political solution to a political problem and instead instituted a military response . Kennedy's critics say he rejected the political solution, instead of a political response .
 The aftermath of the crisis brought not victory, but arrogance; it brought forth a new nuclear arms race . It brought forth an arms race, the author says . The crisis brought victory, not victory but arrogance .
 The twenty-fifth anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis has sparked renewed interest in this crucial episode of the Cold War . The crisis was the height of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons program .
 A number of scholarly books and articles have been published in recent years on this topic . The topic of this topic has been debated for years .
 The conclusion of the missile crisis led the Soviet Union to increase immediately its military power . There was no ""crash"" program to accelerate military power. They were were not there to d conclusion of missile crisis .
 The Soviet Union did later develop rough parity with the U.S. It was not a direct result of the missile crisis, it was .
 Garthoff maintains that the short term consequences were positive in that the crisis did lead to d6tente and to arms control . He says it ended any new flare up about Berlin; and it ended the threat of an American invasion of Cuba . Garthoffs maintains that short term
 The missile crisis initiated a belief in Washington that the U.S. had to accept the fact that Castro and communism would remain in Cuba . While American foreign policy remained hostile to Cuba, the missile crisis led to a belief .
 Garthoff concludes his reflections with an analysis of what he believes is the long-term legacy for the Soviets . He concludes his analysis of the Soviets' success in Russia .
 Crisis avoidance is better than crisis management; political accommodation is possible and preferable to crisis management . Crisis avoidance and political accommodation are possible, but crisis management is not always good .
 No crisis of the magnitude of October 1962 has occurred between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Garthoff concludes that both sides had learned this lesson . Since no crisis of this magnitude has occurred, no crisis has occurred .
 McGeorge Bundy analyzes the Cuban missile crisis within the context of the first fifty years of the nuclear bomb . Bundy is the former Special Assistant to President Kennedy for National Security Affairs . Bundy: The Cuban crisis was the result of a nuclear missile crisis .
 Danger and Survival traces the history of the bomb from the discovery of fission in 1938 to the American-Soviet summit meeting of 1988 . The book is based on the book "Danger and Survival"
 Bundy concludes that this fifty year tradition of ""no use"" provides the basis for reducing the nuclear danger . Bundy writes that this tradition of 'no use' is the basis of reducing nuclear danger. Bundy concludes .
 Bundy claims President Kennedy had no other option than to act forcibly in the Cuban missile crisis . Bundy claims that President Kennedy was forced to act in response to missile threat . Bundy says President Kennedy acted forcibly in response . Bundy: President Kennedy's actions were justified by the threat of Cuban missiles .
 Given the attitudes of the American people, the Congress, and the administration in 1962, thermonuclear missiles in Cuba were unacceptable . The U.S. should not have tested nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Kennedy promised effective action and therefore could not accept ineffective diplomacy . Kennedy said he would not tolerate ineffective diplomacy, and would not accept effective diplomacy .
 Bundy takes exception to Ted Sorensen's 1987 statement at a conference at Hawk's Cay that President Kennedy in his 1962 September statements drew the line precisely where he thought the Soviets were not and would not be . Bundy says Kennedy's 1962 statements drew a line where he believed the Soviets
 Bundy, however, would not have permitted such a choice, Bundy says . Bundy's death would have been a tragedy for Bundy, Bundy's widow says. Bundy, she says, "wouldn't have permitted that choice. Bundy's life is over."
 Khrushchev was induced missiles in Cuba so as to protect Cuba and to change the highly un able strategic nuclear balance of power . The national conviction was that missiles in . Cuba were totally unaccececep .
 Bundy states that the decisive military element successfully resolving the missile crisis was American superiority conventional weapons in this hemisphere . Bundy: American superiority in conventional weapons was the decisive factor in resolving the crisis . Bundy says the U.S. was successful in resolving missile crisis with conventional weapons .
 Bundy contend that the result of the confrontation would have been the same even if the U.S. and the Soviet Union had strategic parity . Bundy: The result would be the same if the United States and the . Soviet Union did not have strategic parity, Bundy says .
 Bundy alleges that the nine to one U.S. nuclear superiority was inconsequential in effecting a resolution of the crisis . Bundy alleges the nine-to-one American superiority was ineffectual in effect of a resolution . Bundy: "In effect, American nuclear superiority is inc
 On the Brink by James Blight and David Welch is a critical oral history of the Cuban missile crisis . On The Brink is an oral history that chronicles the Cuban crisis .
 The book contains an edited version of the Hawk's Cay Conference held in Florida on March 5-7, 1987 . Several members of Kennedy's Executive Committee met with scholars to review and discuss the crisis .
 The letter refers to the removal of American Jupiter missiles emplaced in Turkey . The letter was sent to the U.S. ambassador to Turkey .
 Barton Bernstein and others have questioned whether President Kennedy was sufficiently brave to accept the political consequences of a public pledge to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in order to get the Russian missiles out of Cuba .
 According to the Rusk letter, Kennedy was prepared to use the necessary diplomatic machinery for a public trade . Kennedy was willing to use diplomatic machinery to make public trade, the letter says .
 Rusk's statement in crisis indeed was pr a trade of the Jupit crisis . Mr Thant only after furt statement I furnished as I know, President K knew of this particula Rusk .
 The Cuban m of the post World event have been fo Cambridge Conferen ing as participants Fy and Political Adviso Mikoyan, son of a f Georgi Shaknazarov bachev . While the Cuban m. of the event has been hosted by Cambridge University, the event
 The Soviets truly believed that the U.S. would repeat the attack on Cuba after the Bay of Pigs . The Soviets believed the United States would attack Cuba .
 The missiles were emplaced in Cuba for defense of the Castro regime but also as a first step toward strategic parity . They were placed there for defense, but also for strategic purposes .
 Khrushchev first raised the question of deploying missiles in Cuba six months before the crisis with a small group of six Soviets . The crisis began in the summer of 1962 .
 The missile crisis was the result of adventurism on the part of the Soviets, especially Nikita Khrushchev . Nikita was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States in 1962, was not informed of the decision to deploy missiles to Cuba .
 Mikoyan claimed there were 42,000 troops in Cuba to defend it against an American invasion . U.S. intelligence estimates that there may have been as many as 22,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba .
 The decision to shoot down Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 spy plane over Cuba was made by a Soviet one star general the scene . Igor Statsenko, then a senior Soviet officer in Cuba, was behind the decision .
 Now is the time to develop an internatio perspective relative to this crucial episode in the nuclear age, says CNN.com.com .
 Sorensen, ibid., 833; Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 530; Hilsman, 581. Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy's assassination was the first to be carried out in Washington .
 There are a number of interesting studies on Soviet decision-making and on Soviet motives . There are also studies on the Soviet motives of Soviet leaders .
 Early right-wing critics were equally critical of Kennedy for underreacting, that is, for being soft on the communism . Kennedy's critics also criticized his handling of the Soviet Union .
 A Critical Look at JFK's Foreign Policy,"" The Virginia Quarterly Review 54 : 204 . A Critical look at JFK . JFK's foreign policy . The Virginia . Quarterly Review .
 Written in a journalistic style by a former NBC news correspondent, this book follows the hour by hour, day by day development of the crisis from October 14, through October 28 . Written in journalistic style, the book is written in the journalistic style .
 Litt Professor Allison of scholarly text for un Administration during frames of reference fo classical model, 2) the politics different explanations of quite different explanations . Different explanations of decisi political theory to the Brune, Brune, Lester H Th and References .
 The book is the prod management; this par liberated Soviet membe and revealing insights for Khrushchev . Mikoya and Shaknazarow curr Dinerstein's text is one explore the assumption the crisis erupted politics .
 Divine's opening chapter is a well written 50-page description of the crisis . Divine's first chapter is an opening chapter of the book .
 The text is particularly adaptable to college courses on the Cuban missile crisis . It is available to students at universities around the world .
 The President's brother provides an insider's perspective of the behind-the-scenes maneuvering during those tension-filled days .
 Despite the fact that RFK initially sought a military response, one senses that the author had an anti-military bias . Perhaps he alone influenced the President to respond with restraint in the crisis .
 The text is supplemented by a documentary appendix that contains letters, proclamations, and statements from the crisis . The documentary appendix contains letters and proclams from the Crisis .
 The combination of short text, documents, and photographs makes this book an ideal selection for use as supplementary reading in American history survey courses .
 This is a study of selected historiographical perspectives on the missile crisis incorporating primary sources . It is based on historical perspectives on missile crisis .
 The initial two chapters describe the national clandestine and the international confrontation phases of the crisis . The first two chapters are described by the author of the book .
 Each chapter contains a summary composite of the various interpretations analyzed in that chapter . This article includes a summary of each of the interpretations analyzed .
 This is an excellent source of historiographical information for those who do not have the time to read the original interpretive books and articles on the crisis . This is a great source of historical information .
 This is one of the first articles to present a traditional interpretation of the Cuban missile crisis . This article is an excerpt from an article written by John Sutter .
 It is the first to praise Robert Kennedy for his advocacy of the quarantine and for his suggestion to use the ""Trollop Ploy" in responding to the two contradictory letters of Nikita Khrushchev . It also praises Robert Kennedy's advocacy of quarantine .
 Hagan initiated the first significant pacifist interpretation of the U.S. nuclear showdown of 1962 with this scholarly critique . Hagan was a pacifist .
 Lowenthal, a political scientist now at Boston College, initiated the conservative interpretation of the crisis with this essay . Lowenthal is now a prominent political scientist .
 The author chastises the president for his inadequate and soft response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The author also chastises President George W. Bush for his weak response to Soviet missiles .
 The president missed the opportunity to eliminate communism in Cuba . By his non-invasion pledge, the president guaranteed the presence of communism in the Western Hemisphere .
 Paterson claims Kennedy rejected diplomacy for a policy of confrontation to demonstrate his toughness and manliness . Paterson says JFK rejected diplomacy to show he could demonstrate toughness and toughness .
 Paterson concludes his assessment with an analysis of what he perceives to be the negative repercussions of the missile crisis . He concludes his analysis of the impact of the crisis in North Korea .
 This article represents the most thorough analysis to date on the issues of the of party politics in the deliberations of the Kennedy Administration during the c and the role of the crisis in the 1962 elections .
 Kennedy's selection of a quarantine was not dictated by politics . The effects of the crisis on the congressional elections were indiscriminate .
 According to the author, one cannot find a single congressional election decided by voter reaction to missile crisis . The author says there are no congressional elections decided by voters' reaction to crisis .
 The tense confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev is explored via television tapes from the period . The confrontation between the two leaders is explored by television tapes .
 Interviews with both Russian and American participants in the crisis provide the documentary with an exceptionally balanced perspective from the hindsight of more than a quarter century . The documentary is based on interviews with both Russia and the U.S.
 The American panelists include McGeorge Bundy, Barton Bernstein, Abram Chayes, Ray Cline, Peter Winn, and Adam Yarmolinsky . The Soviet panelists are Fyodar Burlatsky, Igor Malashenko, Viktor Kremenyuk, Igor
 This made-for-television film recreates the events of October 1962 when the U.S. stood on the brink of a nuclear war over Russian missile bases in Cuba .
 The film is both informative and gripping; it is well scripted and intellectually stimulating . The film has been well scripted, intellectually stimulating and informative . It is both a gripping and informative film .
 William Devane is excellent as President Kennedy and Howard DeSilva is memorable as Chairman Khrushchev . Howard is best known for his role as Chairman of the Soviet Union .