 Cuba became a hot spot for the Kennedy administration for two reasons during the early 1960s . Cuba was a key part of the Cuban government during the Cuban Revolution .
 The failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 was an attempt to incite a popular uprising against Fidel Castro . The failed invasion was a failed attempt to overthrow Castro .
 President Kennedy faced a confident Soviet Union and a sleeping giant in the People's Republic of China . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Fears of communist expansion plagued American foreign policy in places as distant as Vietnam and as close as Cuba . The U.S. worried about communist expansion in Vietnam and Cuba .
 Kennedy made containment his chief foreign policy goal . Like his predecessors, Kennedy sought containment of the Korean peninsula .
 Kennedy expanded defense spending in response to Eisenhower's heavy reliance on nuclear deterrence . Kennedy expanded the nation's defense budget in the wake of the Cold War .
 Kennedy: "There are a variety of military options depending upon the specific conditions" Kennedy says he has a wide range of options depending on the conditions .
 Included in this program was the establishment of special forces units similar to the Green Berets . Special forces units were established in the 1950s .
 Kennedy believed communism was a menace that required maximal preparation . Despite the expense, Kennedy believed it was necessary to prepare against communism .
 Kennedy's Peace Corps was one of his most popular foreign policy initiatives . The Peace Corps is now one of the world's most successful foreign policy programs .
 Americans volunteer two years of service to a developing nation . Led by Sargent Shriver, this program allowed Americans to volunteer in developing nations . The program was led by Shriver .
 English teachers would be placed where the learning of the language was needed . The move would be part of a bid to boost the language's popularity in the UK .
 Countries that received Peace Corps volunteers might be less likely to submit to a communist revolution . The Peace Corps is a volunteer program to help people in the Peace Corps volunteer experience .
 Participants obtained experiences that shaped well-rounded, worldly citizens . American participants obtained experiences shaped well into well-balanced citizens .
 John F Kennedy's stirring address to the people of West Berlin in 1963 illustrated that the U.S. was committed to working for freedom throughout the region and the world .
 Relations with Latin America had gone sour since Franklin Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy . Franklin Roosevelt had a "Good Neighbor Policy" on Latin American relations .
 Latin American nations have complained bitterly about U.S. support of dictatorial military regimes . Latin America has long complained of support for dictatorships .
 They pointed out that no large Marshall Plan was designed for Latin America . The plan was designed to help Latin America, the authors said .
 Development funds were granted to nations of the Western Hemisphere who were dedicated to fighting communism . Funds were given to nations dedicated to the fight against communism .
 After Kennedy's death, funds for the Alliance for Progress were largely diverted to Vietnam, however .
 In 1961, the citizens of West Berlin felt completely isolated when the Soviet Union built the Berlin Wall around the city . West Berlin was completely isolated from the rest of the world .
 Kennedy visited West Berlin in the summer of 1963 to allay their fears . Kennedy's visit to West Berlin helped ease fears of West Berlin .
 The visit and the speech endeared him to the people of West Berlin and all of Western Europe . It was the first visit and speech he made to West Berlin .
 Kennedy's greatest foreign policy failure and greatest success both involved one nation — Cuba . Kennedy's failure and success in Cuba were the result of his Cuba policy . Kennedy was president of the Cuban government in 1961 .
 CIA-trained Cuban exiles landed in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . They were hoping to ignite a popular uprising that would oust Fidel Castro from power .
 The exiles believed air support would come from the United States, but Kennedy refused . Kennedy refused to accept air support from the U.S.
 The incident was an embarrassment to the U.S. and a great victory for Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro's government was humiliated by the United States in Cuba . The Castro government was embarrassed by the incident .
 Khrushchev acceded to Kennedy's demands, and the world remained safe from global confrontation . The world was safe from a nuclear war .
 Visit the ""Introduction"" to learn how declassified information changed the understanding of the crisis . Learn the frightening reasons why we were on the brink of nuclear war .
 The ""Chronology"" is replete with links and provides comprehensive context to the crisis . It is a chronology of events leading up to today's crisis .
 Don't miss the ""Photographs" that show aerial photos of Soviet missile bases in Cuba, and images of key people and events . See the "Photographs"" that show the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The U.S. worried that other Latin American countries would follow suit after Cuba's socialist revolution in 1959 . Report broken link link Alliance For Progress .
 President Kennedy's 'Alliance for Progress' address of 1961 . U.S. offered aid to enhance quality of life and security in Latin America, in exchange for social and political reforms .
 Kennedy: "It's another great speech by Kennedy, but the implementation of the policy is another story. It's a great speech, but implementation of it is another issue."
 Texas A&M provides the text of President Kennedy's address concerning the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 . Report broken link links President Kennedy to the nuclear test ban Treaty .
 This first international nuclear treaty was enabled by improved verification abilities . It banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, space, and under water . It also banned testing in space, under water and in space .