 The nine hours of tapes were taken from conversations in the Oval Office . The tapes are the latest in a series released periodically by the John F Kennedy Library and Museum .
 The conversations took place between Nov. and Nov., 1962, after the Soviet Union publicly agreed to remove missiles from Cuba . The conversations were made public in November 1962, when Soviet Union agreed to pull missiles from the country .
 The tapes shed light on how the crisis wound down, a former library historian says . Sheldon Stern reviewed portions of the tapes, including the excerpts released to the media . Stern: The tapes, while not as dramatic as tapes made when the crisis was at its grim height .
 "It's perfectly clear from these tapes, all the others that these decisions were made by the president,"" he said . "It is perfectly clear," he said. "These decisions are made by President Obama"
 In a 20-minute segment of tape on the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy and his advisers discuss whether the prospect of an American pledge not to invade Cuba would encourage the Soviet Union to pull out its bombers .
 Kennedy: "We're ready to give that in a more formal way when they meet their commitments" Kennedy said. "But we're ready for that more formally way when ... they meet commitments"
 The Soviets agreed to pull out bombers and to pull back tarpaulins when missiles were loaded onto ships so they could be counted from the air .
 Ninety tapes made in 1962 and 1963 have been opened to the public or partially opened . 34 tapes still need to be reviewed to see if they contain classified material .
 The Kennedy letters might contain some clarifications of the agreements that Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962, when the crisis was resolved . The official says the Kennedy letters may contain some clarification of the agreement .
 No other conflict during the post-World War II era brought the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than did the Cuban crisis . The crisis grew out of the Soviet decision to deploy offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle Soviet missiles in Cuba in return for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . A week of unprecedented international tension ended in a week of unparalleled international tension in Cuba .
 Kennedy also agreed to call off a United States blockade of the island . Kennedy agreed to end the U.S. blockade .
 Some letters have remained classified because they contain references to Berlin, a major point of U.S.-Soviet contention during that period . One official said that some of the letters remained classified .
 Officials said the government's decision to release the letters was linked to a long-planned conference on missile crisis . Cuba is holding a conference on the missile crisis in Havana starting next Thursday .
 American, Soviet and Cuban officials who participated in the crisis are scheduled to attend . American, Cuban and Soviet officials will attend the memorial service .
 Fidel Castro was outraged by Khrushchev's decision to withdraw missiles without consulting him first . Fidel Castro is expected to take part in the debate .
 He was one of the numerous editors and reporters for that newspaper who reported on the conflict on the Communist island of Cuba in October 1962 .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy wanted to avoid nuclear war at all costs but were almost driven to it by political and military hacks, Frankel says . Frankel's conclusion about the crisis is that both men were blinded by personal and domestic viewpoints, he says .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro comes off as a bit of a spoiled son of Papa Nikita . Fidel Castro almost brought about nuclear war because of a slip-up .
 Anderson's mission was to take clearer, more detailed photographs of the missile sites in Cuba . Anderson was on a mission to find out more about Cuba's missile sites . Anderson: "It's a mission for the U.S.
 This goes against the notion Khrushchev ordered Russian forces on Cuba to shoot down Anderson's airplane with a Soviet SA-2 missile . Anderson's plane was shot down by a Soviet missile in Cuba in the early 1950s .
 If Frankel's claim is true, Castro's order for his military personnel to fire on any American military aircraft flying over Cuba was in direct contradiction to Khrushchev's wishes . However, the claim is not true .
 The Cuban president was kept in the dark by Khrushchev for most of the conflict . In fairness to the Cuban president, he was pretty much kept out of the eye .
 Castro's order to shoot may have been influenced by the Soviet leader's manhandling of him . Castro may have ordered him to shoot after being manhandled by Soviet leader .
 Kennedy had his own hawk (the terms ""dove"" and ""hawk"" came into the popular lexicon due to this Cold War event) to deal with U.S. Air Force Gen. Gen. John Kennedy .
 Kennedy listened to LeMay's opinions with interest . LeMay was a well-respected and decorated veteran of World War II and a hero of the Berlin Airlift .
 In the opening hours of the crisis, the U.S. president favored some sort of military retaliation against the Russians, Frankel says . It is often forgotten that in the early hours of this crisis the president favored military retaliation .
 When the Soviets began moving atomic missiles and weapons to Cuba, they were doing nothing illegal under international law . The Soviets were not breaking the law by sending atomic missiles to Cuba .
 Kennedy saw this maneuver as a sort of threat to his manhood and persona . Kennedy saw it as an attempt to undermine his masculinity . Kennedy: "It's not a threat to my manhood, it's a challenge to my masculinity"
 War almost immediately happened because of a rush of adrenalin and testosterone in the body of John F Kennedy . War was almost immediately because of the rush of adrenaline and testosterone . High Noon in the Cold War is a bit alarming to learn from High Noon .
 Obama used common sense and intelligence to think his way out of this Cold War political Pandora's Box . Fortunately for the world, he cooled down quickly and used his common sense to think .
 Max Frankel will be among the featured speakers at the Times Festival of Reading, Nov. and 7 on the campus of Eckerd College in St. Louis . Frankel is a Pulitzer Prize winner .
 At the White House, Bobby and John Kennedy brooded about what was to come . John Kennedy and Bobby Kennedy were in mourning for the Kennedy family .
 The brothers agreed that John Kennedy probably would have been impeached if he hadn't acted . The brothers said he probably would be impeached for his actions .
 At 10m., the brothers joined the convening of the toplevel ExComm group to await developments . At 10:30pm, the brothers were joined by a group of ExComm members to watch developments .
 If the ship still didn't stop, a shot was to be fired into the rudder to cripple the vessel . A shot was then fired at the ship's rudder if the ship did not stop .
 United States spotter planes found two Soviet ships, the Gagarin and Komiles, steaming toward the quarantine line, only a few miles away . U.S. spotters planes spotted the ships, which were heading toward quarantine line .
 It is possible, within the next few minutes, that there would be an armed confrontation at sea that would lead to nuclear war . It was possible that within a few minutes of the moment, the conflict could lead to war .
 Sixteen Soviet ships, including several with large hatches, had turned around and seemed to be returning to the Soviet Union . Several of the ships were equipped with missiles and warheads .
 Captains of Soviet ships, he announced, had been instructed ""not to retreat one step"" in international waters . Captains had been told not to retreat "one step"
 Later in the day, the Soviet leader held an odd three-hour meeting with William Knox, an American executive with Westinghouse International who happened to be in Moscow . The Soviet leader also met with Knox, who was visiting Moscow .
 Khrushchev warned that he might eventually have to order a U.S. blockade ship sunk . The incident occurred during a rambling conversation with the Soviet leader .
 Construction at missile sites was going on at even a faster pace than before . Construction at the missile sites is going on even faster than before, officials say .
 No Need to Fret, Florida Assured, announced a frontpage headline in The Miami Herald . The headline was the headline of the Miami Herald's front page .
 Anti-aircraft missile batteries are being installed in Key Largo and at a North Dade dump . Anti-missile missile batteries were being installed at a dump .
 Hundreds of tanks of napalm arrived -fire bombs to be used if Cuba was invaded . Fire bombs were used in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Some units of the division were then sent southward, ending up at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale, Florida . Motor pools in the parking lots and cots under the grandstands were set up in Gulfstream .
 Along the city's shoreline, Cubans were boarding up the plateglass windows of stores . Cubans boarded up the windows of shops .
 The seawall in front of the Hotel Riviera was sand-bagged, and anti-aircraft artillery was placed along the broad Malecon boulevard, facing the sea .
 Soviet tanker Bucharest kept steaming directly for the blockade line . Meanwhile, the Soviet ship Bucharest was steaming straight for the line .
 A look at Operation Mongoose and an examination of how the crisis affected the outlook of an entire generation of children . Plus a look at the impact of the crisis on the world's children's lives .
 It was the first time these remarks, originally made during a closed-door academic conference on the Cuban missile crisis held in Havana in January, were broadcast in public .
 The 65-year-old Cuban leader indicated he has no intention of resigning at the moment . Cuba's main ally and economic supplier for three decades was the Soviet Union . Cuba has been hit by a rash of problems resulting from the disappearance of the USSR .
 Castro revealed new details of Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union . Castro said the Cuban government suffered contradictions and criticisms from Moscow for its actions .
 He rejected views widely held by many Western analysts that Cuba followed directions from the Soviet Union in supporting revolutionary movements and left-wing governments .
 The Soviet Union also had misgivings about Cuba sending troops to support the left-wing government in Angola .
 Castro appeared to rule out any future Cuban large-scale military interventions abroad . Castro also ruled out a similar military intervention in Angola and Ethiopia . Castro: "I don't think it's possible"
 Fernandez: Most studies of that period concentrated on the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union . Fernandez: Cuba's role lesser known, with its role less known . Fernandez says most studies of the period focused on the U.S. and Soviet Union.
 Conference participants on Sunday will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in Pinar del Rio . Conference participants will also travel to the sites of the crisis . The conference will focus on the crisis in the region .
 The 11 classified letters exchanged in 1962 following the Cuban confrontation remain "extremely sensitive ... from the national security point of view,"" said Pratt Byrd of the department's freedom of information office .
 Scholars had hoped for the release of the letters in time for a conference in Moscow next weekend . The conference will feature the last missile crisis participants from the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union . Scholars hoped the letters would be released in time to a conference next week .
 The missile crisis flared in October 1962 when an American U-2 spy plane spotted construction of Soviet missile sites in Cuba . The U.S. government says the missile crisis began in Cuba in 1962 .
 Many believe the confrontation brought the superpowers to the brink of war . Many believe it brought the conflict to the verge of war.
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for U.S. guarantees that Cuba would not be invaded . The missile exchange ended in a deal with the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Soviet leaders were enthusiastic about the idea of releasing the letters, says Blight . Blight, who recently published a book on the missile crisis, helped set up the Moscow conference .
 In October 1962, Stevenson displayed 26 photos taken from U2 spy planes to prove that the Soviets were installing missiles . Stevenson was the United Nations ambassador at the time .
 History will decide whether Powell's presentation will have the same effect as Stevenson's did . History will determine whether Powell will succeed Stevenson .
 Experts said the presentation did not have the same irrefutable visual evidence that Stevenson's had .
 The evidence may have been enough to sway some people who were on the fence about supporting the U.S. position . It may be enough to build a clear case showing Iraq's attempts to fool U.N. inspectors .
 Stevenson: "I am also prepared to present the evidence in this room,"" Stevenson told him . Stevenson said he was prepared to give evidence .
 If it condenses and/or fabricates events, turning Kennedy into an unadulterated hero, it captures the slightly sour flavor of an era when the atomic bomb hung over the globe like the sword of Damocles . If Kennedy condenses, it turns Kennedy into a
 Jack and brother Bobby consult him on every decision but one, and that one turns out to be their lone mistake in this war of nerves with the Kremlin . Jack and Bobby consult each other on all decisions but one decision .
 There really was an O'Donnell, though I can't believe the siblings treated him like a third Kennedy . The siblings' brother was a good guy, but he was not a Kennedy .
 Costner's too old and famous to play Jack or Bobby, and he wanted to be at the center of the film . Costner wanted to play the role of Bobby and Jack in the new film .
 His performance, more intense than usual, holds up well, despite a New England accent wobblier than a dayold calf .
 "Dr. Strangelove"" ends with shots of rockets glaring redly and mushroom clouds abloom .
 The events of October 1962 took place in the omnipresent shadow of nuclear war . The Soviet Union set up a mini-base of missiles close enough to wipe out any city in a 1,000-mile radius .
 The United States had been humiliated the year before in the Bay of Pigs incident . The incident was an abortive attempt to unseat Fidel Castro . The U.S. had humiliated the United States .
 The failure left Castro and his U.S. backers convinced that the United States was too weak to object to a Communist nuclear presence near our shores or maybe too incompetent to find out about one .
 American planes did locate the missiles, leaving Kennedy with three options . Kennedy had three options, including locating missiles .
 He could blockade Cuba, turn aside Soviet ships carrying war materials and subduing them with force if they resisted . He could launch a full-scale invasion, knowing the U.S. would consider that an intolerable act of aggression . The Cuban president could launch an invasion, risking casualties and
 All routes might lead to war, but one had to be chosen before Soviets in Cuba could get ready to launch . "One had to choose before Soviets could get their missiles ready to . launch"
 David Self's script, directed by Roger Donaldson with somewhat more testosterone than necessary, makes all these options and their political ramifications clear .
 John Kennedy wants peace at almost any cost, though not through feeble appeasement . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 at age of 60 .
 Bobby worries that United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson can't stand up to the U.S.R. before the court of world appeal . Bobby worries about U.N. Ambassador Stevenson's ability to stand up against U.K. before court of appeal .
 O'Donnell bounces between the Oval Office and his family, giving the president sound advice and reassurances that he doesn't believe . His wife reassures him that the president is right and he's not .
 Dylan Baker and Kevin Conway aren't dead ringers for Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara or General Curtis LeMay . They're the right types .
 The commendable cast includes JFK's real nephew Christopher Lawford as a pilot under pressure . Charlotte's own Madison Mason plays admiral who squares off with McNamara .
 Greenwood, whose range has carried him from the lonely widower of ""The Sweet Hereafter"" to the creepy husband of ""Double Jeopardy,"" gives a star-making performance . Greenwood is known for his performances in the series .
 He's so appealing we could elect him president right now if he weren't Canadian, he says . "He was so appealing that he could easily be elected president if he wasn't Canadian," he adds .