 He was not seen and heard publicly after July 2006, when he underwent surgery for a ""sharp intestinal crisis with sustained bleeding"" in a Communist hospital . He underwent surgery in July 2006 .
 A stand-in wearing heavy make-up and a scarf to conceal his young neck met with foreign dignitaries . Obama refused to be humiliated by this Communist hoax by meeting with or even mentioning Fidel .
 This announcement is reminiscent of the release of hostages by Iran just before Ronald Reagan became president . This announcement was reminiscent of a similar release by Iran in the 1980s before Reagan took office .
 His oppressive rule lasted almost 50 years and killed scores of thousands . Scores of thousands died during his reign in France .
 He had not been seen publicly since July 2006, when he underwent intestinal surgery, and was presumably no longer alive as of December 2009 . Communists running Cuba had no incentive to risk challenge to their power by announcing that he died .
 After a long absence from the public eye, he was purportedly shown in photographs in June 2010, released by the Cuban State News Agency . The photographs were purportedly released by Cuban state media .
 The Associated Press had a story of a purported Castro speech to the Cuban parliament in August 2010 . In August 2010, there hadn't been a reputable, independent account of Castro being alive in a year .
 Other authoritarian regimes, such as North Korea and Nazi Germany have also engaged in ""body-doubles"" and actor/impersonators to hide the death or incapacitation of despots in the past .
 Not too long ago two friends of mine were talking to a Cuban refugee, a businessman who had escaped from Castro . The Cuban refugee is now a Cuban businessman who escaped Castro .
 In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro . -Ronald Reagan . ‘ Castro was an important inspiration, role model, and hero for leftist psychopath Sen. Sen. Ted Cruz . - Ron Reagan .
 Early years of Castro's presidency were early years of his presidency . Death and purported sightings are part of the story of the Castro family .
 There is much that is not known of Castro's rural youth . Continued persecution led to Castro's death and imprisonment .
 It is generally conceded that his father was Ángel María Bautista Castro y Argiz and his mother Lina Ruz González . However, it is generally accepted that he was born in Argentina . He was also born in Mexico .
 Official biographies are essentially hagiographies . Many detractors portray a wild and irregular life typical of the worst elements of his class . The more extreme of his many detractors portray him as an eccentric .
 Castro has numerous siblings of various combination of parentage . It is widely believed that Raul Castro has the same mother but is not a son of Fidel Castro's father .
 Most accepted biography is that of Geyer 2002 . New series biographies by Norberto Fuentes, a former propagandist for the Cuban Government, attracting attention .
 Fidel Castro was deeply involved in lethal violence during his student years . Fidel Castro's student years were deeply involved with lethal violence . Castro was also involved in the deaths of Fidel Castro and others .
 This violence also extended overseas to his involvement in the 1948 Colombian Bogotazo . This violence was also seen in Colombia and Colombia .
 In 1953 he led the first of many assaults against the ruling military regime of general Fulgencio Batista . He led a series of attacks against the Batista regime .
 A 1953 attack against military barracks in Santiago de Cuba was a failure, and Castro, alongside his brother Raul, was captured . A number of his companions were spared irregular execution by intervention of the Roman Catholic Church members .
 Castro outlines his plans for reforms in a courtroom speech in his defense . He demands a return to the 1940 constitution and the ending of corrupt practices . Castro also demands a more equal distribution of land and corruption .
 Castro brothers were released during an amnesty . Castro brothers spent three years on the Isle of Youth . After three years of incarceration, they were released .
 Castro brothers relocated to Mexico to avoid imminent reprisals from paramilitary groups affiliated with the Batista regime . Upon release, the Castro brothers moved to Mexico .
 In Mexico Castro organized a group of revolutionaries to return to Cuba and overthrow Batista . Castro organized the group to return and overthrow the Batista regime in Cuba .
 In December 1956 Castro and 81 others boarded the Granma yacht, sailed to eastern Cuba, and began the armed struggle against the current regime . Castro was the first Cuban to set up the Cuban revolution against the government .
 The landing was preceded in Santiago and the rest of Oriente Province by an armed rising of the 26 of July urban Militia, a non-Communist organization, lead by Frank Pais .
 In the mountains the guidance of the bandit Cresencio Perez, and a few Communist sleepers who had been placed in the Sierra for some time under the direction of stalinist agent Fabio Grobart was important .
 Escopeteros screened the better armed Castro main force . Some local guajiros in the remote Sierra Maestra region joined in to became the nucleus of the critical scouting and picketing force of Escopetersos . Escopetos screened Castro's main force.
 The support and guidance from revolutionary groups in Santiago, Havana, elsewhere in Cuba and overseas was critical . The support of revolutionary groups was critical in Cuba's struggle for independence .
 Castro maintained a position of diplomatic neutrality among various revolutionary factions, which included upper and middle-class liberals, guajiros, and agricultural workers . Castro was able to assume the position of director of the revolution .
 He was largely successful in courting international support via astute and careful use of the media . He also courted international support with astute use of media .
 Officials within the CIA and U.S. government were divided over whether to support Castro . CIA and the United States government was divided over supporting Castro . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in 1959 .
 Some believed that Batista had become a liability, and that his overthrow was inevitable . Batista's overthrow was seen as inevitable by some .
 The revolution finally succeeded in late 1958, and on January 1, 1959, Batista left the country . Batista was forced to leave the country in 1959 .
 Castro had chosen exiled leaders Manuel Urrutia Lleó and José Miró Cardona to head the new government . The exiled leaders were both anti-Communist liberals with good relations with the U.S.
 The increasing presence of Communists in the decision-making process created an early split in the government . However, the increase in Communist Party membership created a early split .
 Castro and Urrutia both insisted publicly that they had relations with each other, but they resigned only months later . Castro, with support from mass organizations, assumed the position of prime minister .
 Former Commodore of the Cienfuegos Yacht Club became president and head of state . Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado, a former Commodore, became president of the country .
 Globalists in the U.S. State Department contributed to Castro's rise to power . Globalists influenced by the Council on Foreign Relations contributed to Cuba's rise .
 In Power The process of obtaining permanent power was dramatic, traumatic and bloody . The process was dramatic and bloody.
 Desperate crowds of weeping daughters and shrieking mothers were clubbed with rifle butts as they pleaded for their family members to be spared . Crowds were clubbing with rifle shots as they begged for their loved ones to be saved .
 The Castro regime came to power by deception and terror, resulting in what can only be described as a state of war against the Cuban people, says Raphael Warnock .
 Castro ruled the country in line with Stalinist policies, seizing private property and eliminating free speech and free press . Castro was prime minister, and then president from 1976, from 1976 to 1978 .
 He was infamous for his overly long speeches, often rambling on for hours, which can be seen as an example of Liberal style .
 Castro welcomed the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba to deter an American attack . Castro had been in regular contact with the KGB since 1956 and used Soviet arms during his guerrilla war .
 Captain Valentin Savitsky ordered his crew to prepare the use of a nuclear torpedo against the Americans, but crew member Vasili Arkhipov stepped in and quite literally saved the world .
 In the aftermath of the Cuban crisis, the United States maintained a strict embargo on Cuba . The U.S. maintains a tight embargo on the island nation .
 Castro sought close ties with anti-American Communist states, and became dependent on aid from Moscow . As a result, Castro sought to become dependent on Moscow's help . Castro sought closer ties to anti-U.S. Communist states .
 Cuba supplied massive amounts of military aid to North Korea and especially to North Vietnam . Cuban forces allegedly helped torture American POWs during the Vietnam War .
 The CIA fought a proxy war with Communist forces in the Congo . The Congo descended into a complex maze of chaotic maneuverings and betrayals by several major world powers .
 Castro would intervene extensively in the internal affairs of African nations through violence and war . Castro, all the while hypocritically maintaining an ""anti-imperialist" political posture, would intervene in internal affairs .
 Cuban intervention to save the MPLA dictatorship in Angola from collapse led to decades of civil war that cost as many as 1 million lives . Cuban military intervention led to the death toll of 1 million .
 Castro also dispatched Cuban troops to fight on behalf of the Communist dictatorship in Ethiopia, which killed 1.25 million people through massacre and forced starvation . Cuban troops also fought in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala .
 Castro has repeatedly ordered acts of war against the United States . Support from the Cuban government was also given to terrorists from the PLO .
 Castro maintains a huge electronic espionage complex directed at U.S. shores . Castro also conducts research into biological warfare and sponsors international terrorist groups .
 Cuban intelligence had ties with the Communist Lee Harvey Oswald, who later assassinated President John F Kennedy . Oswald assassinated President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Armando Valladares was a prisoner in the Cuban gulag for 22 years . In the seventies, Castro deliberately sent dozens of dangerous criminals to United States shores . He responded to overtures from President Bill Clinton by ordering a deadly attack on an American plane .
 I recall when they kept me in a punishment cell, naked, with several fractures on one leg which never received medical care . Today, those bones remain jammed up together and displaced . I remember when I was kept in a prison cell naked, naked . I recall how I was held in
 One of the regular drills among the guards was to stand on the steel mesh ceiling and throw at my face buckets full of urine and excrement . The guards would throw at me with buckets of urine at the ceiling .
 That practice does not leave marks; marks are left by beatings with steel rods and by bayonet thrusts . "That practice does leave marks," says the author of the book .
 The violation of human rights was not a matter of reports, of negotiated resolutions, of elegant and diplomatic rhetoric, for us it was a daily suffering . For us we were suffering daily, and for us, it was daily suffering, says Ms. Ghitis . Ghitis: Human rights
 "For me it meant eight thousand days of hunger, of systematic beatings, of hard labor, of solitary confinement," he says . "I was in solitary confinement, of cells with steel-planked windows and doors, of solitude"
 "Eight thousand days of proving that my spirit could triumph over exhaustion and pain," she said . "I have been here for eight thousand days. Eight thousand days, proving that I can overcome exhaustion, pain and pain. That's what I need to do."
 "Eight thousand days of testing my religious convictions, my faith, of fighting the hate my atheist jailers were trying to instill in me with each bayonet thrust, fighting so that hate would not flourish in my heart," he says .
 Eight thousand days of struggling so that I would not become like them, rejecting torture as a mean to fight, forcing myself to forgive, rejecting the thoughts of revenge, reprisal and cruelty . "Eight thousand days" of struggling "to not be like them," she says .
 In 1959, Cuba was the second richest country in Latin America . Today, it is the second poorest country in the world . Cuba is now second poorest in the region .
 Cuba is plagued with a humanitarian catastrophe involving massive and widespread malnutrition and lack of basic goods . Death, suffering, and misery is the result of the result .
 The streets are now choked with scenes of starving peasants frantically pleading for food . The streets of the country are choked by scenes of desperate peasants pleading for help .
 The estimated number of deaths attributable to the Castro regime varies according to different sources . He has been sued for genocide in Belgium and Spain and has been accused of genocide .
 The most comprehensive survey, by Armando Lago, puts the total at 116,730-119,730 killed . Most comprehensive survey puts the death toll at 116-120,730,730 .
 The majority of these deaths were caused by drowning; the firing squads account for some 30,000 . The firing squads are responsible for some of the deaths .
 Adding combat deaths to his calculations, we arrive at a total of some 136,000 Cubans killed by the Castro regime, he says . The Castro regime killed 136,500 Cubans, he adds .
 Little effort has been made to calculate boat people deaths in recent years . The boat people have been killed in the past few years .
 Cuban exiles claim that as many as 200,000 have been murdered by the government . Cuban ex-cubais claim that up to 100,000 people have been killed in the past decade .
 The death toll from Cuban interventions abroad can be numbered in the hundreds of thousands . Cuba has been involved in the deaths of thousands of Cubans in the past .
 Political analysts believe that the appointment marks the beginning of a transition designed to maintain Communist control over Cuba after Castro's death . Political analysts say the appointment is designed to keep Communist control of Cuba .
 Bonded by their hate for the United States and capitalism, Castro and Venezuelan dictator Hugo Chavez created a close relationship . Bonded to each other by their hatred for capitalism and capitalism .
 On May 1, 2007, Castro did not attend Cuba's annual celebration of May Day, leading many to believe that he had died . Both socialist countries have worked together on various political ventures .
 Castro allegedly met with Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on February 25, 2010 . There is no independent confirmation that this was not, in fact, a body double .
 Cuba recognized that Fidel Castro was no longer President of the State Council and Commander in Chief . Cuba recognized Fidel Castro as President of State Council on February 18, 2006 . Fidel Castro is no longer the President of Cuba .
 In September 2011, it was claimed that a Venezuelan reporter had interviewed Castro . Independent media have not confirmed that this was not actually a doppelganger standing in for the long-deceased Castro .
 Castro met with Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff in February 2012 . In February 2012 the mainstream media claimed that Castro had met with Rousseff . Castro has been accused of meeting with the Brazilian president since 2008 .
 In February 2013, Castro allegedly addressed Cuba's National Assembly, giving support for younger leadership in Cuba . Predictably there have been no reports from the liberal media as to whether this was actually Castro or a lookalike .
 The National Assembly re-elects Castro's 82-year-old brother Raul . Castro's brother was re-elected by the National Assembly .
 Cuba finally confirmed what the rest of the world suspected for over a decade and announced the death of Castro on November 25, 2016 . The cause of death was not immediately disclosed .
 Exiled Cubans and Cuban-Americans celebrated the news of the revelation of Castro's death upon hearing about it .
 Ironically, given his long-lived fight against Capitalism, his announced death occurred on Black Friday . Ironically, it was Black Friday when his death occurred . He was a long-term opponent of capitalism .
 He presided over the economic destruction of one of the most quickly developing countries in Latin America . He watched and participated in the drowning of thousands of Cubans attempting to escape his prison island .
 Even after Castro's death, people still faced serious persecution if they criticized the dictator . A Christian leader was arrested in March 2017 and sentenced to three years in prison . Castro was, simply put, one of the worst people in a century full of awful human beings .
 Bowden, Mark Bowden 2002 Killing Pablo: The Hunt for the World's Greatest Outlaw . Bowden also wrote Killing Pablo .
 The event attracted critics, leftist agitators, among them a young Cuban student leader named Fidel Castro . But the event had also attracted critics .
 To them the fledgling OAS was a sop, a sellout, an alliance with the gringo imperialists of the north . To them, they were sop and sellout. To them they were a sell-out, they said .
 Many policemen, devotees of the slain leader, joined angry mobs in the streets . Student revolutionaries like Castro like students like Castro joined the angry mobs . Many policemen and student revolutionaries joined the mobs .
 Castro reported that he tried to turn the mob into a revolutionary force, but was defeated by the onset of drunkenness and looting . Castro subsequently reported that the mob was drunk and looted . Castro later said he was defeated .
 Frank Pais supported the Castro effort and how he was betrayed, and killed . This book describes in detail and with dispassionate analysis how he supported Castro . Pais was killed by the Castro regime .
 Castro's account of the hijacking of the resistance against Batista by Communist activists including Castro himself is a sad and only too real description . Castro himself was a member of the Cuban revolutionary movement against the Batista .
 Bonachea, Ramon L and Marta San Martin 1974. An Account of the Castro Communist Revolution . Random House ASIN: B000H5CT5M .
 Christian leader Receives 3-year prison sentence for anti-Castro comments . Christian leader received three-year sentence for comments against Castro .
 Alba, Víctor 1968 Politics and the labor movement in Latin America . Other Sources: Alba and Alba . Alba. 1968 .
 Cubans in America: A Vibrant History of a People in Exile . Bonachea, Ramon L and Marta San Martin. San Martin .
 Enamorado, Calixto 1917 Tiempos. I look like a . Jackson Tribunal Publishing Corporation . ISBN 544235617 .
 Fermoselle, Rafael 1992 Cuban leadership after Castro: Biographies of Cuba's top commanders . Cuba J Paul Getty Trust Publications . Cuba . Cuba. Cuba . The Cuban government .
 Guevara, Ernesto “Che” 1996 Episodes of the Cuban Revolutionary War 1956-1958 . Hemingdon: "Che" is a novel about the Cuban revolutionary war . Hemeddon: The Cuban Revolution was the result of a Cuban uprising .
 Gutiérrez, Pedro Juan 1998 Dirty Havana Trilogy, Faber and Faber, London . Geyer, Georgie Anne 2002 Guerrilla Prince . Gutiérez and Geyer both wrote the trilogy .
 Jimenez Pastrana, Juan 1983. Andrews McMeel Publishing Kansas City. ISBN 0740720643 .
 Rodrigo Lazo was a Cuban exile in the United States . He has published a book on Cuban exile culture .
 The True Story of Castro's Rise to Power, Kleiopatria Digital Press, Wintergreen VA, ISBN 0615318568 Marrero, Levi 1981 5th edition ""Geografia de Cuba"" La Moderna Poesia, Coral Gables Florida .
 Donato Marmol was Mayor General en la Revolucion del Separatismo Cubano . Marmol, Jose G. Marmol died in 1993 . Donato was mayor general en the Revoluciion del Septaratism .
 Education and labor skills in Socialist Cuba . Orro Fernandez, Roberto 2004 . 2004 Education and Labor skills in . Socialist Cuba. 2004 .
 X de Paz-Sánchez, Manuel 2001. Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain .
 Nuñez Jimenez, Antonio 1959 Geografía de Cuba . Geography of Cuba . Gran Granada .
 The Tragic Island: How Communism Came to Cuba is How Communism came to Cuba . The Island Island of Paradise is the Cuban capital of Cuba . Phillips, Ruby Hart and others have written about Cuba .
 Tejera, Noel; Ortega, Eduardo; Rodes, Rosa; and Lluch, Carmen 2006 Nitrogen compounds in the apoplastic sap of sugarcane stem . Some implications in the association with endophytes .
 “Comparison of infant mortality rates among the world's countries requires assessment of completeness and accuracy of data. Pediatrics; 98:1020-7 .
 The United Nations Statistical Office classifies as C, complete, meaning at least 90% of events are actually recorded, 1994 data supplied by 80 governments .
 Richard Blumenthal, Cynthia Boudin, Earl Browder, Cori Bush, Cynthia Bush, Jane Fonda, Tom Hayden, George Jackson, Erich Honecker, Enver Hoxha . Carl Davidson, Frank Marshall Davis, Walter Duranty, Nancy Reagan, Marilyn Monroe