 For monthly donations it is necessary to create an account . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Your subscription will be activated when payment clears . If you are a returning customer please login at the top of the page .
 "Gift notes or special notes for delivery" "Order Notes & Gift Notes" "Subscription Totals" "Your subscription has been %s.s. %s"
 Due to payment gateway restrictions, different subscription products can not be purchased at the same time . Different subscription products will not be able to purchase together .
 If you are a new customer, please proceed to the Billing &amp; Shipping section . Please use this page to view the content of this article .
 Many Americans think Fidel Castro wanted to launch them at U.S. targets because he hated our country . At that time, the United States was preparing an invasion of Cuba following a Kennedy-authorized terrorist war against the island .
 Many books and documents have been published about the frightening episode of October 1962 . It appears that few have learned from the lessons of the terrifying episode .
 In August 1961, four months after Kennedy suffered defeat of CIA-sponsored Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs, Che Guevara went to Uruguay to meet Richard Goodwin, Kennedy’s Latin America adviser, Richard Goodwin .
 At this secret session, Che told Goodwin that he “must understand the Cuban Revolution.” Goodwin told Goodwin: “I’m not sure what I’ve learned from Che’s secret meetings.’
 They intend to build a socialist state, and the revolution which they have begun is irreversible . The revolution, they say, is irreversible, and it will be 'irreversible'
 In the Goodwin memo Che says Cuba “would like a Modus Vivendi” with the U.S. Che is prepared to offer certain policies to please the United States . “They could not give back the expropriated properties—the factories and banks….but could
 At the meeting, Kennedy lit a cigar saying, “You know Goodwin, I should have had you smoke the first one,” apparently referring to the CIA’s poison cigar plot .
 Following Cuba's peace offering Kennedy ordered increased numbers of terrorist attacks against Cuba . So, following Cuba’s peace offer Kennedy ordered .
 Fidel Castro accepted the Soviet offer to place nuclear missiles on the island . Fidel Castro took these actions as Kennedy’s response, accepting the offer .
 Castro assumed the U.S. would know about this new weaponry in Cuba – including tactical nuclear missiles designed to deter an invasion of United States ground forces – and understand its deterrent effect . Castro assumed that the United States .
 Cuba interpreted, logically, as an invasion threat . Instead, the U.S. remained ignorant of the tactical missile placement and continued its terrorist war against Cuba .
 From the Fall of 1961 through the end of summer 1962, Soviet missiles and then medium range bombers arrived on the island . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 In September 1962, U.S. satellite photos identified the larger, not the tactical missiles and the Missile Crisis began . The missile crisis began in September 1962 .
 The United States public, like most of the sane world, trembled as Soviet ships approached a United States military fleet in the Atlantic that nuclear war could easily erupt . The U.S. public, however, still believes the U.N. could easily go to war .
 U.S. military chiefs advocated attacking, and even annihilating, Cuba . Indeed, United States military chiefs even advocated attacking Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles in Cuba in return for the U.S. removal of missiles from Turkey and a pledge not to invade Cuba . Kennedy feared that a nuclear war would end badly for mankind and sought a diplomatic solution .
 The two leaders played a dangerous game with the lives of millions of people, but it worked successfully . The game was dangerous, but the two leaders were able to pull it off .
 Khrushchev had to twist Castor’s arm and finally unilaterally withdraw them . The U.S. remained ignorant of the tactical missies and the U.K. remained unaware .
 One thinks of Iran, which has done nothing to imperil U.S. national security, as a threat to national security . Iran has nothing to do with national security in the past, he says .
 National security mavens inside the government and major media pundits have decided that if Iran succeeds in building a nuclear weapon, U.S. security would be threatened . Nevertheless, some national security experts believe that Iran has the capability to build a nuclear bomb .
 Some want to bomb Iran to prevent – or delay – that process . Others think punishing Iran through sanctions will succeed in forcing Iran’s leaders to the table at which they will shuttle their nuclear ambitions .
 All sectors of the discussion, however, should begin their reflections by returning to the lessons of the 1962 misssile crisis, writes Andrew Hammond .
 President Obama might well apply this advice to Cuba policy as well, and begin talking to Havana as well as to Teheran .
 Saul Landau’s WILL THE REAL TERRORIST PLEASE STAND UP screens n Oct 24 at the Vermont International Film Festival . The film is based on Landau's Will The Real Terrorist Please Stand Up .
 SAUL LANDAU’s A BUSH AND BOTOX World was published by CounterPunch / AK Press .
 The Origins of America’s Vicious War on Its Own Kids . JoAnn Wypijewski: The Long Hand of Slave Breeding, Redux . Richard Falk: A Peoples Ukraine Wars Tribunal. Jeffrey St.