 In the summer of 1962, a number of nuclear tests on both sides increases tensions that had been mounting for years . The war of words between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was a summer of words .
 Both sides are under increasing panic that the other will ‘press the button’ and launch a preemptive nuclear strike, possibly destroying the world in the process . The world is under constant threat from both sides .
 Under international pressure, the U.S. government and its allies agree to stop tests and a de-facto moratorium went into effect . The United States and allies agreed to stop testing in response to international pressure .
 Talks between the US, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union begin in Geneva . In an attempt to make the test ban permanent, negotiations between the U.S. and Great Britain begin .
 The Soviets are seriously inferior to the Americans in terms of nuclear strength . But here’s the thing, as we saw in the preludes, the U.S. is seriously inferior in the nuclear strength of Russia .
 The public perception is a missile gap to the Soviet Union’s advantage . Both governments know this, but the public on both sides is largely unaware .
 In reality, with mid-range missiles in Italy and Turkey, the U.S. is now not only the stronger, but also the only side that can carry out an initial strike without ensuring complete self-destruction from retaliation .
 Khrushchev holds fast to the test ban . Political and military pressure increases on him to do something, anything, to keep up the semblance of a balance of nuclear power .
 An American U2 spy plane is shot down over Russia May 1st. 1960 . Cold war belligerents reach a tentative agreement in the ongoing Geneva talks .
 A solution as to how to effectively enforce a ban seems further and further away . The already fragile mutual trust is now severely dam-aged .
 By the end of the year, war hawks on both sides call increasingly for resumed testing . The U.S. and North Korea have been at odds for years .
 When the crisis over West Berlin breaks out in June 1961, the Soviets end the moratorium and will resume testing beginning September 1 . The Soviets ended the moratorium in 1961 .
 On October 30th, 1961, the Russians set off a staged thermonuclear bomb called RDS-220, over the Novaya Zemlya Island in the Russian Arctic Sea .
 Theoretically you can have as many layers as you have nu-clear material, making it possible to construct a bomb that blows up the whole planet . Anything more than two stages is considered excessive even by nuclear bomb proponents .
 The cores implode sequentially on each other, compressing the nu-clear material and setting off an outward chain reaction . The actual explosive power is the explosive power of the device .
 The initial explosion also emits thermal radiation traveling at the speed of light . The explosion instantly ignites anything within its radius, igniting anything within it .
 The heat created inside the fireball causes a thin shield of air to expand violently within fractions of a second of detonation . The blast is thought to have caused the explosion to explode into flames .
 This hydrodynamic front acts like a piston on the surrounding medium and sets off a massive shockwave . The shockwave accelerates outwards at more than a thousand km per hour . This is the first time a shockwave has been seen to hit more than 1,000 km per
 The Hiroshima bomb remains the largest manmade explosion ever set off, 3,800 times stronger than the Hiroshima bomb . The explosion was set off by a manmade bomb in 1945 . The bomb was the biggest manmade blast in history .
 The detonation is 4 km, or 13,000 feet above ground, and still triggers an earthquake of 5.5 on the Richter Scale . The explosion still triggers a 5.2 magnitude earthquake, which is the equivalent of a magnitude 5.3 on the scale .
 The mushroom cloud is close to 60 km high that’s seven times as high as Mount Everest . It is seven times the height of Mount Everest and seven times higher than a mountain summit . The cloud cloud is almost 60km high .
 Objects within in a radius of 35 km are completely destroyed and the heat from the bomb can be felt hundreds of kilo-meters away from the blast . Objects within 35 km of the bomb were completely destroyed .
 It actually defies human imagination in many ways, so let’s try to put this into perspective. It defies our imagination, and it defies us to think about it,’ says CNN.com .
 Let’s say that the bomb is set off over the Eifel Tower in Paris in our time in clear weather . In clear weather, the bomb would have been set off in the French capital . Let's say that .
 The light flash as it goes off can be seen from more than 1,000 km away . So in Berlin, Dublin, or Barcelona, it's possible to see it in the sky .
 The fireball engulfs and instantly incinerates more or less all of the western half of the inner city, about two million people just evaporate . Two million people were killed in the blaze .
 The thermal flash is hot enough to instantly ignite wood in the rest of the inner city and the better part of the Parisian suburbs – so millions more die in the flames . Millions more people are killed in the flash .
 The shockwave travels outward at hundreds of meters per second, wiping away pretty much any manmade construction still standing . The shock wave travels out of the air, traveling hundreds of metres per second .
 Most houses in a 21-kilometer radius are destroyed, including the Pal-ace at Versailles, the Louvre, and of course killing yet more people . Most houses are destroyed in a radius of around 21 kilometers, destroying most houses .
 Houses are damaged and all windows blown out for another 25 46 km from ground zero . That’s about a third of the distance to the English Channel yet more people are killed and injured . Houses are also damaged and blown out .
 Millions are already dead and injured, and any survivors have no immediate humanitarian and medical aid at their disposal . Millions of people have already been killed and injured in Syria .
 Within the next months, countless more will die from radiation sickness and their wounds . Within the coming weeks, countless others will die of radiation sickness .
 Over Paris, the bomb kills close to 7 million people and injures another 2. million . The bomb over Paris killed close to seven million people, injures around 2 million .
 In an instant, one single bomb has created a human tragedy nearly on the scale of a world war . One single bomb creates a tragedy nearly as big as a war, says CNN.com .
 The Soviets might have been behind in the number of warheads and deployment devices, but they now have the strongest bomb . The Soviets may have been ahead of the U.S. with the most powerful bomb .
 The cold war is heating up fast and the US soon resumes atmospheric tests of its own . The US will soon resume atmospheric tests, including those conducted by the US .
 The rhetoric is also sharpening in the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration . The U.N. has been conducting a series of high-profile tests in the past year .
 On October 21st, a few days before Tsar Bomba, Kennedy lets Khrushchev know that the U.S. knows full well that the missile gap is a myth . Kennedy: "The United States knows that the United States know full well" Kennedy: The U.
 Kennedy tells his Deputy Secretary of Defense, Roswell Gilpatric, to let everyone know for the first time that there is no missile gap . Kennedy: "The United States knows" that the U.S. knows"
 He reveals the actual number of U.S. missiles and emphasizes that even after a Soviet strike this arsenal would be enough to destroy the Russians . Even after a strike, he says, the arsenal would destroy the Russian .
 Up until this day the Soviets may have really believed that the U.S. actually believed in the missile gap . The Soviets may still believe in the United States' missile gap.
 President Obama's standard response to questions on missile gap is ‘Yes I know what Kennedy claims, and he’s quite right. Yet he continues the rhetoric – he continues to continue the rhetoric .
 We’re satisfied to be able to finish off the United States first time round. We're satisfied to have finished off the U.S. first time . We're not going to play for the first time in a row, but we're going to win this time .
 Khrushchev makes the first move in May of 1962 when he convinces Fidel Castro to let him place nuclear missiles on Cuban soil . The move is the first time the Soviet Union has placed nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 By June, a trickle of re-ports on mysterious Russian shipments to Cuba, blank cargo statements, tarpaulin covered machinery, night time unloading of equipment under heavy guard, and increasing soviet presence on the island reach U.S. officials .
 In the summer of 1962, they turn their attention to high altitude tests, partly to see if nuclear weapons induce Electro Magnetic Pulses . EMPsthought to be an effective way to knock out electron-ics and infrastructure .
 The 1.4-megaton bomb creates a spectacular light show in the sky, but also knocks out a number of satellites . Power and telephone line outages in Hawaii caused by the bomb caused power outages .
 The nuclear radiation band that it spreads across the top of the stratosphere severely damages the worlds first TV and telephone satellite, Telstar 1, which is launched a few days after the detonation .
 Although it is made functional and makes the first ever satellite relayed telephone calls ad TV broadcasts, it does sustain serious radiation damage . It does make phone calls and broadcasts, but is damaged by radiation radiation .
 In November 1963, shortly after Kennedy’s assassination, it fails terminally . The film was released in November 1963 . It is the first time the film has been shown to be shown to the public .
 On August 31st, 1962, Senator Kenneth Keating brings the reports on possible missiles on Cuba to the attention of the Senate . Keating urges Kennedy to take action .
 Instead of increasing intelligence gathering, the White House chooses to restrict aerial reconnaissance by U-2 spy planes over Cuba for diplomatic reasons . The White House says the move is to increase intelligence gathering for the U.S.
 On September 15th, the first actual Soviet missiles arrive on Cuba and the United States doesn’t notice . The United States didn't notice the arrival of the Soviet missiles .
 The reports on suspicious Soviet activity in western Cuba keep coming in .
 In early October, the National Security Council relaxes restrictions on the U-2 flights . But bad weather and red tape delay them until Oct.th .
 Analysts determine three MRBM launch sites near San Cristobal . The first flight crosses the island of Cuba and brings back photographs of what analysts say are three launch sites .
 The CIA informs the President's National Security Adviser, McGeorge Bundy, on the evening of Oct. 9th, and Bundy tells President Kennedy the following morning . Bundy tells the President the next day .
 The hard words, the threats, the blustering, the missiles in Turkey and Italy, the increased nuclear tests have not deterred the Soviets . The overwhelming might of the U.S. nuclear arsenal, the overwhelming might, has failed to deter the Soviets, the author says .
 It has forced them into a corner and made them more dangerous than ever, it has been said . Instead, it's forced them to a corner, they have made them dangerous again, they said . It has made them even more dangerous, they added .
 Kennedy now faces the most dangerous crisis in the his-tory of humanity . Kennedy faces the biggest crisis of his time in history .
 In the next thirteen days, we’ll see the world not only come close to a new world war, but also almost step over the precipice into total nuclear holocaust .
 The 13 episodes for the 13 days of the crisis will be released daily, subscribe and ring that bell to NOT miss any of the action . Subscribe to the 13 episodes of this week's crisis .
 We worked out the effects of Tsar Bomba on Paris using Nukemap by Alex Wellerstein . Also, we used NukeMap to work out the effect on Paris from the bomb .
 Nukemap lets you calculate the devastation of any given nuclear device for any place on the globe . NukeMap is a tool that calculates the damage caused by nuclear weapons .
 If you want to understand more about the devastating effect of nuclear arms, you can click here to check out that .
 It is the TimeGhost Army that funds this, our WW2 in real time project, and all of our programming . It is a TimeGhost army .