 Life is a comedy to those who think, a tragedy to those . who feel, and an open book to those those who read . Life is also a tragedy for those who feel and is open book for all .
 You are welcome to contact China Matters at the address chinamatters --a-prlee.org or follow me on twitter @chinahand .
 Fidel Castro's 90th birthday celebrations might have been a bit more extravagant if Cuba had emerged from the 1962 missile crisis as the world's fifth nuclear power . Cuba emerged from a missile crisis in 1962 to emerge from a nuclear crisis .
 America’s Best and Brightest under Jack Kennedy stared down Nikita Khrushchev and his attempt to position strategic nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Cuban missile crisis occurred in October 1962 .
 Revisionist history has removed some of the good evil gloss slathered on the United States by Kennedy hagiographers to reveal the political calculations underlying the confrontation . The U.S. has been accused of being complicit in the Vietnam War .
 Soviet strategists were appalled by the introduction of United States Jupiter nuclear-tipped missiles into Turkey and Italy . They were justifiably anxious about the prospect of a pre-emptive U.S. strike . Kennedy understood that standing up to the Soviets over Cuba was more a matter
 From the beginning of the crisis, his advisors are unambiguous in their analysis that the missiles in Cuba, when operational, would not effect the strategic balance . President Obama's advisors say the missiles would not affect the balance of the country .
 The U.S. saw Khrushchev as way out on a limb that was ripe for sawing off . The United States saw the premature exposure of the Soviet missile gambit on Cuba thanks to United States intelligence .
 Missiles in Cuba were intended by Khrushchev as a stabilizing strategic riposte to the United States missiles in Italy and Turkey . A neat way to succor Cuba and bind it into a Soviet alliance by deterring a widely expected US ‘regime change” style
 Soviet expectations were spot on; after the Bay of Pigs debacle the Pentagon was busy with Operation Mongoose planning for Castro’s overthrow . As for regime change, Soviet expectation was spot on .
 We could blow up a U.S. ship in Guantanamo Bay and blame Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba is a key ally of the United States in the region .
 The key assumption underlying the U.S. strategy for facing down the Russians in Cuba was that the United States didn't think that the Soviet Union had any operational nuclear weapons capability in Cuba when it decided to go public with the ultimatum .
 Marchetti claims to have been intimately involved in the intelligence aspects of the Cuban crisis . He says he was intimately involved with the intelligence aspect of the crisis in Cuba .
 President Kennedy was well aware that missiles in Cuba were still lacking their warheads and therefore posed no threat to the U.S. He alleges that President Kennedy knew that the missiles still lacked their warheads . The missiles were still missing their warheads, he says .
 Kennedy and his hagiographers have skated over this aspect of the crisis, perhaps in order to provide America’s youth with sufficient pretext for a frantic pre-apocalypse f*ckfest . Nevertheless, Kennedy and . his hagographers, perhaps . perhaps in . order
 There were allegedly forty thousand Soviet troops in Cuba, not the few thousand estimated by Marchetti and the CIA . There were also shiploads of military equipment under the noses of the CIA, including infantry, anti-aircraft, and other defensive units .
 Soviet forces were commanded by officers whose concept of operational routine was the Great Patriotic War against Nazi Germany . They had control over tactical nuclear weapons, and had authority to use them if the United States invaded and communications were severed .
 The Soviet Union has plenty of material to turn Cuba into a major battlefield . The U.S. base at Guantanamo is a focus of Soviet attention .
 Issa Pliyev, the general in charge of Soviet forces in Cuba, is a two-time Hero of the Soviet Union, seven time Order of Lenin, Hero of Mongolian People’s Republic, Member, French Legion of Honor, etc. etc.
 The part about the strategic missiles not being operational was something of a lucky guess . However, Marchetti is correct in terms of describing United States perceptions at the time of the crisis .
 A U2 flight yielded unambiguous photographic evidence that, indeed, the Soviets had established intermediate and medium-range missile launch facilities in Cuba . The CIA didn’t know for sure that the warheads had arrived in Cuba, but the CIA knew for sure they had arrived .
 The photos reveal something that looks more like construction sites than comfy bases of mass destruction . The Soviets apparently cloned their homeland missile facilities in Cuba, making photo analysis of the projects a bit easier .
 CIA conclusion appears to have been that the warheads weren’t in Cuba . If they were, they were off in some warehouse somewhere and the missiles were unarmed . The CIA concluded that if they were in Cuba, they would be unarmed .
 The warheads for the strategic missiles were in Cuba but had not been deployed to the launch sites yet . It turns out the the warheads had been in Cuba and were not deployed yet .
 Khrushchev was not yet prepared to formally announce the existence of the missiles . Another indication that the strategic missiles were not operational was not operational in October 1962 . The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in 1962, but were never operational .
 Khrushchev planned to announce the existence of the missiles during a visit to the U.S. in November 1962, bringing to mind this exchange from Kubrick’s 1964 film, Dr. Dr. King . The missiles are believed to have been launched by the Soviet Union .
 McNamara states that his knees wobbled when he was told about the tactical nuclear weapons at a thirtieth anniversary get-together in 1992 between the US, Russia, and Cuba . McNamara says he was shocked to be told of the weapons at the event .
 President Obama had been informed of the possible presence of tactical nukes on Cuba at the time of the crisis . However, it's more accurate to state that he had refused to believe it .
 I'm guessing McNamara chose to assume the missiles were not nuclear tipped and this was the version presented to Kennedy . I'm sure McNamara .
 US planners set aside the worry that a nuke would get lit off in Cuba, and gamed the nuclear element as if it would play out only within the parameters of a potential direct nuclear exchange between the US and Russian homelands .
 The assumption was that any nukes would have to come out of Russia, and Khrushchev probably wouldn't escalate to global nuclear war if the U.S. dropped the hammer on Cuba . The assumption is that any nuclear war would probably come from Russia .
 Tactical Air Command, Walter Sweeney, who cautioned that maybe a nuclear-armed missile might survive a massive U.S. strike to hit the United States . Sweeney: Maybe a . nuclear-army missile might . survive a . massive United States strike .
 Expert opinion has started to tilt away from “masterful statesmanship” toward the “lucky accident” interpretation of the crisis .
 As it transpired, the most immediate nuclear risk during the crisis didn’t even involve the weapons on Cuba . The most immediate risk was not even involving Cuba .
 The U.S. Navy depth charged a Soviet sub approaching Cuba with a nuclear torpedo . The sub was armed with a torpedo armed with nuclear weapons . The UVA was creating the submarine to attack the Soviet sub that was carrying a torpedo .
 The Soviet captain decided to dish out his 10-kiloton nuclear torpedo and go down in a blaze of glory . Unaware that the USN was dropping undercharged ashcans and not “we want to sink you” depth bombs .
 The launch was vetoed by his flotilla commander, who happened to be on the boat . Fortunately, the launch was blocked by the commander of the flotillas .
 Fidel Castro regards Khrushchev as an ass and a wimp, says Castro . The Castro family is proud of his father's legacy, says Fidel Castro .
 Four dozen strategic missiles in package capable of reaching most of U.S. continental United States . This put the Soviet foreign policy establishment on the wrong foot in vigorously defending the initiative .
 Khrushchev backed down in October 1962 and threw Cuba under the bus . And wimp wimp, because wimping, because he backed down and threw the country under the knife .
 Cuba under Castro had irrevocably burned its bridges to the United States by hosting the missiles . Cuba was ready to do that shoulder-to-shoulder thing and risk U.S. annihilation in an attack .
 Khrushchev caved to the United States and removed all the nukes, not just the strategic weapons he had promised Kennedy to remove . Washington didn’t even know about .
 Cuba was left as a lonely piñata twisting in the wind while the United States took whacks at it for over 50 years . The US had extended the courtesy to a number of Soviet proxies with considerably less national legitimacy than Cuba- Cuba . Cuba had extended its courtesy to Soviet proxies
 President Obama marked the continuation of the effort by going to Cuba for a triumphal visit that was interpreted as receiving the Castros’ surrender to the forces of the U.S. democracy and capitalism . Raul Castro’s effort to literally spin Obama's flaccid wrist
 For the Soviet Union, it was a dismal botch that helped cost Khrushchev his job . It came on the heels of the China debacle, pretty much put paid to Soviet overseas nuclear junketeering .
 Latin America would certainly have been different if Cuba had nukes…and maybe not worse off . Looking at the cavalcade of instability in places like Chile, Argentina, Colombia, Honduras, and Guatemala engendered by the successful US rollback of socialism .
 The U.S. has no interest in exploring the possibility of using the moonwalkers . But that’s a possibility the US, for obvious reasons, would be interested in exploring .
 The legal recourse for the United States would have been to obtain a 2/3 vote from the Organization of American States authorizing a blockade against a member state . The U.S. wasn't willing to wait for the vote, which would have required a 2-3 vote .
 Mikoyan determined that Khrushchev's serial mismanagement of the crisis had alienated Castro to the degree that effective co-management of weapons was impossible . The crisis was the result of the failure to co-manage the weapons .
 Castro prepared to inform the world through the UN that, despite the Soviet withdrawal, Cuba still had the nukes and an effective deterrent against U.S. invasion . Castro, in desperation, was prepared to tell the world .
 The purpose of the loan is to provide financial assistance to the owner of the money . The amount of money is expected to be around $1.5 million .
 DreamHost is one of the best hosting company for any hosting plans you need . DreamHost provides the best web hosting options for any of your hosting plans .
 Professional trading signals sent to your mobile phone every day . Start following our signals NOW & profit up to 270% per day .
 I feel happy about and learning more about the topic . keep sharing your information regularly for your future reference .
 The information which you have provided is better than another blog. Thanks for sharing an article like this. It is better to share your information with us .
 Usually I never comment on blogs but your article is so convincing that I never stop myself from saying something about it . Usually I don't comment but I'm so impressed by your article that I think I'll comment on it .