 These books will break down conventional lines of demarcation by incorporating historical perspectives into issues of current and ongoing concern . Collectively, these books will offer international and global perspectives on a variety of issues, and bridging the gap between historians and scientists .
 In this way they advance scholarly conversation within and across traditional disciplines but also help define new areas of intellectual endeavor . They advance conversation within traditional disciplines, but also in new ways .
 First published in 2010 by PALGRAVE MACMILLAN® in the U.S.
 Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies and has companies and representatives throughout the world . Palgrave is the world's largest academic imprint and has representatives in all parts of the globe .
 Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries . Palgrave is a registered trademark in the U.S. and UK .
 A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library . U5L64 2011 629.45'40973—dc22 2010025629 .
 Thank you for listening, and then going on to make me proud of your accomplishments, says President Obama . "I am proud of my daughter's accomplishments," says Obama .
 Understanding its evolution is important to an appreciation of its character and intent . Understanding the evolution of the art form is essential to understanding its origin .
 I actually signed a contract to publish my dissertation before I defended it, says author . "I actually signed to publish the dissertation," she says .
 As the years passed, I became increasingly dissatisfied with the completeness of the study’s narrative elements . But as the years as the study progressed, I was increasingly dissatisfied .
 Only a very limited base of primary documents on which to base the study was available . The basic story has stood the test of time, but because of the book was carried out even before Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin reached the Moon .
 The John F Kennedy Presidential Library had not yet opened, and Lyndon B Johnson was still president . Kennedy's library was not yet open, and the library was still under construction .
 Many oral histories discussing the Kennedy presidency were not yet available . That meant the narrative lacked the fullness made possible only by using the documentary record . The documentary record was not available .
 The flip side of this situation was that the events and considerations that led to the decision to go to the Moon were still fresh in the minds of the key participants in that decision, and I was fortunate to be able to interview most of them .
 Of those involved with the decision to go to the Moon, only McNamara and President Johnson declined interview requests . By that time, by that time both John and Robert Kennedy had been assassinated .
 NASA chief historian Gene Emme and through him NASA administrator James Webb became convinced that I was trying to prepare an unbiased account of the decision process . Their support greatly facilitated my research, and they supported me to write this article .
 The 1970 book was based primarily on interviews with participants in the decision process and the secondary literature . The author was able to gain access to a few key documents .
 JFK’s lunar landing decision was not complete . That meant that the story of JFK's decision to land on the moon landing was not completed .
 I also came to realize that I had totally missed an important theme in President Kennedy’s thinking in the January—May 1961 period . President Kennedy's thinking was a key theme in the President's thinking .
 His first instinct on coming to the White House had been to seek cooperation in space with the Soviet Union, not competition .
 Kennedy had suggested to Khrushchev that the U.S. and the Soviet Union should go to the Moon together . Even after he announced his decision to send Americans to the the Moon on May 25, 1961, Kennedy had said that the United States and the Soviets should go together .
 Khrushchev responded negatively, and at least for the time being, the cooperative alternative was foreclosed . The cooperative alternative is foreclosed, and Khrushchevitch responded negatively .
 I also came to realize that I had told only one part of the story of John F Kennedy and the lunar landing program . I also realized that I came to the conclusion that I was only telling part of Kennedy's story of the moon landing .
 Achieving large-scale objectives through government action has two requirements . Government action is required to achieve objectives through large scale government action . The aim is to achieve the objectives of government action in order to achieve them .
 JFK’s lunar landing decision was indeed an example of choosing a course of action only after careful thought and examination of possible alternatives . JFK's lunar landing was indeed a good example of a careful thought, examination of alternative options . I believe that JFK's decision to land on the moon
 But turning a decision into action, and carrying that action through to completion, is also needed for success . Turning a decision to action is also a key to success, says the author .
 President Kennedy and his White House associates generated the political will needed to mobilize the financial and human resources which made the lunar landing program possible . President Kennedy's actions and decisions from May 1961 through November 1963 generated the funding and support for the program .
 John F Kennedy and the U.S. space program were the subject of a study into Kennedy's legacy . Kennedy was the first president of the United States to carry out a space program in the 1960s . Kennedy died at the age of 92 in February 1963 .
 NASA administrator Dan Goldin and his associate administrator for policy and plans Lori Garver gave top-level support to my request . NASA’s chief historian Roger Launius approved a modest contract to help me get started .
 I carried out a first round of gathering primary documents and other material from the Kennedy Library and the NASA Historical Reference Collection at NASA’s headquarters . Over the next several years, I worked on a few parts of the book . The book will be published in 2015 .
 Roger PREFACE xi Launius, by now senior curator in the Space History Department at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, suggested that he apply for the museum’s most senior fellowship, the Charles A Lindbergh Chair .
 From September 2008 through August 2009, I was in residence at the museum, finishing another round of research in the Kennedy Library and the NASA archives . I was awarded that position, and from September 2008 until August 2009 I was able to complete my first draft .
 Mike Neufeld, chair of the museum’s space history department and Wernher von Braun biographer, provided useful comments . Roger Launius provided very useful comments on the book .
 I returned to GW’s Space Policy Institute as professor emeritus in September 2009 . I finished my research and drafting of the manuscript there, and finished it in 2009 .
 "The current study is thus much more than a warmed-over version of my 1970 book," he says .
 The study adds a great deal of new material to the account of the initial decision-making process . It provides a fuller understanding of the factors at play as Kennedy made his choice .
 The MIT Press graciously provided its permission to incorporate as much of the contents of the earlier book into the new manuscript as I wished . I have drawn upon many text passages and used almost all of the interview material in crafting this narrative .
 In doing so, I have tried not lose any of the qualities that have made The Decision to Go to the Moon the standard account of that decision . I have also tried not to lose any other qualities that made the decision to go to the moon the standard standard account .
 This new study carries the story until the tragic day in Dallas when Kennedy’s presidency was so abruptly terminated . The study was published in the New York Review of Columbia University .
 Even on November 22, 1963, John Kennedy was intending to speak in positive terms about the future of the U.S. space program . Kennedy was intent to speak about the United States space program.
 President John F. Kennedy, his inner circle of advisers, career staff and agency heads . Study looks at the decisions and actions of the Kennedy presidency . It looks at Kennedy's inner circle and career staff .
 President Kennedy assigned a lead role in space policy to his vice president-elect, Lyndon B Johnson . Kennedy before he was inaugurated assigned Kennedy's vice president to space policy .
 "I have not done, except when it was necessary to understand deliberations at the White House level," he says . "What I've not done is give much attention to the technical and management aspects of Project Apollo itself," he adds .
 This study is not a complete account of John F Kennedy and the American space program . This study does not give an accurate account of the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy will forever be associated with the singular space achievement with which he is forever associated with . The realities of time and page count led to a decision to focus only on Kennedy and the race to the Moon .
 John Kennedy personally had only limited involvement in the steps taken during his administration to bring communication satellites into early use .
 He was deeply involved in making sure that there were no international restrictions placed on the ability to operate photoreconnaissance satellites . He was also involved in limiting the spread of military conflict into the new environment .
 In 1961 and 1962, he laid out the principles that became the basis of the 1967 Outer Space Treaty . The treaty was the basis for the 1967 space treaty . It was signed by the United Nations in 1967 .
 Kennedy also became personally involved with all seven Mercury astronauts . Kennedy was particularly friendly with the first American to orbit the Earth, John Glenn .
 The astronauts represented a personality type that Kennedy had written about in his book Profiles in Courage . Kennedy wrote about individuals who had responded successfully to challenging circumstances .
 There is more to be written about Kennedy and space than is contained in this study, says author .
 This narrative draws on what is available in the documentary record and has the benefit of interviews and oral histories that took place close to the events being discussed, it can never be really complete .
 One cannot know which of the many memoranda addressed to President Kennedy he actually read, and of those he read, to what issues and views he gave most attention . One of the memoranda he read is that he gave the most attention to .
 Kennedy enjoyed discussing policy issues with his advisers and associates . Few of those conversations can be re-created. Kennedy enjoyed talking about policy issues . Kennedy enjoyed conversations with advisers, associates .
 John Kennedy’s brother Robert was his closest confidant, but there is a very limited record of their discussions about the U.S. space program .
 This study is a reconstruction of history based on extensive, but still partial, evidence . So inevitably this study is . inevitably this . study is based on . extensive but incomplete evidence .
 Given the more than a decade over which I have been working on this book, there are many people to thank, and I am bound to have forgotten to mention some who deserve recognition .
 This book is part of the Palgrave Studies in the History of Science and Technology series of which Roger Launius co-editor .
 NASA archivist Jane Odom and Colin Fries helped me locate key documents and other research material . At NASA, I want to thank Lori Garver and Dan Goldin for their original support .
 The research staff of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library has been supportive during visits to the library . Maryrose Grossman was particularly helpful in digging through the photo archives to locate several of the images .
 Lyndon B Johnson Presidential Library staff were very helpful during a visit to the library in March 2010 . The library staff was also very helpful .
 The Lindbergh Chair is offered by the Smithsonian Institution for a year to focus on his writing . He has been given the opportunity to write for the first time in his own life .
 Mike Neufeld and his colleagues in the Department of Space History at the National Air and Space Museum were welcoming . I felt quite comfortable working in their midst, says author .
 George Washington students Krystal Brun and Megan Ansdell provided occasional but valuable research assistance . MIT student Teasel Muir-Harmony provided additional assistance to the researchers .
 My colleague Dwayne Day read the draft manuscript and provided useful comments while also catching my many typos . The book is published in September 2014 .
 Professor Scott Pace, the director of the Space Policy Institute, welcomed me back to GW after a year at the museum . Professor Pace is the successor of Scott Pace who was the director at the space policy institute .
 Chris Chappell has been enthusiastic about this study, and I have appreciated his guidance in getting it into print .
 Sarah Whalen and Heather Faulls have been very helpful in shepherding the manuscript through the production process . The book is set to be released in September 2015 .
 I also welcomed the very useful comments by several anonymous reviewers of my book proposal . The author's book proposal is published in September 2015 .
 It goes without saying that I am responsible for any errors in this account and for the interpretations of all the actions and decisions detailed herein . I am also responsible for all the decisions and actions detailed herein.
 "She is still my wife and still a constant source of support and encouragement. Forty-one years later, she is still our wife," he says .
 John Kennedy was a very unlikely candidate to decide to send Americans to the Moon . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the Kennedy administration .
 He had shown little interest in space issues in his time as a senator or during his presidential campaign . He had showed little interest during that time .
 The answer came back less than three weeks later—sending astronauts to the surface of Earth’s nearest neighbor gave the best chance of besting the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy stayed closely engaged in the effort and in making sure the benefits of Project Apollo would outweigh its burgeoning cost . Kennedy not only decided to go to the Moon; over the remaining thirty months of his tragically shortened presidency, he stayed closely involved .
 He pushed hard to make sure Apollo was carried out in a manner that best served both the country’s interests and his own as president .
 Many presidents since John Kennedy have announced bold decisions, but few have followed those decisions with the budgetary and political commitments needed to ensure success . Many presidents have made bold decisions but few followed them with the political and budgetary commitments needed for success .
 Kennedy’s commitment to the race to the Moon initiated the largest peacetime government-directed engineering project in U.S. history . Kennedy's commitment to race to moon initiated the biggest peacetime project in United States history .
 Project Apollo by the time it was completed cost United States taxpayers $25. billion, which would be equal to some $151 billion in 2010 dollars . Project Apollo cost the U.S. taxpayers some $25 billion, the equivalent of $151billion in 2010 .
 Apollo is frequently “WE SHOULD GO TO THE MOON. 3” compared to the construction of the Panama Canal as an expensive, long-term, government-funded undertaking . The Panama Canal is an expensive and long-needed undertaking .
 By the time the Canal was completed in 1914, the cost of its construction was $375 million, equivalent to $8 billion in 2010 dollars, much less than Apollo's . The cost of the Canal in 1914 was much less .
 The Interstate Highway System began in the mid-1950s and cost $114 billion out of a total cost of $128 billion . Another comparison might be with the multidecade construction of the interstate highway system .
 Apollo required a historically massive commitment of public funds over a relatively brief period of time . By any measure available, Apollo required an unprecedented amount of public money .
 The book contains a detailed narrative of the decisions and actions of President Kennedy . Kennedy's inner circle of advisers, career White House staff and agency heads are included .
 Study characterizes Johnson’s role with respect to space decisions during the Kennedy administration . Kennedy before he was inaugurated assigned vice president, Lyndon B Johnson, a lead role in space policy .
 The book does not give much attention to the specific details of Project Apollo itself . Except when necessary to understand deliberations at the White House level, the book doesn't give much detail .
 Most general accounts of JFK’s time as president give only passing attention to his involvement with the lunar landing program . Yet most of JFK's time in office were focused on his involvement in the program .
 One goal of this study is to create as historically complete a record of that involvement . The study is aimed at creating a more complete record of the history of the project .
 Kennedy administration filled an empty niche in the record of the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy relied heavily on his agency heads to carry out programs he set in motion . Kennedy's case study provides a detailed case study of how he conducted his presidency .
 Kennedy’s space-related efforts provide insights about his personality and the way he carried out his presidency . Readers of this account can decide for themselves what insights Kennedy's space efforts provide about him .
 The book's concluding chapter reflects on the character and quality of JFK’s space decisions . It also asks whether the way Apollo was conceived and carried out can serve as a model for other large-scale government efforts .
 The image of John Kennedy that emerges from this study is at variance from how he is often regarded with respect to space . John Kennedy's image of space travel is also at variance with that of how he was viewed in space .
 John Kennedy emerges as pragmatic political leader who soon after entering office came to see the United States civilian space program as an important tool to advance U.S. foreign policy and national security goals .
 He was flexible in his approach to space activities . He was willing to compete if necessary but preferring to cooperate if possible .
 John F Kennedy with his actions in the spring of 1961 and in the following months took the first steps toward the Moon . Kennedy's actions in 1961 were the first step toward the moon .
 Kennedy did not live to see the first footprints on the lunar surface . It is one of the ways in which he will be most remembered for his role in the mission .
 Kennedy’s own inclination seems to have leaned in the direction of becoming a journalist, a writer of nonfiction books, or even an academic . Kennedy's own inclination is to be a journalist or a writer .
 Kennedy’s father, Joseph, was determined that his sons not enter the business world . He had amassed sufficient wealth to allow his sons to choose a future that did not have to lead to significant additional income . Joseph Kennedy was determined to let his sons choose not to be involved in
 The reality was that if Kennedy had chosen a career other than politics, it would have meant going against the wishes of his strong-willed father . The reality is that if . Kennedy chose to go against his father's wishes, he would have faced going against his wishes .
 Kennedy was easily elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1948 and to the Senate in 1952 and again in 1958 . Kennedy served in the Senate from 1952 to 1958 and was elected to Congress in 1948 .
 His time in Congress was not fulfilling for either his or his father’s ambitions . But his time as a congressman was fulfilling for both his and his father .
 Kennedy was almost selected as Adlai Stevenson’s vice presidential running mate in 1956 . Kennedy set his eyes on being elected president of the United States in November 1960 .
 In his years as a senator, Kennedy said little about space issues except in the context of the linkage between space launch vehicles and strategic missile capabilities . Kennedy: "Space launch vehicles are a key component of our strategic missile capability"
 He was the Democratic nominee for president in July 1960 . That changed once he became the Democratic Party's nominee .
 Kennedy offered no specific views on future space activities during the campaign . Once he was declared president-elect, he spent little time on space issues prior to his inauguration .
 Kennedy's personal views and interests with respect to space remained largely unknown as he entered the White House . This meant that Kennedy’s personal views with respect . to space, as differentiated from his campaign rhetoric, remained unknown .
 Senator Kennedy said little about space issues during his presidential campaign . The significance of the Soviet launches of spacecraft began with Sputnik 1 in October 1957 . The appropriate U.S. response to Soviet space achievements were major issues before Congress .
 Kennedy showed little personal interest in United States and Soviet space efforts . Kennedy also showed little interest in U.S. and Soviet efforts .
 He was a member of the Visiting Committee of the Harvard College Observatory . He was an astronomer at Harvard College .
 The head of the Instrumentation Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Charles Stark Draper, recalled a discussion with John Kennedy and his brother Robert at a Boston restaurant during the post-Sputnik period . Draper recalls the conversation with Kennedy and brother Robert .
 Draper tried to get the Kennedy brothers excited about the promise of space flight . Draper: "We're going to go to space. We're looking forward to space," Draper said .
 Kennedy did vote in 1958 to create a Senate Special Committee on Space and Aeronautics . Other actions related to NASA during those years were approved by voice votes, without the positions of individual senators being recorded .
 The growing disparity between U.S. and Soviet missile capability, Kennedy argued, would soon put the United States at a significant strategic disadvantage vis-a-vis the Soviet Union . Kennedy argued that the growing disparity would soon be a major strategic disadvantage .
 Kennedy expressed worry that the Soviet Union’s superiority in nuclear-tipped missiles would allow it to use “sputnik diplomacy” and other nonmilitary means to shift the balance of global power against the U.S. In a speech on the Senate floor on August
 Kennedy gained a seat on the Committee on Foreign Relations in the mid-1950s . Kennedy did gain a seat in the Senate in the 1950s .
 He was one of the first senators to recognize the significance of the decolonization movement of the BEFORE THE WHITE House 7 late 1950s . He thought it essential that the U.S. be an appealing ally to Asians and Africans .
 Kennedy denounced French suppression of Algeria’s move toward independence . Kennedy attracted international attention by denouncing the French suppression .
 His interest in presenting a positive image of the United States to the countries of the third world was a factor in his later judgment that the U.S. could not by default cede space leadership to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the only country that would be willing to accept
 This response suggests that Senator Kennedy had indeed given some thought to space issues before February 1960, and that in his judgment they had a lower priority in comparison to other threats to U.S. leadership . This may well be an accurate reflection of his views as opposed to the strident attitude
 JFK’s interest at this early date in increasing the lifting power of U.S. rockets and in internationalizing space activity . JFK's interest is in both increasing the lift power of United States rockets and increasing the internationalization of space activity. Notable is JFK interest in increasing
 The letter suggests Kennedy or whoever composed the response was not very familiar with the specifics of the U.S. space effort . The letter also suggests that the use of the expression “propulsion unit” rather than launch vehicle, may have been a mistake .
 Space issues did not play a major role in John Kennedy’s campaign for the Democratic nomination for president in 1960 . Space issues were not a major issue in Kennedy's 1960 campaign .
 Kennedy said that the New Frontier of which he was speaking “is a set of challenges.” Foreshadowing the most famous line in his inaugural address, Kennedy said “New Frontier’s New Frontier” was “set of challenges,” he said
 The Republican Administration has remained incredibly blind to the prospects of space exploration . President Obama's administration has remained "blind" to the prospect of exploration .
 It has failed to pursue space programs with a sense of urgency at all close to their importance to the future of the world . The U.S. has not been able to pursue its own space programs .
 The new Democratic Administration will press forward with our national space program in full realization of the importance of space accomplishments to our national security and our international prestige .
 "We shall reorganize the program to achieve both efficiency and speedy execution," says President Obama .
 Kennedy established a “brain trust” drawn primarily from the faculties of Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . To develop background material on the various issues he would have to address during his presidential campaign, the 'brain trust' was set up .
 Harvard law professor Archibald Cox began collecting research memoranda and reports from experts at both universities and from across the country . Cox: Even before the presidential campaign began, Cox collected memoranda from both universities . Cox also collected reports from both Harvard law professors .
 Before the White House 9 generated, little of it was read by Kennedy or used during the campaign . While an impressive amount of material was created, little was used by Kennedy .
 Sorensen: “Not all of their material was usable and even less was actually used.” Cox’s products were not usable .
 Kennedy asked Cox to contact Trevor Gardner, former assistant secretary of the U.S. Air Force for research and development . Gardner was a man to whom Kennedy looked for advice on space and missile issues . Kennedy himself on September 2, 1960 .
 The Democratic Advisory Council reported to the Democratic National Committee . Kennedy’s campaign was largely unused but remarkably prescient input into his campaign .
 Leading the preparation of this paper was physicist Ralph Lapp, who worked in the Manhattan Project to develop the atomic bomb . Lapp spent most of the rest of his career warning about the dangers of nuclear war .
 The U.S. has failed to define its real objective in space, a position paper says . The position paper pointed out that “the United States has failed . to define . its real objectives in space .
 "If purely scientific, this should be so stated so that the American people and others understand our objective," says President Obama . "We have to be honest about our objective. If purely scientific," he says .
 The paper noted that “Senator Kennedy must make the decision, essentially political in character,” between the two programs . The paper also noted that Kennedy must decide between the programs .
 The costs of the politically driven second program were estimated to be $26 billion from 1960 to 1970, compared to the then planned expenditures during that period of $12 to 13 billion .
 The scientifically oriented program was 10 JOHN F KENNEDY and the RACE TO THE MOON estimated to cost $19 billion . The program is estimated to have cost $20 billion .
 By 1960, it had become customary for specialized publications to ask presidential candidates to state their positions on issues of interest to their readers .
 Dr. Kennedy’s response, which appeared in the October 10 issue of the magazine, was drafted by Dr. Robert Kennedy himself .
 The target dates for a manned space platform, United States citizen on the moon, nuclear power for space exploration, and a true manned spaceship should be elastic . The target date dates for manned space platforms, U.S. citizen on moon, and true manned spaceships should also be elastic
 Many in the space community took the statement at face value and anticipated that if elected Kennedy would favor an accelerated space effort . Kennedy would put additional emphasis on the military dimensions of the United States space program .
 John Kennedy laid out his basic argument for his candidacy in one of his early campaign speeches . The Symbolic Role of Space is important to John Kennedy's campaign .
 An administration that moves rapidly to rebuild our defenses, until America is once again first in military power across the board; 2. An administration . 2.2.3.4.5.5 . An administration of rapid rebuilding of our defenses .
 3. An administration that moves rapidly to revamp our goals in education and research, until American science and learning is once again preeminent; 3. A. U.S. science, learning and research will be re-emphasized; . An administration revamps our goals
 An administration that moves rapidly to reshape our image here at home, 4.4. 4.5.5 . The revolution for equal rights is still the American revolution; 4.6.5 for the U.S. It will be clear to all the world that the revolution
 An administration that moves rapidly to renew our leadership for peace, until we have brought to that universal pursuit of the same concentration of resources and efforts that we have . brought . to the preparation of war; and 5.5. 5.6.6 .
 Eventually that phrase or a variation of it appeared in every campaign speech . The phrase became a staple of Obama's speeches .
 Kennedy made frequent references to the space program in his campaign appearances . It was in this context that Kennedy made reference to space program .
 The impression began to move around the world that the Soviet Union was on the march, that it had definite goals, and that it knew how to accomplish them, he says . "We failed to recognize the impact that being first in outer space would have," he adds .
 Kennedy’s rhetoric with respect to the loss of United States prestige because of the Soviet space successes was reinforced by a classified U.S. Information Agency report that was leaked to The Washington Post .
 The report was based on polls taken in Great Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, and Norway . The report is based on poll results from Great Britain and France .
 In October 1960, in response to Richard Nixon’s defense of the space record of the Eisenhower administration, Johnson released a “white paper” prepared by the staff of the Senate space committee, which he chaired .
 Johnson criticized the administration’s space policy but stressed that both Democrats and Republicans in Congress had recognized the need for a strong space effort . Johnson: Both Democrats and Republican leaders in Congress have recognized that need for strong space efforts .
 On July 23, after the Democratic convention, candidate Kennedy had a highly classified briefing from the director of the Central Intelligence Agency . Allen Dulles was the CIA director .
 The missions flown by the U-2 spy plane prior to the May 1, 1960, downing of a flight over Russia . The missions had suggested that there had been very limited deployment of the initial Soviet ICBM .
 The first successful U.S. spy satellite mission was not launched until August 18, 1960, after Kennedy’s CIA briefing . It took several additional missions later in 1960 and in early 1961 to confirm that the indications were correct .
 Kennedy was not briefed on the CORONA intelligence satellite program that Eisenhower had approved in February 1958 . The program's existence was known to very few people within the Congress . Kennedy was asked if the U.S. or the Soviet Union would be first to have a reconnaissance satellite .
 Eisenhower was “reportedly furious” that Kennedy continued to raise the missile gap issue throughout the campaign, while his opponent, Richard Nixon, could not provide information that would counter Kennedy’s claims because of its highly classified nature .
 In the following ten weeks before he took the oath of office, president-elect Kennedy moved forward briskly on many of the issues that he had highlighted in the campaign . Kennedy took office in January .
 He paid very limited attention to space topics during his transition activities . However, he paid very little attention to the space topics .
 The Eisenhower administration's space efforts may have been a useful issue to stress in the campaign . The president-elect and his advisers did not give high priority to addressing either immediate or longer-term space questions during the transition period .
 There was no contact made with the new National Aeronautics and Space Administration . The agency had begun operations on October 1, 1958 .
 Kennedy prior to his inauguration nominated no one to replace T Keith Glennan as NASA administrator . Eisenhower appointee Glennan was appointed by President Eisenhower in 1964 .
 As John F Kennedy took the oath of office on January 20, 1961, there was significant uncertainty about the future of the U.S. space effort .
 Brookings Institution had urged both candidates to prepare for the transition . Brookings Institution: Both candidates should prepare for transition, if elected .
 In September, Kennedy had asked high-powered Washington lawyer Clark Clifford to be his primary transition adviser . Clifford represented Kennedy against allegations that he was not the author of Profiles in Courage . Clifford was a senior adviser to President Harry Truman .
 Jackson and Kennedy were similar in their strongly anticommunist views and on giving priority to military strength . Kennedy had included Jackson on his short list as a running mate .
 Jackson took Neustadt to meet Kennedy on September 18, and the candidate was impressed . Kennedy was impressed by the memo, which was sent to him . Jackson took the memo to meet with Kennedy .
 Kennedy asked Neustadt to elaborate his arguments in additional memoranda, saying someone in the campaign would get back to him in due time . Kennedy asked for more information about the case .
 As was typical of Kennedy’s style, he asked Clifford and Neustadt to work without consulting one another, ensuring that he would have two independent sources of transition advice . Kennedy asked Clifford to work independently without consulting 16 JOHN F KENNEDY .
 Neustadt joined Kennedy on his campaign airplane on November 4 to hand him memorandums he had prepared . Kennedy's campaign plane was the last stop for the campaign trail .
 Neustadt recommended FDR adopt a staffing pattern in the White House that was much closer to that used by Franklin D Roosevelt than the military-like arrangements that had been set up by Eisenhower .
 Clifford delivered his transition memorandum and back-up notebooks to Kennedy on November 9, the day on which Kennedy’s election victory was confirmed . Clifford delivered the memo and notebooks on the day of the election . Clifford's transition memorandum was delivered to Kennedy that day .
 Clifford was the president-elect's liaison with the outgoing Eisenhower administration during the transition . Clifford was asked to serve as his liaison to the incoming president .
 Neustadt and Clifford said Kennedy should organize the White House to serve his needs as president . Clifford: Kennedy should have no chief of staff to control who had access to the president and thus whose advice he received .
 Pierre Salinger as his press secretary, Kenneth O’Donnell as his special assistant and appointments secretary, and Theodore Sorensen as his principal adviser on domestic policy and programs, with the title of special counsel to the president . Theodore Soresen is the president's principal adviser
 Salinger was a former journalist who had served as Kennedy’s press secretary during the campaign . Salinger worked for Kennedy as a journalist .
 O’Donnell had served as the organizer and scheduler of Kennedy’s senatorial and presidential campaigns . She was part of the protective Massachusetts “Irish mafia” that had emerged around Kennedy during his career .
 Sorensen was from Nebraska, the son of a Unitarian minister, and very different in style from Kennedy’s Massachusetts associates . Kennedy's associates were very different from his associates .
 JFK joined JFK’s Senate staff in 1953 and had MAING THE TRANSITION 17 become his chief speechwriter and domestic policy adviser . He had become his alter ego on policy matters .
 O'Donnell "was constantly at JEK's side," says Salinger . Salinger reports that during the 1960 campaign, O’Donnell “was constantly” at the party’s side .
 O’Donnell as appointments secretary controlled most access to the President . He also acted as Kennedy’s chief “enforcer” within the executive branch, making sure that . senior agency officials acted in accordance with White House priorities .
 O’Donnell had relatively limited involvement in space-related issues . However, it appears that he had little involvement in NASA’s facility location and contract award decisions . O'Donnell had a relatively limited role in space issues .
 Sorensen also notes that he and Kennedy were “close in a peculiarly impersonal way” There was little social contact between him and Kennedy either as senator or president .
 There was no love lost between O’Donnell and his staff and Sorenson and his deputies during the time they served President Kennedy . O'Donnell: "No love lost"
 O’Donnell’s hostility toward Sorensen and his staff was well known to most in the White House . Sorennsen professes to have been unaware of the antagonism until years later . O
 Sorensen, in fact, appears to have been something of a latent space enthusiast .
 Sorensen later suggested that this “was just freewheeling speculation as to whether I would have a post and what would be the most suitable post for me”
 Kennedy first focused on selecting the ten members of his Cabinet . His first nominee was announced on December 1 and the final one was announced December 17 .
 On that latter date, sixty additional key policy posts and several hundred more other key positions remained to be filled . The White House has not yet been able to fill those posts .
 One of the December groups, discussed in more detail below, was on outer space; it worked under Sorensen's guidance .
 Twenty-four of the twenty-nine teams, including the outer space group, turned in their reports before the inauguration .
 Dealing with these issues was to occupy president-elect Kennedy’s attention only briefly during the postelection transition period .
 The White House proposed a proposal to abolish the National Aeronautics and Space Council . NASA’s plans for a human space flight program to follow the initial United States effort to send an astronaut into orbit, Project Mercury .
 The most fundamental policy question to be addressed in the months following the 1957 launches of Sputniks 1 and 2 was whether a new organization for space was needed, or whether all U.S. space activities should be managed by the Department of Defense .
 In the weeks following the Sputnik launches, both the Army and the Air Force put forward ambitious space plans, and campaigned vigorously for primacy in the United States space effort .
 The Army claim was based in large part on the fact that Wernher von Braun and his rocket team worked at the Army Ballistic Missile Agency . In addition, the Army’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had managed the development of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 .
 AMBA in its struggle to gain an important space role developed ambitious plans in 1957 and 1958 . Plans began with suborbital launch of a human and extending to establishing outposts on the Moon .
 The Army campaign was not successful, and by mid-1960, both the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and von Braun’s rocket team had been transferred to the new civilian space agency NASA .
 Its chief of staff, General Thomas White, argued that “there is no division, per se, between air and space.” The U.S. Air Force says there is “no division’s per se” between space and air .
 The implication was that the service was the natural choice for the space role . The implication is that it is the service's natural choice to take over the role .
 DARPA, rather than one of the armed services, was to manage all United States space efforts, civilian and military, but it was not successful in establishing itself as the lead U.S. space agency . DARPA was succeeded by NASA, but the agency failed to establish itself as
 He was an engineer by training and had had a wide-ranging career, including a stint as a member of the Atomic Energy Commission . He had also had a stint at the Atomic Power Commission .
 He knew little about space science or technology, and had not followed the post-Sputnik debates leading to the creation of NASA . In his own words, “I didn’t have any idea what astronomy or geodesy would mean in this strange world”
 Glennan agreed to take the position, but only on the condition that Hugh Dryden, the executive director of NACA, would be nominated as deputy administrator . Dryden agreed to the position only on condition that Dryden be nominated for the deputy administrator, Glennan said .
 Many in Washington had expected Dryden to get the top NASA job . Dryden had been the top official handling day-to-day affairs at NACA since 1949 .
 Dryden served as NASA’s deputy administrator until his death in 1965 . Dryden was deeply disappointed, but he overcame that disappointment to serve as the deputy administrator of NASA .
 Dryden played a key role in the deliberations leading to the decision to go to the Moon . Dryden stayed on in his position during the Kennedy administration .
 NASA inherited three programs from the Department of Defense that would later play important roles in the space efforts of the Kennedy administration . NASA inherited the programs that would play key roles in space efforts .
 In August 1958, DARPA transferred its human space flight project to NASA . The effort was soon named Project Mercury .
 Eisenhower decided that the first U.S. people to fly in space, to be known as “astronauts, should be drawn from the ranks of military test pilots .
 DOD program inherited by NASA inherited a much more powerful launch vehicle than any rocket available to NASA in its early years . NASA inherited the program from the DOD . The launch vehicle was a more powerful version of a rocket than any other launch vehicle .
 The lift-off thrust of the Saturn C-1 vehicle was to be 1. million pounds, four times more powerful than that of the Atlas ICBM that NASA was planning to use for orbital flights in Project Mercury . The vehicle was conceived and managed by von Braun team .
 The von Braun team also proposed developing a second version of the Saturn launch . Known as the Saturn C-2, it would be known as the 'transition 21'
 The F-1 rocket motor was designed to provide 1. million pounds of thrust, equivalent to the eight engines that were to power the first stage of the Saturn C-1 . It was the third inherited DOD project .
 By the end of 1959, just over a year after it began operation, NASA had developed a ten-year plan . NASA had identified various mission milestones and estimated the costs of achieving them . NASA's mission milestones were identified in 1959 .
 Air Force leaders and supporters were encouraged by the tone of candidate Kennedy’s public statements on space, especially his strident October 1960 response to Missiles and Rockets . Air Force members were encouraged .
 The service by 1960 had gained the lead role for space within the Department of Defense from DARPA . Then it turned its ambitions to recapturing from NASA the primary role overall in U.S. space activities .
 Gardner had been one of Kennedy’s advisers on missile and space issues during the presidential campaign . Gardner was Kennedy adviser on missile, space issues .
 In December 1960 Gardner also became a member of the group President-elect Kennedy chartered to advise him on space matters . This was interpreted as another suggestion that Kennedy favored a larger role for the military in space .
 The United States organizational approach to space during 1958 had been how best to coordinate the activities of NASA, the Department of Defense and the military services, the Atomic Energy Commission, and other government agencies that might become involved .
 The Senate hoped to create a single integrated national space program, with civilian and military elements, rather than separate programs carried out by different agencies . The Senate wanted to create some kind of formal policymaking and coordinating body .
 The White House did not want to interpose such a body between the operating space agencies and the president . The Senate proposal was resistant to the Senate proposal .
 Eisenhower and LBJ agreed to create a policy-level body to be chaired by the president . The body was created after a one-on-one meeting at the White House between Eisenhower and Johnson .
 Johnson convinced President Eisenhower to chair the board, according to some accounts . Some accounts say he convinced President Johnson to do so .
 Other members would include the secretaries of state and defense, the NASA administrator, the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, and three individuals from outside the government .
 Eisenhower had accepted the creation of such a Space Council . He made it clear to his associates at the White House that he had no intention of convening this body regularly, nor of acting as its presiding officer .
 He refused to use his discretionary power to appoint an executive secretary or create a separate staff for the Space Council . He asked science adviser James Killian to preside at its infrequent meetings .
 The Space Council indeed met infrequently and had little influence on space issues in the months following its creation . The council was created in 1973 and it was created by President Richard Nixon .
 He recommended that the president propose amendments to the 1958 Space Act to abolish the Council . He also recommended that amendments be proposed to amend the 1958 space Act .
 Glennan met with Eisenhower on January 8, 1960, and found that the president “seemed to have forgotten our earlier discussion,” even though in the interim the proposed changes in the Act had been drafted and were ready to be sent to the Congress .
 Lyndon Johnson opposed the changes, despite what he had told Eisenhower in January . The Senate refused to act, primarily because of Johnson's opposition to the changes .
 Glennan met again with Johnson on June 23, but was unsuccessful in convincing him to bring the proposed changes before the Senate for approval . Glennan says he hopes Johnson will bring the changes to the Senate on June 26 .
 Glennan reports Johnson as saying “I don’t see any reason for giving you a new law at the present time.”
 A new President will take office on January 20, 1961—less than five months from now . A new president will be inaugurated in January 1961 .
 The next President could well have different views as to the organization and function of the military and civilian space programs .
 It is unlikely that at this point Johnson envisioned a scenario in which John Kennedy, if elected president, would turn over the Space Council chairmanship to his vice president .
 Linking Soviet space achievements to the Russian ballistic missile program, as John Kennedy had done during the presidential campaign, was a reason . Even in the 1957-1960 period it was well known in United States intelligence and technical circles that the Soviet Union had used its initial R-7 Intercontinental
 Soviet engineers had been developing this missile since the early 1950s, giving them a several-year head start on the United States . The missile was developed by Soviet engineers .
 The launch of Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, was not only a propaganda loss for the United States . It was also a visible demonstration that the Soviet Union possessed the capability to launch a nuclear warhead across intercontinental distances .
 The launches of Sputnik 1 and 2 demonstrated that the Soviet Union possessed the capability to lift much heavier payloads into space than did the United States . Among their other impacts, the launches showed that the U.S. could lift much more payloads than the Soviets .
 The second stage of the R-7 booster also went into orbit on each launch, so in reality the Soviet Union had placed some 12,000-13,000 pounds into space . It was the rocket’s upper stage, not the satellite itself, which was visible .
 Explorer 1 was launched by the Army team led by Wernher von Braun on January 31, 1958 . Explorer 1 weighed only 30. pounds, with half that weight being the satellite’s last-stage booster rocket . By contrast, Explorer 1, the first U.S.
 The three megaton nuclear warhead which was the payload for the R-7 ICBM weighed approximately 11,000 pounds, thus requiring the development of a powerful booster to send it on its intercontinental trajectory . The warhead was the largest nuclear weapon in the U.S. arsenal
 By contrast, the United States was able to develop a thermonuclear warhead weighing only around 1,600 pounds . This meant that Atlas and Titan ICBMs did not have to be nearly as powerful as the Soviet R-7 in order to accomplish their military mission .
 This was acceptable in terms of strategic rocket relationships, but meant that the U.S. was at a severe disadvantage in sending heavy payloads into space . The United States was not able to afford to launch a heavy payload into space in the 1970s .
 The United States might be able to launch scientifically sophisticated satellites, but it would not match the Soviet Union in publicly visible space achievements using a converted ICBM as a launch vehicle .
 There were two approaches taken during the Eisenhower administration to closing the U.S.-USSR gap in rocket-lifting power .
 One was to develop the Saturn C-1 launcher, with its first stage having 1. million pounds of lift-off thrust . The first stage of the rocket launcher was to have 1.million pounds of thrust .
 The other was to develop the large F-1 rocket engine, which at some future time could be used to power a much larger launch vehicle . The F1 engine was developed in the 1960s to power the rocket .
 The Saturn project received the highest national priority, DX, authorizing the use of overtime work and giving it precedence for scarce materials and other program requirements . Four days later, the Saturn project was awarded the top national priority for the project, DX .
 NASA had hoped to get a FY1962 budget of $1.2 billion approved . Such a budget would have enabled NASA to accelerate its booster and rocket engine development efforts .
 After tough negotiations with BOB, NASA was held to a $1.2 billion total . NASA was also held to $1 billion total by BOB .
 It would be up to the new president to decide whether this was an acceptable situation . The new president would have to decide if it was acceptable, he says .
 Project Mercury was intended to study the human ability to survive being launched into space and returning to Earth and to perform simple tasks in the weightless environment while in orbit . Project Mercury is the first U.S. human space flight effort .
 Planning for a human space flight program to follow Mercury began within NASA in 1959 . Planning for the program began in 1959, and NASA began in 1961 .
 NASA formed a Research Steering Committee on Manned Space Flight in April 1959 . NASA formed the committee in 1959 . The committee was formed to research space travel .
 The committee concluded its meeting without agreeing whether such a mission, or a less ambitious mission to fly around the Moon without landing, was the better choice of a longrange objective .
 NASA planners chose the lunar landing objective almost two years before John F Kennedy made his decision to send Americans to the Moon . NASA planners were operating without top-level political guidance .
 The post-Mercury program was named Project Apollo in July 1960 . It was the suggestion of the NASA director of space flight programs Abe Silverstein .
 Silverstein picked the name out of a Greek mythology book because he thought that the image of the god Apollo riding his chariot across the Sun gave the best representation of the grand scale of the proposed project .
 President Eisenhower and many of his advisers were skeptical of the long-term value of human space flight . Eisenhower was not inclined to approve an ambitious undertaking as ambitious as sending United States astronauts to the Moon .
 As NASA and the BOB developed a space budget for fiscal year 1962, no funds were included for the Apollo spacecraft . The Apollo spacecraft was the first mission to space .
 The panel noted that a circumlunar mission could only be attempted only when the Saturn C-2 with a hydrogen-fueled upper stage became available . With respect to future missions, the panel said they depended on the availability of the launch vehicle .
 The panel estimated that this would be in 1968 or 1969, with an initial attempt at a circumlunar mission around 1970 . The panel also estimated that the mission would be around 1970, with the first attempt being made in 1968 .
 This was several years later than what NASA had indicated was possible . NASA had said it would be possible to send a spacecraft into space .
 Panel: None of the boosters now planned for development are capable of landing on the moon with sufficient auxiliary equipment to return the crew safely to Earth . Panel: “None of the booster boosters now . planned for . development are . capable of . landing on . the moon . with sufficient
 The PSAC report suggested that “certainly among the major reasons for attempting to attempt the manned exploration of space are emotional compulsions and national aspirations”
 The panel estimated the costs of the Mercury, Apollo circumlunar, and lunar landing programs . The panel also estimated the cost of the Apollo, Mercury and Apollo programs .
 1975 was the target date for the first lunar landing . It included in the costs of each program the expenses connected with robotic activities undertaken in its support, and used 1975 as the target .
 Project Mercury—$350 million Apollo circumlunar—$8 billion Manned lunar landing—an additional $26 to $38 billion . Project Mercury was $350 million Project Mercury, $8 billion .
 The PSAC panel developed the cost estimate for the lunar landing mission on its own . Its estimate was dramatically higher than any that NASA was developing at the time .
 The panel’s report was presented to President Eisenhower at a National Security Council meeting on December 20, 1960 . President Eisenhower presented the report to him at a meeting in Washington .
 There are various accounts of his reaction, none of them suggesting a positive response . There are many accounts of him reacting to his reaction to the incident .
 Eisenhower asked for an explanation of the reasons for undertaking such an ambitious and expensive program . One response compared the lunar journey to the voyages of Columbus to America, which were financed by Spain’s Queen Isabella .
 Eisenhower reacted by asserting that he was “not about to hock his jewels” to send men to the Moon . Eisenhower responded by saying he was not “on the Moon” and that he wasn’t going to “hock’s jewels�
 The draft of Eisenhower’s last budget message said that there was no scientific or defense need for a man-in-space program beyond Mercury . The draft says there is no scientific need for such a program .
 Glennan went to see science adviser Kistiakowsky on January 3, 1961, to argue that such a statement was ‘unwise” and succeeded in getting the statement modified . Glennan successfully got the statement changed .
 NASA’s internal planning for Project Apollo and a lunar landing project to follow it had continued . Despite the negative signals from the outgoing administration, NASA had continued to plan for the project .
 On October 17, 1960, George Low had told his boss, Abe Silverstein, “it has become increasingly apparent that a preliminary program for manned lunar landings should be formulated”
 The Space Task Group at NASA’s Langley Research Center in Virginia, which was in charge of Project Mercury, and the von Braun team in Huntsville also worked on planning a lunar landing mission .
 The groups presented a status report on their efforts at a January 5 meeting of NASA’s Space Exploration Council .
 There was a “clear consensus” that such planning should continue under Low’s direction . There was no White House support for such an ambitious undertaking, Glennan said .
 President-elect Kennedy dealt with only one of these pressing space policy issues . Lyndon B Johnson assumed the chairmanship of the National Aeronautics and Space Council . Kennedy asked vice president-elect Johnson to assume chairmanship .
 This request was widely viewed at the time as an indication of the secondary priority that Kennedy was assigning to space . Kennedy's request was seen as a signal that he was assigning secondary priority .
 Kennedy was briefed on January 10 on the report of his task force on outer space . The report was chaired by MIT engineer Jerome Wiesner, who had served as a technical and arms control adviser during the presidential campaign and was the top candidate .
 Wiesner was critical of NASA’s organization and management . The report also had harsh words for the national security space program . NASA was criticized for emphasis being placed on Project Mercury human space flight effort .
 Weisner task force had prepared its report without any briefings or other input from NASA . There was no other direct contact between the incoming administration and NASA’s managers during the transition period .
 The position of NASA administrator was one of the few senior positions for which no one had been nominated as Kennedy became president . The position had no one been nominated for the position .
 During the transition, Ted Sorensen and David Bell met several times with BOB deputy director Elmer Staats . Kennedy had chosen Bell to be his budget director, who was Kennedy's budget director .
 They agreed that the Space Council was not needed and that legislation abolishing it should be reintroduced in the new Congress .
 Kennedy announced on December 20 that the vice president would replace the president as chair of the National Aeronautics and Space Council . Kennedy announced that he would be replaced by Vice President Biden .
 The precise sequence of events surrounding this announcement remains unclear . It is unclear whether the timing of the announcement was behind the announcement .
 Belieu told Johnson that “at NASA there has been a continuing lack of leadership and competence” Belieu also said “the Air Force can be expected—and apparently already has started, to make a basic power play’
 Beginning soon after the launch of Sputnik 1, he had played a prominent role in shaping the Congressional response to the Soviet space achievements . He had been influential in shaping congressional response to Soviet space achievement .
 An October 17, 1957, memorandum from one of his top advisers, George Reedy, pointed out to Johnson that the Soviet achievement “could be one of the great dividing lines in American and world history, the whole history of humanity” suggested that it offered the Democrats an opportunity
 Johnson chaired hearings on ‘satellite and missile programs’ held by his Preparedness Subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee between November 1957 and January 1958 . Johnson chaired the twenty days of hearings on satellites and missiles .
 Johnson named himself chairman of the new Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences . He maintained his position as majority leader .
 He told Johnson that the NASA-Air Force conflict was “why I have been so firmly convinced that the Space Council needs to be resurrected and reestablished,” since “only someone with your force ... can separate the men from the boys”
 Neustadt in a cover letter said that his memorandum was a response to Kennedy for a suggestion, which must have come before December 20, “on something you could give him to work on and worry about” He called the memorandum a “quickie,”
 There is even suggestive evidence that the initiative may have come from Lyndon Johnson himself . There is, as the preceding paragraphs show, even suggestive .
 Johnson returned to Palm Beach to meet with Kennedy on December 26 . He was accompanied by Oklahoma senator Robert Kerr, who was LBJ’s choice as his successor as chairman of the Senate space committee .
 To make Robert Kerr the new chairman meant bypassing several senators on the committee more senior than Kerr . Kerr is the chairman of the Senate's Republican-led committee .
 Of them, only Senator Clinton Anderson of New Mexico was potentially interested in the chairmanship .
 Anderson was persuaded not to stand in Kerr’s way and instead to accept the chairmanship of another committee during a phone call from Kerr as he met with Johnson and Kennedy .
 In Kerr, Johnson knew he had a close and powerful ally who would help him push for a larger space program . Kerr was sympathetic to the political uses of that larger program .
 It was not until April 1961 that the Space Council was activated . Lyndon Johnson as its chairman was given the task of proposing a way for the U.S. to enter and win the space race .
 The task force was led by Jerome Wiesner, a professor of engineering at MIT who had been involved in weapons research during World War IJ . He had had a decade of experience dealing with national security policy .
 Wiesner had been a member of PSAC since its inception in 1957, but had not served on any of the PSAC subcommittees dealing with space issues . He had served on PSAC's space subcommittee .
 He had, 32 John F KENNEDY and the RACE TO THE MOON . However, most likely heard many of the briefings on space issues given to the committee .
 During the presidential campaign, Kennedy had sought his advice primarily on a possible nuclear test ban and other arms control issues . Kennedy sought the president's advice on nuclear test bans and other issues .
 By the time the task force began its work, Wiesner had emerged as Kennedy’s most likely choice to be presidential science adviser .
 The decision to make Lyndon Johnson chair of the Space Council had been taken prior to December 17 . A meeting on that day between Jerome Wiesner, Kenneth Belieu, and Max Leher, who was the Senate space committee’s assistant staff director .
 Wiesner expressed support for reestablishing the Space Council . Belieu and Leher were invited to join his task force at a meeting of the space council .
 Most of the members of Wiesner’s group were deeply familiar with space issues because of their past involvements . The group was deeply familiar to space issues .
 The report was admittedly a “hasty review” aimed at providing a ‘survey of the program’ and identifying “personnel, technical, MAING THE TRANSITION 33 or administrative problems” requiring prompt attention .
 The report was critical of the management of both NASA and DOD space efforts . The report is critical of NASA's management of the space program . NASA and the DOD have been criticized by the report .
 With regard to NASA, it called for “vigorous, imaginative, and technically competent top management” implying that NASA’s current top officials had not demonstrated these qualities, the report says .
 The use of the word managing was particularly noted . Some took this as a suggestion that the Space Council would have executive, not just coordinating, responsibilities in space .
 Report: Too few of the country’s outstanding scientists and engineers are working in the space field . Even so, the report noted that “too few” were working in space field. The report also noted that too few of China's outstanding scientists are working .
 The Wiesner task force called Project Mercury “marginal” and pointed out that it was “very unlikely” that the U.S. would be first to send an astronaut to orbit . The task force also said Project Mercury was "marginal"
 It recommended that “we should stop advertising Mercury as our major objective in space.” The space agency said it would stop advertising “Mercury’s” role in space .
 Of particular concern was the potential death of an astronaut in a Mercury mission, particularly if he were to be stranded in orbit .
 Panel recommended “a vigorous program to exploit the potentialities of practical space systems” for communications, navigation, and meteorological observation . Panel also recommended a vigorous program for communications and navigation .
 There was even some question after inauguration whether Wiesner agreed with everything in the report of the task force he had chaired . There was some doubt after inauguration that he agreed with report .
 Kennedy named Jerome Wiesner as his new science and technology adviser . The day after he received the report of the panel, Kennedy named him a new science adviser . Kennedy has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 Wiesner’s selection meant that Kennedy would hear both sides of the case for a high profile civilian space program focused on human space flight . Kennedy would have heard both of the two perspectives from Lyndon Johnson and the other from Wieckner .
 NASA administrator Keith Glennan grew increasingly distressed by the lack of any contact from the incoming Kennedy administration . In his final weeks in office, Glennan became increasingly distressed .
 Glennan told Wiesner he was not willing to stay on in the job, to which Glennan replied in the negative . Glennan tried to ask Wieren about the schedule for naming the new NASA administrator, but he said no .
 On January 9, the impatient Glennan called vice president-elect Lyndon Johnson . Glennan's call was the first time he'd been called by Johnson .
 Glennan called the White House to alert the staff there that no senior person at NASA had been asked to stay on . Hugh Dryden had expressed his willingness to serve as acting administrator during the change in administrations, Glennan says .
 Dryden was told by Clark Clifford, who was handling personnel appointments for president-elect Kennedy, that the new administration did indeed want Dryden to stay on . An hour later, he was told that Clark Clifford had indicated to the White House that Dryden would stay .
 Glennan left NASA for the final time, intending to begin the drive back to his home in Cleveland that evening . After sherry with a few of his staff, Glennan went home . Glennan died at the age of 65 .
 Washington was paralyzed by a blizzard, and it was not until 6:30m. on January 20, the day of the Kennedy’s inauguration, that he was able to leave .
 January 20, 1961, John F Kennedy was sworn in as the thirty-fifth President of the United States . This page intentionally left blank .
 Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear to negotiate . Let's never fear negotiation, but never fear negotiating . Let’s never fear negotiations, but negotiate .
 Kennedy was to use with respect to space in all his days in office . He preferred to cooperate but be willing to compete if that was the better path to advancing U.S. interests . It was an approach that Kennedy used to use .
 The inaugural address reflects Kennedy's world view as he entered office . Kennedy's inaugural address reflected his world view when he took office in 1963 .
 He suggested that “nothing would help the new administration more than such a first impression of energy, direction, action, avd accomplishment, he said .
 The first 100 days of the Kennedy administration were marked by slow movement of Kennedy’s domestic program through the Congress and immediate challenges from abroad . Instead, the first one hundred days were marked with slow movement .
 President Kennedy found that moving his domestic policy proposals through Congress was much slower going than he had hoped for . After an initial victory in the House of Representatives, adding two more liberal members to the House Rules Committee made it more likely that the committee would not block Kennedy’s legislative proposals
 In the foreign policy and national security fields, even more intractable issues confronted the new president . The new president faces an array of challenges, such as foreign policy .
 Kennedy's tough language in his inaugural address was an initial reaction to the Soviet challenge . Kennedy’s tough language was a reaction to Soviet challenge, he says . Kennedy's speech was a response to the threat of the Soviet Union .
 On February 23, Kennedy sent off a letter to Khrushchev suggesting an early meeting between the two . It was Kennedy’s hope that he could convince the Soviet leader that the United States could not be bullied .
 The White House interpreted this conflict as one of the “wars of national liberation” that Nikita Khrushchev had said in his January speech would be an important means for spreading Communist values around the world . Nikita said in a January speech that the conflict would be important
 On March 20 and again March 21, Kennedy met with his National Security Council to discuss whether immediate intervention was necessary or whether a diplomatic solution was still possible . Kennedy: "I'm not sure if immediate intervention is necessary or if it's still possible"
 Joint chiefs of staff urged decisive actions involving 60,000 GETTING STARTED troops, air support, and possibly the use of tactical nuclear weapons in order to ensure quick success .
 After these meetings, Kennedy decided not to intervene as yet, but to demonstrate his willingness to do so if the U.S. and the Soviet Union could not find grounds for compromise on the future of Laos .
 Kennedy scheduled a press conference for March 23 in order to issue a public warning to the Soviets that the U.S. would intervene unless an immediate ceasefire could be arranged . Kennedy scheduled the press conference to issue the warning to Soviets .
 Space remained a relatively low priority item on Kennedy's agenda . Kennedy himself was only occasionally directly involved in space .
 As the new administration took office, no one had been selected as the nominee for the job of NASA administrator . NASA administrator was the most senior unfilled position as the Kennedy presidency began .
 There are several versions of how many people were considered for the position . There is one version of the number of people considered to be considered .
 John Kennedy had given Lyndon Johnson the responsibility of identifying the person to be the next NASA administrator . In December, John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson discussed space issues .
 Johnson asked the staff director of the Senate space committee, Kenneth Belieu, to coordinate the search for the nominee . Johnson asks Belieu to coordinate search for a nominee .
 Belieu told Johnson in December that “the Administrator of NASA doesn’t have to be a technician.” Belieu had told Johnson on December 22 that ‘the Administrator . of NASA  doesn” have “a technician. Don’ve been a
 Belieu’s initial thoughts about people qualified for NASA position included Karl Bendetsen, an industrialist who had served in the Truman administration . General Maxwell Taylor, retired Army Chief of Staff; and George Feldman, who had been the staff director of the House committee .
 Air Force chief of staff Thomas White "might be interested," he says . He says he's gotten suggestions that Jet Propulsion Laboratory director William Pickering and Marshall Space Flight Center director Wernher von Braun might be good candidates .
 On January 23, Belieu gave a list of possible picks to now—Vice President Johnson . Johnson is the current vice president of France .
 Laurence Hyland of Hughes Aircraft; Charles Thornton of Litton Industries; James Fisk of Bell Laboratories; James Doolittle of Bell Labs . William Foster of Olin Mathieson Chemicals . World War II hero and World War I hero James Doolsittle of World War
 The head of General Dynamics, Frank Pace, was also involved in the search process . General Dynamics head of the company also involved .
 Kennedy reportedly told Johnson and new science adviser Wiesner that he would find someone himself if they did not act soon . Kennedy was tired of the delay in identifying a candidate for the NASA job .
 One underlying reason for the difficulty in finding a person to take over NASA was the pervasive uncertainty about the future of the agency and of the U.S. civilian space program .
 John Kennedy had given little indication during the campaign of how he would approach space policy as president . John Kennedy gave little indication of what he would do in space policy .
 One view favored a person with administrative experience in a science and technology setting; this had been the background of Keith Glennan . Glennan had a background in science, technology and technology .
 A third argued that political savvy in addition to administrative skill was a more necessary background than either a . scientific or engineering background .
 Few senior people who had experienced the ‘Johnson treatment’ were eager to undergo it on a continuing basis . Few senior staff members who had . experienced the 'Johnson treatment' were eager .
 Wiesner argued that his suggestion was the one that was decisive . Other accounts suggest that it was Lyndon Johnson who first brought Webb’s name to White House attention .
 James E Webb, a businessman and lawyer with prior experience in high-level government posts, was named the new candidate for the job . Webb is a lawyer and businessman who has previously worked for the UK government .
 Webb had been head of the Bureau of the Budget during the Truman administration . Webb was the number two person under Dean Acheson at the Department of State .
 Webb also had experience in managing large organizations . Webb had worked in Oklahoma heading one of Robert Kerr’s companies from 1953 to 1958 .
 After leaving Kerr’s employ, Webb had been active on issues of science and engineering education . Webb was well known to many of the leaders of the scientific community, including Wiesner .
 Kennedy asked Wiesner to check if Johnson agreed that Webb would be a good choice, he says . Kennedy asked him to check whether Johnson agreed with Webb's selection .
 Johnson did agree, and because he had had such little success with the people he had contacted, asked Wiesner to call Webb . Webb was able to reach Johnson, and Johnson agreed to meet Webb at his request .
 Webb was at a luncheon in Oklahoma City when Wiesner asked him to be in Washington the following Monday to meet with the vice president to discuss the NASA position . Webb was in Oklahoma at the time of the meeting .
 Webb left Oklahoma City on Friday and spent the weekend in Washington discussing the prospects for space under Kennedy . Webb left the state on Friday to discuss the prospects of space under the Kennedy White House . Webb also met with several former associates in the BOB and the Kennedy administration .
 Webb’s longtime friend Lloyd Berkner was the current chair of the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences . Berkner had himself been approached for the NASA job and had said that he was not interested .
 Webb chatted with acting NASA administrator Hugh Dryden, who was there for the meeting, and Frank Pace, who had been Webb’s successor as director of the BOB .
 Webb asked Pace to convey that view to Johnson . Pace and Dryden agreed with Webb that he was not the right man for the job . Webb has not been confirmed as Johnson's replacement .
 Johnson threw Pace out of his office . Pace tried to do so, but Johnson was unwilling to listen and threw him out of office .
 Webb then met with Johnson, who, Webb says, was “very anxious” for Webb to accept the NASA job . Webb says Johnson was ‘anxious” to see Webb accept the job, and Webb says .
 Webb made it clear that he would only accept the position on the basis of a direct offer from the president . Webb said he would not accept the job on the president's direct offer . Webb would only take up the position if he was offered directly by the White House .
 Webb had met Kennedy only once or twice on social occasions . Webb met Kennedy for the first time . Webb had previously met Kennedy at social gatherings .
 After lunch with Dryden, Webb met with Kennedy one-on-one in the Oval Office . Webb was invited to the White House to meet with Kennedy .
 Kennedy told Webb that he did not want a technical person for the NASA job, saying that “there are great issues of national and international policy” related to NASA . Webb, with his previous government experience, was well qualified to address such issues .
 Webb felt he could not refuse the president’s direct invitation, and so accepted the nomination . Webb said he felt he couldn't refuse his direct invitation to the president's direct invitation . Webb was nominated for President Obama's second term .
 He asked Kennedy to keep Hugh Dryden as deputy administrator . He also asked the president whether he was being hired to implement a predetermined policy .
 Kennedy escorted Webb from the Oval Office to the office of press secretary Pierre Salinger . Salinger then took Webb to the press room to announce his nomination for president .
 The committee voted unanimously to support the nomination . The Senate followed suit on February 9 . The committee of the Senate voted unanimously .
 It was clear from the start of his tenure that James Webb had a different vision for the future of NASA than his predecessor . Webb's vision for NASA's future was different from that of his predecessor, James Webb . Webb was NASA's first director of space exploration .
 He was happy to learn that Seamans was a Republican, since that would give a bipartisan appearance to the top NASA management team .
 Webb told Dryden and Seamans that he wanted NASA to be managed jointly by the three of them as a “triad” Webb wants to hammer out the major decisions together . Webb said he wants NASA to have a "triad" of the three .
 Webb would handle NASA’s external political and public relations . Dryden would be the primary link to the U.S. and international science communities . Seamans would act as the general manager of NASA . Webb would also handle the external political, public relations, and Seam
 Wiesner remembers that Kennedy “understood that he had somebody with real ability in Webb” and adds that he never heard Kennedy say anything “snide or negative” about him .
 A number of other men had turned down the job because of NASA’s uncertain future . If they had “known that four months later NASA would become a custodian of the nation's honor, most of them would have snapped up the job.”
 Webb faced an almost immediate challenge to his freedom to manage NASA as he saw appropriate, especially in the context of the prevalent NASA-Air Force tensions . Webb soon faced a challenge . Webb was soon challenged by the Air Force, which he saw as appropriate . Webb is now the director of
 The first attempt in July 1960 to launch a Mercury capsule atop an Atlas booster had ended in an explosion . The first launch of the first Mercury capsule in 1960 ended in a failed explosion .
 The cause of this failure had been localized to the area where the spacecraft and the capsule were joined . The spacecraft and capsule failed to make contact contact .
 Since the Air Force retained responsibility for booster performance and launching while NASA was responsible for the spacecraft and the overall mission, this meant that both organizations were intimately involved in attempting to correct whatever had caused the failure .
 Webb will be the first man behind the wheel of space shuttle program . The Air Force remains extremely concerned about the possibility of another major accident . Webb is the first person in the Air Force to take part in the program .
 There had been a highly visible Atlas failure on December 15, 1960 as NASA attempted to send a robotic spacecraft to the Moon, increasing the level of concern on the Air Force .
 Webb was briefed on the situation on February 18 by NASA’s Project Mercury managers, who wanted his approval for a launch of the improved Mercury—Atlas combination on February 21 . Webb was also briefed on a launch date for the new Mercury—atlas combination . Webb says he
 Webb approved the launch, but soon after got a call from the Air Force asking him to reverse that decision . Webb said the launch would be the first of its kind . Webb: "It's a good thing to say yes, but it's not a good sign that it's a
 From the White House, Wiesner also expressed his opposition to going ahead . The White House also expressed its opposition to the move .
 Webb refused to reverse his decision, although the Air Force “protested vehemently” and made its concerns known to the White House, Webb says . Webb checked again with knowledgeable people both within and outside NASA, he says .
 Webb’s conduct with respect to the Mercury—Atlas test flight had demonstrated to the Air Force that he was not easily intimidated . Webb's conduct in the Mercury-Atlas flight demonstrated that he wasn’t easily intimidated, he says . Webb”s conduct demonstrated
 Webb embarked on a conscious campaign to establish close working relationships with the new civilian leadership of the Department of Defense . Webb and other top NASA officials embarked on this campaign . Webb: "We are committed to working closely with the Defense Department"
 Webb knew McNamara's number two person, Roswell Gilpatric, from their time together in the Truman administration . Webb did not know well Kennedy’s hard charging and intellectually brilliant secretary of defense, Robert McNamara .
 Webb and Dryden met with McNamara, Gilpatric, and director of defense research and engineering Herbert York . Webb, Dryden: "We're going to do a lot of things we need to do"
 Webb and Gilpatric will meet “from time to time for lunch and would bring others as needed” as a way to coordinate NASA and DOD space activities at the top level . The group agreed to meet for lunch at the end of the day .
 McNamara requested a review examining whether the Wiesner Task Force criticism of a “fractionated military space program” was valid . Shortly after taking office, McNamara had requested that a review .
 The report unintentionally reinforced Robert McNamara’s concern about the need to limit Air Force ambitions . The report of the committee headed by Trevor Gardner was submitted March 20 .
 The United States, the report claimed, could not overtake the Soviet Union in space for at least another three to five years . There were “no accelerated and imaginative programs” to close that gap . The report's conclusions were alarmist .
 The report was critical of the separation between the civilian and military space programs . The report argues that there should be one integrated national space program .
 The report called for a “dramatically invigorated space program” and called upon the DOD to create a series of “building blocks” of a firm technological foundation for whatever the nation wanted to do in space .
 The report devoted significant attention to future human spaceflight efforts . The report recommended that the United States send people to the Moon and develop large space stations in the 1967-1970 period .
 The Gardner report had limited impact on both Air Force space activities and national space policy . Given the agreements already described and the events of the next two months, the report was limited .
 The publicity-seeking chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Overton Brooks, was aware of and concerned by the Air Force .
 Eisenhower had warned of the increasing power of the “military— industrial complex” The move in the early months of the administration would have been politically very difficult .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara was trying to get the management of defense activities under centralized control . McNamara wanted to bring the management into centralized control of defense operations .
 McNamara and Webb had reached an understanding of the respective roles of their agencies . The White House would have been unlikely to countermand the decision .
 NASA under Webb’s direction seemed to be shaping up in terms both of its organization and program success, and there were no compelling reasons to downgrade the agency . The agency's mission to the Hubble Space Observatory is scheduled to begin in February 2015 .
 One of presidential science adviser Wiesner’s major priorities was to control the spread of the arms race into new areas . He too was unlikely to have supported an expanded military space effort .
 With that response, the controversy over the NASA-Air Force relationship became a secondary policy issue . The controversy never completely disappeared, but it never fully disappeared .
 The NASA team was confident that Mercury was a sound program . They feared that without the positive assessment they believed would result from such an independent review, President Kennedy might decide that even the suborbital mission planned in the next few months was too risky .
 A first step was to inform the White House that there was a rehearsal flight for the suborbital mission . A chimpanzee named Ham as its passenger, scheduled for January 31, is scheduled for the mission . The mission will take place on January 31 .
 Robert Gilruth, head of the Space Task Group that was in charge of Project Mercury, suggested to George Low at NASA headquarters that NASA push for an early start on the review .
 Dryden met with Wiesner and Hornig on February 11 to discuss the composition of the panel . Dryden says the panel will be the first time the panel has been convened .
 Originally the first suborbital flight with an astronaut in the spacecraft, Mercury-Redstone 3 , had been scheduled for late March . Originally it was originally scheduled for a late March flight .
 Even after these problems, NASA managers are ready to commit an astronaut to the next flight . NASA managers at the Space Task Group and some at NASA headquarters say they're ready to fly .
 “Key members of von Braun’s team quickly decided that they wanted another booster test before a man could fly,” and von Braun did not overrule them . However, “key . members of the von Braun team decided that . they wanted more booster tests before
 The extra Redstone flight was launched on March 24 and went well; from NASA’s point of view, there now was no obstacle to launching the first U.S. astronaut .
 If this had happened, it is unlikely that the Soviet launch of Yuri Gagarin into orbit three weeks later would have had such a dramatic impact on U.S. space policy .
 von Braun’s judgment that Mercury was not yet ready to fly with an astronaut aboard would have been difficult if not impossible for NASA to get White House permission to go ahead with the mission . But of course this was not known in March, and with the review of the PSAC
 Ten-person Hornig panel spent four days in early March visiting the McDonnell Corporation factory in St. Louis, Missouri . The ten-person panel visited the facilities at the McDonnell Corp.
 The Mercury capsule was built in St. Louis where it was built; the launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida; and the Space Task Group at NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia .
 Science adviser Wiesner on March 7 thanked Hugh Dryden for the “thorough and candid presentation of all elements of the program” and suggested that “this complete cooperation is evidence of a continuation of the excellent relationship” between NASA and the White House . Dryden
 The reason for the delay was continuing reservations by a biomedical subgroup of the panel . The delay was due to continuing reservations from a biomedical group .
 The report reviewed the accomplishments and failures of the Mercury program . The report assessed the risks involved and the probability of success .
 The panel rated all aspects of the Mercury system as being more than 85 percent reliable . The booster and telemetry, which were rated 70 to 85 per cent reliable, were rated between 70 and 85 percent .
 Even these items were “not per se a cause for alarm” for astronaut safety, just for mission success, says NASA director . Even the items were not “per se a matter of alarm’s concern,” he says .
 The panel noted that ‘it was too early’ to estimate similar probabilities for an orbital flight . The panel said it is too early to estimate such probabilities for such a mission .
 Only serious reservations about the readiness of Mercury to launch an astronaut were expressed by the medical experts on the Hornig panel . The only serious reservations were expressed in the panel .
 Astronaut’s blood pressure would be monitored during flight and that high pulse rates such as those observed on Ham in the January flight, combined with the possibility of low blood pressure during the most stressful parts of the flight .
 NASA met with members of the medical panel on March 17 and then again on April 11 together with science adviser Wiesner, who shared the panel’s concerns, but were unable to allay their reservations . NASA says the panel's concerns were not resolved .
 Experts suggested additional tests prior to clearing MR-3 for launch, including ground and flight tests with chimpanzees . The experts suggested various additional tests before the launch .
 Hugh Dryden thought that such a step was “totally unrealistic” and Robert Gilruth facetiously suggested that if so many tests with chimpanzees were needed, the program ought to move to Africa . Hugh dryden said that such an Africa move was ‘unrealistic
 The three astronauts from which the MR-3 pilot would be chosen did undergo additional runs at a Navy centrifuge in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, that simulated the stresses of reentry .
 This feat made moot many of the concerns of the panel’s medical experts . It also made moot the concerns raised by the panel of medical experts.
 NASA had begun to investigate in a preliminary fashion the technological and budgetary requirements for a lunar landing program in October 1960 . Planning for a Lunar Landing Mission began in October 1961 .
 A small group led by NASA’s program chief for manned space flight George Low was chartered to continue further investigation into those requirements . After an interim report on this planning effort at a January 5, 1961, meeting of NASA's Space Exploration Program Council, a small group was chart
 An initial mission to the Moon would be possible in the 19681970 period with an average cost of $700 million per year for ten years, or a total of $7 billion . The mission would take place in 1968 and 1969 .
 The report noted that the plan it presented “does not represent a ‘crash’ program, but rather it represents a vigorous development of technology . The plan was presented ‘does not 52 John F KENNEDY AND THE RACE TO THE MOON represent a
 Low’s report and the supporting work done by NASA and its contractors on preliminary design of the three-person Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn C-2 launcher would be important to the confidence of the NASA leadership in the following weeks .
 This position was counterbalanced in March 1961 by support for the scientific value of humans in space from the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences . This position has since been counterbalanced .
 The National Academy is a body designated by congressional charter as scientific adviser to the federal government . The Academy is the body designated to be a scientific adviser .
 Election to the National Academy is one of the highest scientific honors available to a U.S. scientist . It is also an honorary body; election to the Academy is also a national honor .
 The board was composed of 16 scientists, many of them National Academy members . It was chaired by Lloyd Berkner, a geophysicist .
 Berkner was a supporter of a strong space program and a decades-long friend of James Webb . Berkner is a longtime supporter of the space program .
 Members of the board included Bruno Rossi, Joshua Lederberg, Harrison Brown, John Simpson, Harold Urey, James van Allen, and Donald Hornig, all well known members of the scientific community .
 Berkner's statement almost guaranteed that the statement would support the human role in space exploration, given Berkner’s well-known views .
 This ringing endorsement of the human role in exploring space came from a prestigious group of scientists . It was controversial in later years, and was controversial .
 In 1961, the statement had a “profound influence” on PSAC members and other scientists . It made it hard for them to criticize President Kennedy’s call two months later for a national effort to send Americans to the Moon .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson had a specific role with respect to space to be assigned to Vice President Johnson . The space program was launched in 1961 .
 President-elect Kennedy had indicated in December 1960 that Johnson would have an important space role in his administration . The character of that role and how it would relate to the existing structure for space governance, remained to be defined .
 President Kennedy virtually guaranteed that he would have to react to an early plea for an accelerated civilian space effort . Second, by selecting James Webb as NASA administrator and asking him to recommend what he thought was the appropriate NASA program, President Kennedy almost guaranteed that .
 Webb was unlikely to accept the relatively slow-paced space program that he had inherited from the Eisenhower administration . Webb was a policy activist, and he was not likely to accept a slower pace of the program .
 Webb insisted that the president hear his arguments for budget increases as soon as possible . Kennedy and his policy, technical, and budget advisers hoped to delay decisions with respect to the space program until a fall 1961 review . Webb insisted on the president to hear his argument for increased funding .
 It took several months to sort out just what Kennedy had in mind in this regard . The vice president has a new space role for the vice president .
 The Bureau of the Budget staff in early January drafted a white paper on options for implementing the presidentelect’s intent . The white paper was drafted by the bureau of the budget staff .
 Staff paper suggested that there was no immediate need for statutory changes . Instead, the president could simply assign responsibility for chairing the Space Council to the vice president .
 Lyndon Johnson pushed for expanded role with respect to space in Kennedy administration . Johnson sought a major role in space policy .
 His ambition was apparently to serve as the president’s alter ego with respect to all areas of national security policy, not just the space program . His ambition is apparently to become the president's alter ego .
 Many prior vice presidents who had served under Democratic presidents, such as John Nance Garner, Harry Truman, and Alben Barkley, were not informed about or involved in national security matters .
 Johnson's staff drafted an executive order for President Kennedy’s signature that would have given the vice president authority “at all times” for “continuing surveillance and review with respect to domestic, foreign and military policies relating to national security”
 Moyers suggested that “the nature of our times requires that the Vice President be adequately informed on vital matters” Moyers said . “The possibility of immediate succession to the number one job, however remote and however distasteful to think about from the President’s
 Moyers drafted a nonpublicly visible executive order that Moyers had drafted . Moyers says the new president and his White House staff were resistant to the kind of publicly visible order .
 NASA added to the list of agencies subject to vice presidential review that had been in the draft executive order . NASA was added to, and the BOB deleted from, the list . The BOB was also deleted from the draft order that was in draft .
 Attempts at the start of the Kennedy administration to give Lyndon Johnson an expanded policy role were not successful .
 John Kennedy had needed Johnson to attract enough Southern voters to get elected . Kennedy, and his top aides, had no intention of making Johnson a major player in national security affairs .
 Eisenhower administration bill abolishing council was not countermanded . Sorensen and Bell had agreed during the transition to have this bill reintroduced . Kennedy had at least tentatively decided to retain the council .
 It would have authorized the president to make the vice president a member and the chairman of the Space Council . It would also have delegated to vice president executive functions assigned by law to the president .
 Moyers also worked with staff 58 John F Kennedy and RACE TO THE MOON members of the Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences to prepare the documents needed to make the changes in the 1958 Space Act .
 He said that he was “much concerned” regarding “the Vice President’s position as a constitutional officer who cannot share, so should not be pressed to take on, operating responsibility” that was assigned to the president .
 Ina memorandum on “Organizing the Space Council,” Neustadt noted that “where space programs are concerned, the President should have available the same sort of top-level, politicallyresponsible advice on policy on policy”
 Neustadt’s late February critique of an operational role for the vice president implies that at least some on LBJ's staff were continuing to push for such responsibility . Johnson's staff, if not Johnson himself, were pushing for such a role .
 Neustadt’s memorandum was followed on March 1 by another BOB staff memorandum, which he characterized as ‘one man’t opinion,” was followed by another .
 Vice President Johnson again got personally involved in early March . He asked budget director David Bell how best to finance the council’s staff .
 Bell told Johnson that since the Space Council was a statutory agency on its own, it was not legal to transfer funds from NASA or DOD budget to fund its operations . Bell told him that since . the Space . Council was not . legal to . transfer funds . from NASA . or DOD
 President Kennedy agreed to provide funds from his ‘Special Projects’ budget to fund the council’s executive secretary and two more staff positions . Bell said NASA had agreed to delegate three or four of FIRST DECISIONS 59 employees to act as council staff .
 Edward C Welsh was chosen for the position several weeks earlier . Welsh had already been actively working on reorganizing the council .
 He held a doctorate in economics and had been in charge of Symington’s hearings on air power in 1956, had helped staff LBJ’�s Preparedness Subcommittee hearings after Sputnik .
 He had also been the executive director of the task force on reorganizing the Department of Defense set up by Kennedy during the campaign .
 Welsh had been the primary author of the strident October 1960 Kennedy campaign statement on space . The statement had argued that “control of space will be decided in the next decade”
 In Welsh, Lyndon Johnson got a strong, if somewhat self-important, advocate for a vigorous U.S. space effort . Welsh was a strong advocate for the United States .
 Welsh’s confirmation hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences were held on March 23 .
 Welsh was confirmed by the Senate on March 24 . The Senate voted to confirm Welsh on the same day and he was sworn into office . Welsh was sworn in as president of the U.S. on March 25 .
 Welsh’s first assignment was to draft the changes in the Space Act that were needed to make the vice president its chair and to make other desired adjustments in the council's membership and organizational location within the executive office of the president . Welsh: “The Space Act is needed to
 By March 30, Welsh had prepared a memorandum noting that there were three options available to change the provisions of the 1958 Space Act . Welsh: A reorganization plan, an amendment to the then-pending NASA Authorization Bill, or a separate amendment would be needed .
 The congressional perspective prevailed, and a decision was made to move forward with proposing an amendment to the Space Act . The amendment would be proposed to the House of Representatives .
 The amendment was approved by President Kennedy and his top advisers . Before the amendment could be approved, there were two issues to be dealt with . President Kennedy's top advisers had to deal with .
 The Space Council was a topic that had been discussed ever since December . One was whether 60 John F KENNEDY and RACE TO THE MOON would propose a name change for the Space Council .
 Welsh was concerned that the titles that Neustadt had suggested in his February 28 memorandum would not indicate the intended broad scope of the council’s activities . Welsh said he was concerned the titles would not be appropriate .
 The other issue was the wording of the proposed amendment to the Space Act . The amendment would have to be amended to allow astronauts to use the space .
 Edward Welsh and James Webb had not been able to agree on how best to indicate in the amendment the separation of the functions of the Space Council and the president .
 Welsh wanted to put forward a simple amendment that retained the Space Act language that specified the functions of the council . Webb wanted to add a new section to the Act that specified duties that would remain the president’s responsibility .
 No change in the name of the National Aeronautics and Space Council was suggested . No change of the name was proposed .
 The secretaries of defense and state, the administrator of NASA, and the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission remained council members . The one additional government member and the three public members of the council were eliminated .
 Welsh told Vice President Johnson on April 6 that his version of the proposed amendment “had been cleared in the Executive Office of the President with Messrs. Johnson and Ms. Welsh’s. Welsh . Welsh: “I’m sure Mr. Johnson is right to
 Rep. Overton Brooks has agreed to schedule a hearing on the amendment, he says . He says preliminary agreement to the amendment obtained from the staffs of Senators Kerr, Bridges, and Dirksen and with Speaker of the House .
 President Kennedy transmitted the amendment to the Congress on April 10 . Welsh testified as the only witness before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on April 12 .
 This was the day on which the Soviet Union orbited the first human in space, Yuri Gagarin, was the focus of the committee’s questions .
 Welsh testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on April 19, again as the sole witness . Welsh then testified again before the committee on April 20 .
 The Senate approved the amendment on April 20 . Committee approval quickly followed and the amendment was approved by the Senate .
 In the weeks after his inauguration, President Kennedy spent very little time in formal consideration of space issues . President Kennedy’s initial Space Budget Decisions were made in the weeks following his inauguration .
 On February 13, he sent Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev a congratulatory note on the launch of a Russian mission to Venus . On the previous day, he had sent a message congratulating on launch of the mission .
 The launch had raised security concerns because experts had suggested it could be “a step towards creating a capability for achieving a parking orbit with an ICBM warhead” The spacecraft had gone into orbit around the Earth before ejecting a large probe on a Venus-bound trajectory .
 In dramatizing the space race we are playing into the Soviet’s strongest suit, he said . He noted that “one of the things we must realize is that in dramatization we are . playing into Soviet's strongest suit.”
 Subsequent actions by President Kennedy demonstrated that he did not accept this advice . President Kennedy's actions were shown to be a mistake .
 NASA’s Budget Reviewed Budget director David Bell in February issued a government-wide call for a rapid agency review of the proposed Fiscal Year 1962 budget . The outgoing Eisenhower administration submitted the budget in February .
 James Webb’s initial examination of the NASA budget convinced him that the Eisenhower proposal was not adequate to support the kind of space program he believed was appropriate for the Kennedy administration . Webb judged that there was a need to accelerate the pace of the milestones that had been set out in NASA
 He wanted to move the date of a potential lunar landing mission forward from 1973 to 1970 . George Low’s report indicated that it would be possible by that year, and perhaps even sooner .
 On March 17, NASA submitted a request for an additional $308. million, a 30 percent increase over the $1,109. million budget in the Eisenhower request . The request is 30 percent higher than the Eisenhower budget request .
 He later recalled that “most of us, when we came into office didn’t have any notion of what the space program was all about, what the issues were.” He said .
 BOB indicated that it would approve only a $50 million increase in the NASA budget, with any additional increases deferred until fall 1961 . Additional increases were deferred until after a comprehensive review of the NASA program had been completed .
 Webb, Dryden, and Seamans briefed Vice President Johnson on budget request . Webb and Dryden also briefed the vice president on their budget request for the president .
 Budget director Bell, his deputy Elmer Staats, and the top career BOB staff person for the NASA FIRST DECISIONS 63 budget, Willis Shapley, explained to the vice president why they had not approved most of the request . The budget director Bell and his deputy Staats
 In preparation for this meeting, Edward Welsh had prepared a briefing memorandum for Johnson . Welsh had noted that the “major policy issue” involved in the budget was “does this country want to catch up to the Soviet Union in space capability,” he said .
 Yale-educated member of the Republican Eastern establishment who had become a Harvard professor of government with a widely acknowledged intellect . At age 34, he was the youngest ever dean of the Harvard faculty faculty .
 Bundy during the Kennedy administration was to play an important role in the national security dimensions of the U.S. space effort, including the race to the Moon . Bundy was a key figure in national security in the space effort . Bundy died at the age of 92 .
 James Webb stayed up late the day before the meeting preparing a six-page talking paper . Webb stayed late the night to prepare the paper for the meeting . Webb had stayed up the day to prepare for the event .
 Webb noted that in the preparation of the 1962 budget, President Eisenhower reduced the $1.35 billion requested by the Space Agency to the extent of $240 million and specifically eliminated funds to proceed with manned space flight projects beyond Mercury . Webb notes that “in the preparation . of the
 The Soviets have demonstrated how effective space exploration can be as a symbol of scientific progress and as an adjunct of foreign policy, he said . He added that the Soviets have shown how effective it can be .
 Robert Seamans followed Webb with a brief summary of NASA’s budget request . The budget request for NASA's budget request was requested by Webb . Webb was the first to speak on the budget for NASA .
 John Kennedy, perhaps for the first time, had had the chance to get a clear picture of the space policy and budget issues requiring his decision . Kennedy: "During those 90 minutes, John Kennedy had had a chance to . get a . clear picture" of space policy .
 Webb briefly went into the Oval Office with President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson . Webb then briefly went to the Oval . Webb's decision was the first major decision to be made in the White House since 1964 .
 Kennedy told Webb that Dryden and Seamans had made a positive impression on him at this, their first meeting . Webb assured them that he believed “that we were moving right ahead with the things that needed to be done” Kennedy in return said Dryden, Seam
 Other items in NASA budget request were not discussed in Seamans’s memo .
 The president started the meeting by asking Vice President Johnson for his views on the NASA budget . If the requested increases were approved, the orbital laboratory could begin flights in 1965 rather than 1967 . Circumulunar flights would be possible in 1967 rather than 1969 .
 President Kennedy asked Wiesner if he concurred; he said he did . President Kennedy had been hearing the same thing repeatedly . Kennedy: "I'm sure you can't wait to see what happens next."
 McNamara would suggest proceeding at “a normal rate of investigation,” which was considerably less than a maximum effort . McNamara’s response was that he was unable to assess the prestige payoffs from human space flight .
 The final increase in the NASA FY1962 budget approved at the meeting was just under $126 million . Almost all of the increase was to accelerate the NASA booster effort . The increase was almost all of it to accelerate NASA booster efforts .
 No funds for the Apollo spacecraft and thus for human space flight beyond Project Mercury were approved . No funds were approved for the project . Project Mercury was the first human space mission to space .
 President Eisenhower's budget request for NASA was 20 percent less than NASA hoped for . This was an increase of a bit over 10 percent compared to President Eisenhower’s budget submission .
 President Kennedy had heard the full range of arguments with respect to the goals and pace of the U.S. civilian space program . In this initial engagement with space policy and program issues, President Kennedy .
 He decided that it was a matter of some urgency to begin the process of closing the weight-lifting gap that its powerful rocket had given the Soviet Union . But he decided not yet ready to commit himself to the use of those new boosters for a post-Mercury human spaceflight program
 The expectation as of the end of March 1961 was that this issue would be the focus of a comprehensive review of NASA’s future to be conducted by Lyndon Johnson as the new chairman of the Space Council . The decision would be made as the Fiscal Year 1963 budget was being prepared in
 One reason for the hesitance at this point to approve any funds for a Mercury follow-on was likely the uncertainty about Mercury’s success .
 The Hornig panel had not finished its work, and its medical experts were very worried about whether an astronaut could survive the stresses of space flight . The panel's medical experts are very worried .
 Jerome Wiesner shared their concern, and had communicated it to the President . Jerome Wiedner shared the concern with the President, and shared it to CNN.com .
 Kennedy was tending toward approval of future human space flight efforts, Seamans says . He "wanted to know more about it" about it .
 Laos was occupying most of Kennedy’s time . Added to these factors were the immediate concerns over Laos, which were occupied most of his time .
 David Bell had told Hugh Dryden that Kennedy was too busy for direct involvement in decisions on NASA’s future . As he attempted to resist NASA demands to meet with the president to appeal the original BOB decisions .
 Dryden’s words proved prescient; within three weeks, Kennedy would be faced with a Soviet space challenge . Kennedy would set dramatic new space goals for the United States .
 Monday April 10, 1961, John F Kennedy threw out the opening day baseball pitch as the Washington Senators played the Chicago White Sox . This page intentionally left blank Chapter 5 “There’s Nothing More Important”
 Kennedy’s deputy press secretary told him that the Soviet Union had successfully recovered the first human to orbit the Earth . U.P.I. news service was about to report that the first person to orbit Earth was recovered .
 Kennedy asked Hatcher to check on the report; he had known for several weeks from intelligence briefings that such a launch was imminent . Kennedy had known from briefings that the launch would be imminent .
 The Soviet Union had successfully completed one-orbit missions of a spacecraft carrying a dog as a passenger on March 9 and March 25 . The mission was the first of two to carry a dog .
 It was almost certain that the next step would be a mission with a human on board . The mission would be the first time a human has been on a mission to the surface .
 By the end of the next day, April 11, the CIA did report that the Soviet launch was likely within the next few hours . The launch was expected to take place within hours of April 11 .
 President Kennedy approved a statement for the president to issue once the Soviets had announced a successful mission . Press Secretary Pierre Salinger prepared and Kennedy approved the statement .
 The president also had an approach ready to take if the launch were unsuccessful and the cosmonaut died .
 As he retired for the evening on April 11, Kennedy told aides that he did not want to be woken if the Soviet announcement came while he was sleeping . Kennedy said he wanted to avoid being woken while he slept .
 U.S. intelligence systems knew that the launch of the first human in space had taken place at 1:07m. on April 12, Washington time . The launch took place in a few seconds .
 They monitored the in-orbit communications during the single-orbit flight . They decoded the television transmissions from the spacecraft that showed the cosmonaut moving about .
 We congratulate the Soviet scientists and engineers who made this feat possible . We congratulate them for their work .
 The Russian team has the greatest admiration for the Russian who participated in this extraordinary feat . Well, it is a most impressive scientific accomplishment, says the Russian .
 I have already sent congratulations to Mr Khrushchev, and I send congratulations to the man who was involved in the incident . I'm happy to congratulate the man involved in this incident .
 Soviet progress in the field of boosters, where they have been ahead of us, is expected to be first in space . I indicated that the task force which we set up on space way back last January, January 12th, indicated that because of the Soviet progress, we expected that they
 “THERE’S NOTHING MORE IMPORTANT” 71 has taken place. And, of course, that “there’s notHINGING more IMPORTIVE” has happened. “There’ll be nothing more important.
 We are carrying out our program and we expect to—hope to make progress in this area this year . We expect to ... make progress this year ourselves. We hope to... make progress, this year, ourselves .
 A Member of Congress said today that he was tired of seeing the United States second to Russia in the space field .
 President Obama has asked Congress for more money to speed up our space program . He has also asked for more funds for the space program in the U.S.
 The Soviet Union gained an important advantage by securing these large boosters which were able to put up greater weights, and that advantage is going to be with them for some time. Well, the Soviet Union gain an important .
 However tired anybody may be, and no one is more tired than I am, it is a fact that it is going to take some time . I think we have to recognize it. However tired anyone may be. It is going for some time, and I am tired,’
 They secured large boosters which have led to their being first in sputnik and led to the first putting their man in space . The Soviets were first to launch their first man into space .
 We are, I hope, going to be able to carry out our efforts with due regard to the problem of the life of the man involved this year . We are going to try and find a way to get back to the right place in the world, says the mayor .
 I am sure that they are making a concentrated effort to stay ahead of us . But we are behind and I am . But I am not sure that we are . We are behind, but we are making an effort .
 We are attempting to improve other systems which will give us a stronger position, all of which are very expensive, and involve billions of dollars . We have provided additional emphasis on Saturn, Rover, and Rover .
 The news will be worse before it is better, says President Obama . "It will be some time before we catch up," he says .
 We are, I hope, going to go in other areas where we can be first and which will bring perhaps more long-range benefits to mankind. We are not going to be first, but we hope to go first, and that we can do so first . We are going to
 Earlier in the press conference, Kennedy had mentioned one of the areas “where we can be first” and which might bring “more long-range benefits to mankind”—desalinization of sea water .
 Congressional and media reaction to the Gagarin Flight resembled reaction to launch of Sputnik 1 in October 1957 . Reaction to the launch of the Soviet spacecraft was hysterical .
 Clearly, this second Soviet space achievement was a major political setback for the new administration . Clearly, the new president is not happy with the failure of his first mission to space .
 The Soviet Union was quick to capitalize on the significance of the successful flight . The flight was the first flight of the Soviet Union to fly over the world .
 The rest of the world was almost unanimous in its admiration of the Soviet achievement . Russia was the only country to praise the Soviet achievements .
 Romans snapped up the papers, emptying kiosks in a matter of minutes, then stood around discussing the event . Romans were able to buy the papers from kiosks at the end .
 American reaction to the Gagarin flight was characterized by disappointment and chagrin . American reaction was characterized as disappointment by disappointment . The flight was the first manned mission to carry out Soviet Union space flight .
 No high official had prepared the general public to expect the Soviet flight, and thus for many it came almost as much of a shock as the 1957 Sputnik 1 launch .
 The general excitement from Europe to Asia, Africa and the Americas will not be diminished by the recognition that no immediate military, commercial or other actual advantage accrues to the Soviet Union .
 None of these and other measures have had the effectiveness or the spectacular quality of Soviet efforts . But none of these measures have ever been as effective or spectacular .
 If the U.S. is to compete in space, we must decide to do so on a top-priority basis immediately, or we face a bleak future of more Soviet triumphs . In fact, if the United States is to . compete in . space, it must .
 The United States is still the strongest military power and leads in many aspects of the space race . But the world believes that the U.S. lags behind the Soviet Union's firsts .
 The dangers of such false images to our military power and diplomacy are obvious . The dangers are obvious, says the author .
 The neutral nations may come to believe the wave of the future is Russian . Even our friends and allies could slough away, writes David Frum . Russia is the future of the West .
 The deterrent, which after all is only as strong as Premier Khrushchev thinks it is, could be weakened . The deterrent is only a strong deterrent, and it could have been weakened .
 He very likely had criticisms such as these in mind as he considered how best to respond to this new Soviet challenge .
 Congress calls for an immediate response to the Soviet flight . The most vocal demands for a crash effort came from the House of Representatives .
 On April 12, the committee held a previously scheduled hearing on the proposal to revise the 1958 Space Act . The vice president is the chairman of the Space Council .
 The minds of the representatives were on the Gagarin flight, not the Space Council . But the minds of those representatives were not on the space council . The meeting was held in Moscow, Russia, in April 1961 .
 James Webb and Hugh Dryden appeared before the committee to defend the NASA budget increases that the president had approved on March 23 . Webb and Dryden defended the budget increases approved by the president .
 The focus of the hearings was not on those additions to the NASA budget to speed up the booster programs . Instead, it was on the funds for human space flight on which the president had deferred approval .
 Congressman Vincent Anfuso suggested that he was “ready to call for a full-scale congressional investigation’s call for full-fledged congressional investigation . Congressman Vincent A. Anfusso said he was ready to “call for an investigation”
 Seamans put himself in a vulnerable position with respect to administration policy, saying that although there were no plans at that time to ask Congress for funding for Project Apollo, the post-Mercury human space flight effort, it might indeed be possible with an accelerated effort .
 Seamans added that he would be “the first to review it wholeheartedly to see what it would take to do the job’s job . Seaman said he would review the job "wholeheartedly"
 Seamans was well aware of the February report of George Low’s committee that had said that a lunar landing within the decade was technologically feasible . Kennedy also did not approve additional funding for human space flight beyond Project Mercury, even as he provided additional funding .
 Seamans’s comments, coming just as the committee and the media were calling for an accelerated space effort, appeared to be adding NASA pressure on the president to the pressure coming from the House committee and media . This was an uncomfortable position for the NASA director .
 President Kennedy was not at all happy to read in the next day’s newspapers that a NASA official had made public statements that seemed to preempt what would necessarily be a presidential decision .
 For a few days, Seamans’ job was in real jeopardy, but Webb was able to calm the White House concern . Webb: "For the first time, we are not going to be able to do anything wrong"
 Eisenhower and his advisers had found themselves unprepared to deal with the Soviet propaganda bonanza resulting from its space success . The situation was similar to the one after the October 1957 launch of Sputnik 1, when President Eisenhower found himself unprepared .
 President Kennedy convened a meeting of his advisers on space on April 14 to consider his alternatives for responding to the Gagarin flight . Kennedy: "To address this situation, I want to present the image of a president deeply involved in a pressing issue"
 Kennedy had agreed to an interview with Time/Life journalist Hugh Sidey on that day . Kennedy allowed Sidey to attend his meeting with his advisers . Sidey attended the meeting with Kennedy .
 Having a journalist present at a presidential meeting was a very unusual occurrence . Kennedy viewed Sidey as friendly and wanted to portray himself as actively engaged in considering how best to proceed .
 Webb and Dryden gathered with Sorensen, Bell from BOB, accompanied by budget staff member Willis Shapley, science adviser Wiesner, and space council executive secretary Welsh to review possible actions . Webb, Dryden, and Webb met with the president of the Space Council
 Sorensen pressed them on what the U.S. might accomplish in space before the Soviet Union . He asked them what the United States might do in space .
 The response was that “the Soviet lead in rocket thrust would continue to beat us to every milestone” being discussed being discussed . The response to the discussion was that the Soviet lead would continue “to beat us”
 Sidey requested the interview with the president . Sidey had prepared a memorandum for Press Secretary Pierre Salinger .
 “A crucial decision is now needed as to what degree we are willing to commit our resources, both of talent and of money, to further manned missions,” he said .
 Wiesner prepared a second memo for Kennedy, this time addressing the points raised by Hugh Sidey . The memo was prepared for Kennedy to respond to Sidey's comments .
 Administration says it's "perfectly clear to the Administration that making these decisions had to be faced" Administration says decision to develop booster is "a decision"
 Sidey had suggested that the Kennedy administration had advanced the date for the first astronaut-carrying launch in Project Mercury in the hopes of beating the Soviets to a first human launch . Sidey also suggested that Kennedy administration .
 Sorensen invited Sidey to accompany him to the cabinet room, where the participants from the earlier meeting were waiting . They talked for a few minutes, and then Sidey was invited to accompany them to the room .
 At almost the same time, President Kennedy joined the group after a congressional coffee hour . President Kennedy joins the group almost a decade ago .
 Sidey invited Sidey to sit at the head of the table and to ask the assembled group his questions about the space program . Sidey was invited to sit in front of the group and asked Sidey's questions .
 Kennedy took over the meeting and went around the table, asking the key participants for their thoughts . Kennedy then took over and asked the key people to respond .
 Dryden suggested that, even with that level of funding, it was only an even chance that the U.S. could beat the Soviet Union to the Moon . Dryden: Even with that funding, the United States could only beat the Soviets to the moon .
 Wiesner was slumped down in his chair so far that his head seemed to be at table level . He asked for three months to complete a review of the program . He said “now is not the time to make mistakes”
 Vice President Johnson had long favored a greater effort in space, Welsh reported . Welsh reported that any thought that the U.S. could not catch up to the Soviet Union should be discarded . Welsh: Johnson had always favored greater effort .
 If somebody can just tell 78 John F KENNEDY and the RACE TO THE MOON me how to catch up, I'll catch up . If you can tell John F Kennedy and the race to the moon? Please .
 Kennedy directed Sorensen to organize a review to answer questions about feasibility and cost of the project . Kennedy directed the review to look at feasibility, cost and feasibility . Kennedy also directed a review of the feasibility of the proposed project .
 Affirmative in the sense that the U.S. intended to maintain its position of world leadership, commerce, science, foreign policy, and other things .
 The United States had to take the lead in this area just as we had taken the lead, says President Obama . Obama says the U.S. had to lead the way in order to win the election .
 The rest of the world had been led to believe by Soviet space accomplishments, and particularly by the U.S. reaction to them, that the scientifically most competent nation now was the Soviet Union, not the United States, because they could do this . The United States reaction to the Soviet
 The President was dealing with, not was it time to go to the moon or not, but how to get yourself out of this . We were paying a price, all kinds of ways—internationally, politically, politically—and that was the issue the President was .
 President Obama invited Hugh Sidey to participate in April 14 meeting . Sidey was invited by the White House to discuss the situation in space . The White House hopes to show Sidey a serious concern about space travel .
 Kennedy inherited Eisenhower’s “THERE’S NOTHING MORE IMPORTANT” plan for an invasion of Cuba, since 1960 under the control of Fidel Castro, by CIA-trained Cuban exiles . Eisenhower had inherited Eisenhower “there’ll be
 Kennedy had reluctantly given the go-ahead to the plan a few days before April 14 . The bombing of Cuban airfields by what were characterized as airplanes flown by the exiles but actually flown by United States pilots began on April 15 .
 Robert Kennedy "turned on everybody,” just after the president stepped out of the room, he reportedly said, “All you bright fellows.” Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was a top-level adviser to the Kennedy administration .
 The failure was never explicitly linked to the review of the space program that took place in the days following the Bay of Pigs . Edward Welsh maintains that the fiasco was “not a factor at all” in that review .
 Wiesner: "I don’t think anyone can measure it, but I am sure it had an impact" The Bay of Pigs was the first time the U.S. military had a direct attack on Cuba .
 The failed invasion was never explicitly linked to space, he says . He adds that he discussed it with the President and saw his reactions .
 Sorensen says Kennedy's attitude toward the space program was influenced by the Gagarin flight . He says the Soviets gained world-wide prestige from the flight at the same time we had suffered a loss of prestige from Bay of Pigs .
 A mission failure, especially if it resulted in the death of the Mercury astronaut on live television, was a possibility that the president and his advisers viewed with great concern . The president and advisers viewed the possibility of a mission failure as a possibility .
 The events of April 1961 drastically shortened the time allotted to that review . But the events of that month's events in the U.S. dramatically shortened the review .
 Johnson did not attend the April 14 White House meetings on the space program . Johnson didn't attend those meetings .
 Senegal is celebrating its independence from France with stops in Geneva and Paris . Senegal's vice president was returning from his first overseas trip as vice president .
 President Kennedy met with Lyndon Johnson and James Webb on April 19 to discuss the accelerated review he had decided was needed . Kennedy had walked disconsolately with Ted Sorensen and then alone on the south lawn of the White House after the Bay of Pigs failure .
 President Kennedy signed it and sent it to Johnson the next day, April 20 . Ted Sorensen drafted a one-page memorandum, and it was sent to Johnson .
 The memorandum stands as a historic document . It spelled out the requirements that led directly to the decision to go to the Moon as the centerpiece of an accelerated U.S space effort .
 I would like for you to be in charge of making an overall survey of where we stand in space . Space Council chairman will be responsible for the survey .
 Do we have a chance of beating the Soviets by putting a laboratory in space? Or by a trip around the moon, or by a rocket to land on the moon? Or a trip to the moon and back with a man? Do we really want to beat the Soviets?
 Ifnot, will you make recommendations to me as to how work can be speeded up? Please make your suggestions as well as any suggestions for speedier work .
 Wiesner, Secretary McNamara and other responsible officials to cooperate fully with you fully. Wieckner and McNamara will cooperate fully.
 I have asked Jim Webb, Dr, Weisner, Secretary McNamara and other responsible officials to cooperate with you fully . Ihave asked Jim Weg Webb, . Dr. Wegill Weisner and others responsible officials, to cooperate fully .
 The Kennedy memorandum both contained a very clear statement of a requirement . “A space program which promises dramatic results in which we could win” was a requirement, Kennedy said .
 Congress passed the bill providing for a Space Council which will be chaired by the Vice President . We are attempting to make a determination as to which program offers the best hope .
 We are attempting to make a determination as to which of these various proposals offers the best hope. We are trying to make an assessment of which of the various proposals offer the best .
 When that determination is made, we will then make a recommendation to the Congress. We will then decide whether or not to make a decision on the issue .
 In addition, we have to consider whether there is any program now, regardless of its cost, which offers us hope of being pioneers in a project . In addition to the cost of the project, we need to consider if there are any programs now that offer us hope to be pioneers in
 "It is possible to spend billions of dollars in this project in space to the detriment of other programs and still not be successful," NASA says . The agency says it will not be able to rely heavily on the money to launch a spacecraft .
 We have to make a determination whether there is any effort we could make in time or money which could put us first in any new area . We need to decide whether to make an effort to make the most of the time and money .
 I don’t want to start spending the kind of money that I am talking about without making a determination based on careful scientific judgment as to whether a real success can be achieved, or whether because we are so far behind now in this particular race we are going to be second in
 I think before we break through and begin a program which would not reach a completion, as you know, until the end of this decade—for example, trips to the moon, maybe 10 years off, maybe a little less, but are quite far away and involve, as I say
 The study is now being undertaken under the direction of the Vice President of the United States .
 We couldn't quit the space race, and we couldn't condemn ourselves to be second . We couldn’t commit ourselves to being second in space race. We’ll be second in the history of space travel .
 Wiesner added that he and Kennedy talked a lot about do we have to do this . Wieren added that they had a lot of fun talking about the possibility of doing this .
 There were so many military overtones as well as other things to the space program that you couldn't make another choice . We talked about a lot of things where we could make a dramatic demonstration .
 If Kennedy could have opted out of a big space program without hurting the country in his judgment, he would have . Kennedy would have. He would have, he says, if he could have .
 Maybe a different kind of man could have said to the country, “Look, we are going at our own pace.” The country is going at its own pace, he says .
 Kennedy said, “If we could afford to do something else, we would do it.” Kennedy said . Kennedy: "If we were able to afford it, we'd do it"
 I think he became convinced that space was the symbol of the twentieth century . Space was the 'symbol' of space, he says. He says .
 Lyndon Johnson and his space assistant, Space Council executive secretary Edward Welsh, quickly set to work after receiving JFK’s April 20 memo . Options Assessed: Options Assessments .
 The organization of the review reflected the “Johnson system” of obtaining informa84 John F. KENNEDY and the RACE TO THE MOON CONTENT .
 Johnson consulted many of individuals whom he thought would significantly contribute to examining the space program . Johnson consulted with many of the individuals who thought they would contribute to the study of space exploration .
 He met with officials from NASA, the Defense Department, the Atomic Energy Commission, and Wiesner’s office . He also met with NASA officials .
 Kennedy anticipated a positive recommendation justifying a “Presidential Message” to the Congress . It is not clear whether at this point he had also decided to deliver that message in person .
 An April 19 memorandum from Walt Rostow, who as a MIT professor had been a Kennedy campaign adviser, was in April 1961 on McGeorge Bundy’s national security staff . Rostow had been on Bundy's national security team in 1961 .
 Rostow identified an accelerated space effort as one of the potential topics in the speech . Rostow said he would talk about accelerated space efforts in the coming weeks .
 A similar meeting with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was set up for later that day . The two organizations were told not to coordinate their views in advance of meeting separately .
 He told Johnson there is a chance to beat the Russians in accomplishing a manned circumnavigation of the moon . Perhaps by 1966, perhaps by 1966 .
 Other areas in which the U.S. might be first included “returning a sample of the material from the moon surface to the earth in 1964” and “developing communications satellites,” the author says .
 NASA at this point in the review estimated the cost of an accelerated effort in all areas over the period through 1970 as $33. billion, an increase of $11. billion over its then-current ten-year plan . NASA estimates the cost would be $33 billion .
 Hugh Dryden was credited with being first to propose a lunar landing to the White House . Dryden had also raised the lunar landing possibility at the April 14 cabinet room meeting with President Kennedy .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s response to Vice President Johnson drew heavily on material provided by John Rubel, deputy director of Defense Research and Engineering . Rubel was the top space official within the Office of the Secretary of the Defense Office .
 Rubel was an engineer who had worked for Hughes Aircraft before coming to Washington during the Eisenhower administration . Rubel had strong views on how best to organize the national space effort . He was a strong advocate for space exploration .
 McNamara articulated a particular philosophy with respect to space . President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum was issued on April 20, 1962 . McNamara: Space exploration will be a major priority in space exploration .
 He remarked that “all large scale space programs require the mobilization of resources on a national scale.” He said that all large-scale space programs need national resources .
 They require the development and successful application of the most advanced technologies . They need to be developed and successful with the use of advanced technology .
 McNamara calls for an orderly but accelerated program to close the booster gap . McNamara called for a program that closes the gap between booster gap in the U.S.
 Vice President Johnson reached out to a number of individuals whom he thought could provide informed advice . Others Consulted as part of his review of the National Security Council .
 On April 24 he received a thirty-four-page report prepared by George Feldman, a former staff member of the House space committee who had sought the job of NASA administrator, and Charles Sheldon of the Congressional Research Service .
 Cyrus Vance was the top lawyer at the Department of Defense but formerly a member of Johnson’s Senate preparedness subcommittee staff . He also asked Welsh to get the views of Cyrus Vance, in April 1961 . Vance was a former member of the House preparedness committee .
 On Monday morning, April 24, Johnson held a “hearing” to solicit the views on what course of action he should recommend to President Kennedy . The hearing was held in response to the public's views .
 Presenting their views were individuals representing the three military services . The event was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 The vice president invited three prominent businessmen who were also close personal friends to listen to the presentations . To get a “keen sense of public reaction” to the kind of accelerated program that was emerging from his review, he invited them to listen .
 George Brown of the Houston, Texas construction firm of Brown and Root (who had been a major Johnson campaign contributor); Frank Stanton, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System; and Donald Cook, vice-president of the American Electric Power Corporation .
 The three service representatives were Vice Admiral John T Hayward, . Lieutenant General Bernard Schriever, commander of the Air Force systems command . Wernher von Braun, who had been transferred in June 1960 from the Army Ballistic Missile Agency to work for NASA .
 Johnson had sent each of the three a copy of President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum directly, not through their chain of command . President Kennedy had sent the three copies of the memo .
 The President wants the best hard-headed advice he can get, and he wants it now, he says . The meeting is called to get your specific views on what we can do to get this country into the Space lead, he said .
 He believed that, from a national point of view, only the lunar landing mission made sense as a way of accelerating the space program . He said that only the moon landing mission would make sense .
 The Navy was concerned, that the practical applications of space technology that provided assistance to naval operations, such as the use of satellites for navigation, reconnaissance, communications, and weather forecasting, not be neglected in any accelerated program .
 Schriever also urged that a program aimed at a lunar landing be adopted, primarily because “it would put a focus on our space program.” He said it would put ‘a focus on the space program’
 If we had this sort of an objective, there were so many other things that would be required that you couldn’t avoid having a major space program . If you had this kind of objective, it would be necessary to have a major program .
 Air Force in 1958 had proposed a lunar landing effort as a central focus of a national space program . Schriever in 1961 did not suggest Air Force management of such an effort, noting “that never came up”
 This letter addressed directly the questions in President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum . This letter was written by President Kennedy to address the questions posed by Kennedy .
 Schriever suggested that our currently projected space effort is dangerously deficient . Schriev suggested that the current space effort was dangerously deficient. He suggested that we need to focus on space exploration .
 It has been characterized by an attitude of defeatism and a seeming resignation to second place for the U.S. in the space competition with the Soviet Union .
 "This negative philosophy places at serious risk both our national prestige and our military security," says President Obama . This negative philosophy puts at serious risks to national prestige, says Obama .
 It fails to recognize the military potential of space and the fact that achievements in space have been the single most important influence in the world prestige equation . The U.S. military has been a major factor in world prestige, says NASA .
 A greatly expanded and accelerated space program can—and should—be undertaken . The program can be expanded and should be accelerated, says President Obama . Space exploration can be accelerated .
 "There is clear evidence that we have the resources to more than double the magnitude of our present space effort," says President Obama . There is also evidence that the U.S. has resources to double the size of its space program .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt called upon the nation to increase its annual airplane production from a few thousand to 50,000 aircraft per year . The decision is similar to that made by FDR shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor . All that is lacking is the decision to do so .
 This was because “a performance jump by a factor 10 over their present rockets is necessary to accomplish this feat.” This was due to a ‘performance jump’ by ‘a . factor 10’ over the . present rockets . “A performance jump .
 von Braun: “We would not have to enter such a race towards this obvious next goal in space exploration against hopeless odds favoring the Soviets. Given this likelihood, said von Braun, “we would not . have to . enter such an . race towards the obvious next . goal
 von Braun’s estimate reflected his confidence that with adequate resources his rocket team could develop the large launch vehicle needed more rapidly than could its Soviet competitors . This estimate reflected von Braun's confidence he could develop a larger launch vehicle faster than his Soviet rivals .
 Von Braun: "In the space race we are competing with a determined opponent whose peacetime economy is on a wartime footing" Von Braun calls for a more centralized approach to the management of large-scale technological efforts .
 “The distinction between ‘peaceful uses’ and defense uses for space is a handicap. Rather, it should be pushed as a basically important achievement of great technical and scientific importance.” e “We have to have a basic philosophy—make our objectives clear
 Johnson apparently did consult with Rusk by telephone to learn if the secretary of state foresaw any negative foreign policy impacts from an accelerated space program . Johnson said Rusk agreed that a program aimed at capturing leadership in space for the United States was politically desirable .
 There were no dissenters among those consulted to the notion that the country should undertake a vigorous space program funded at a significantly higher level than had been the case under Eisenhower .
 Johnson was told repeatedly, that such a program would have considerable political, strategic, technological, and economic payoffs for the U.S. There was little question, Johnson told repeatedly .
 Donald Cook argued that achievements in space should be equated with technical proficiency and industrial strength . Cook: "actions in this field must, I believe, be based on the fundamental premise"
 This view of the world situation was at the root of U.S. foreign policy in the early months of the Kennedy administration . The view of a bipolar struggle between the United States and the Soviet Union for global leadership at a time that Communist parties were strong in many Western European countries .
 Cook’s views were commonly shared among the United States political and intellectual leadership, including President Kennedy . Cook's views were common among the U.S. political leaders, including Kennedy himself .
 Our objective must be, therefore, not merely to overtake, but substantially to outdistance Russia . Our objective is to overtake Russia, rather than merely outdistance them, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Any program with a lesser basic objective would be a second-rate program, worthy only of a second class power . The U.S. needs to be a top-class power in order to compete in a major league league .
 On April 28, the vice president sent the president a six-page memorandum summarizing his space review to date . The president has been reviewing space exploration since April 28 .
 Wiesner viewed the decision to accelerate the space program with a lunar landing mission as “a political, not a technical issue.” The decision was a central undertaking as a “political, not technical issue,” he said . President Eisenhower presented the findings to President
 It was not an issue of scientific versus non-scientific issues, it was a use of technological means for political ends . It was the use of technology for political purposes, the author says .
 NASA administrator James Webb was skeptical of the push for a major acceleration of the space program . Webb was a key figure in the decision to land on the Moon before the Soviet Union as its central feature .
 Webb hoped to maintain his good working relationship with Wiesner and the scientific community . He hoped to influence the program recommendations so that if necessary he could defend the program against charges that it was aimed only at prestige and was fundamentally distorted and unsound .
 The original plan was to meet with the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on May 1, and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on May 2, respectively .
 The May 1 meeting had to be postponed so that Johnson could participate in a National Security Council discussion of policy toward Viet Nam . Johnson was scheduled to participate in the discussion . The meeting was postponed because of Johnson's participation .
 Webb and Dryden from NASA, John Rubel from DOD, Edward Welsh, George Brown, Frank Stanton, and Donald Cook were also present . Representatives from the Atomic Energy Commission, the Department of State, and the BOB, also attended .
 Kerr and Bridges were two of the small number of veteran legislators who, together with Johnson, had controlled the Senate during Eisenhower years .
 Johnson believed that their support would suffice to carry the rest of the Senate with them . Johnson said he hoped that the support of the Democrats would be enough .
 Johnson completed his canvas of Congressional support by telephoning Overton Brooks and James Fulton to inquire whether the House of Representatives would also support an accelerated space effort . Johnson called Brooks and Fulton to ask if the House would support a similar effort .
 Given what these two men had been saying in their recent committee hearings about the need for a faster-paced program, their responses were not surprising . Given what they'd been saying, it was not surprising.
 He recommended an immediate acceleration of programs for communications, television, weather, and navigation satellites . He also recommended an acceleration for communications programs .
 By the end of the May 3 meeting Lyndon Johnson “was close to demanding” from NASA a specific recommendation on a lunar landing program, Webb says . Webb: “Close to demanding a recommendation from NASA”
 Lyndon Johnson was gauging Congressional support for an accelerated space effort . Kennedy was also consulting key members of Congress with respect to what type of enhanced space program would be politically acceptable .
 Webb: "Little doubt in my mind” that Kennedy consulted Houston-area Congressman Albert Thomas, who chaired the House subcommittee controlling NASA’s appropriations . Webb: There was “little doubt” in his mind that Thomas consulted with Kennedy .
 Kennedy also needed support from Thomas in other areas of his legislative agenda . Thomas alerted Kennedy to his desire to have an accelerated space program benefit his Houston Congressional district .
 "In the end he was, I believe, as strongly influenced by Johnson and Thomas as by any other two people. In the end, he was . as strong influenced by . Johnson and . Thomas as well as any other people, he said .
 Webb might have wanted more time to have his staff carry out a fuller study of the requirements for sending Americans to the Moon, 94 John F KENNEDY says .
 Lyndon Johnson was asked by President Kennedy to embark on a tour of Southeast Asia to provide a first-hand assessment of the situation there with respect to Communist-supported insurgencies .
 The vice president wanted to submit these papers to the president on the following Monday, before he left on his trip . He wanted the papers to be submitted on the next Monday before leaving for his trip to South Africa .
 Success in that flight was a critical factor in any decision that might follow . Success in the flight was critical for any decision .
 Project Mercury's plan called for several brief suborbital flights with an astronaut aboard before committing a human to an orbital mission . Project Mercury was the first human mission to orbit the Earth in 1958 .
 The first such flight could have come in March 1961 if it had not been delayed due to problems on January 31 Mercury-Redstone-2 flight carrying the chimpanzee Ham . PSAC was concerned about astronaut's ability to withstand the stresses of spaceflight .
 An additional test flight without an astronaut aboard was inserted in the Mercury schedule . The first crewed flight, Mercury/Redstone-3, was slipped until the end of April or early May .
 White House fears that the risks of the MR-3 mission outweighed its benefits . A task group report in January found the risks outweigh the benefits of the mission .
 President Kennedy and his top advisers were worried that a U.S. astronaut might perish in the full light of the television and other media coverage of the mission . These fears were only amplified by the failure at the Bay of Pigs in mid-April . The possibility that a United States astronaut
 Wiesner’s hope for a historic first was definitively dashed by the Soviet orbital flight in April . The Soviet space flight was the first of its kind in Soviet history .
 President Kennedy had asked about the risks associated with the first Mercury flight . President Kennedy said the risks of the first flight would be the greatest .
 Ted Sorensen and the president’s brother Robert Kennedy discussed whether it was worse to postpone the flight after the press buildup had reached such a peak . In the previous days, Ted and Robert Kennedy debated whether to delay the flight and run the risks of failure .
 Present at the meeting were Wiesner, Sorensen, Bundy, Bundy and Welsh, among others .
 Webb assured the president that all precautions had been taken and the flight should go forward as scheduled . Webb: All precautions have been taken to ensure the flight will go forward .
 Kennedy asked his secretary to place a call to NASA’s public information officer in Florida, Paul Haney, to discuss the reliability of the escape system . Haney: The capsule's escape system is designed to be able to escape from space .
 Salinger talked to Haney from the Oval Office . Salinger told Kennedy that he felt that JFK’s questions had been adequately answered . Haney reviewed the history of the launch escape system .
 A wave of national relief and pride over an American success swept the country, from the White House down to the person in the street . The nation was swept by a wave of pride over the success of the American success .
 At the White House, Kennedy’s secretary Evelyn Lincoln interrupted a National Security Council meeting to tell the president that Shepard was about to be launched . Lincoln interrupted the meeting to announce the launch of the spacecraft .
 Kennedy was joined by Lyndon Johnson, Robert Kennedy, Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, Ted Sorensen and McGeorge Bundy . Lincoln’s office had a black and white television set in the Lincoln's office .
 Sorensen suggests that the group watching the flight in Lincoln’s office “heaved a sigh of relief, and cheered” as Shepard and his spacecraft were pulled from the Atlantic Ocean .
 Kennedy called Shepard to congratulate him after Shepard was safely aboard the recovery ship . Kennedy: "I want to congratulate you very much. I hope you're very safe"
 President Kennedy in his secretary’s office watching the May 5, 1961, launch of the first U.S. astronaut, Alan Shepard . In contrast, “Soviet secrecy was deplored and even continued to silence,” Kennedy said .
 The unqualified success of the flight in both technical and political terms likely swept away any lingering reservations with respect to the benefits of an accelerated space effort with human space flights as its centerpiece . However, Kennedy’s lingering reservations are likely to be quashed .
 America still needs to work with the utmost speed and vigor in the further development of our space program, says John F Kennedy . But America still must work with utmost speed, says Kennedy .
 Today’s flight should provide incentive to everyone in our nation concerned with this program to redouble their efforts in this vital field . The flight should encourage everyone in the U.S. concerned with the program to .
 Vice President Johnson’s consultations over the prior two weeks had revealed almost unanimous support for such an initiative, he said . Vice President Lyndon Johnson said .
 President Kennedy announced his intent to enter and win the space race . The program recommendations had to be turned into specific program recommendations with political rationale and budget estimates .
 The vice president leaves Washington on May 8 for almost two weeks . Those charged with putting the results of LBJ’s consultations into a form for his recommendation for presidential approval .
 Group charged with preparing the recommendations met at the Pentagon office of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . Recommendations were made Saturday morning, May 6 .
 Neither Jerome Wiesner nor Edward Welsh participated in the weekend sessions . Neither was briefed on their results before LBJ’s recommendations were submitted to President Kennedy on May 8 .
 Most of the day was spent with NASA and DOD presenting their responses to President Kennedy’s April 20 memorandum . The two agencies had never seen each other's responses to the April 20 memo .
 NASA outlined its proposed lunar landing goal with a planning date of 1967 for the first landing attempt . The first lunar landing attempt would take place in 1967 .
 There had been enough analysis, dating back to the work of George Low’s task force, to satisfy the NASA leaders that a lunar landing was a technically achievable objective, given a strong commitment of resources .
 NASA had established an internal task force four days earlier to provide a more detailed sense of what would be involved in such an undertaking . That such a program would be recommended to the president was certain enough .
 The specifics of the lunar landing plans discussed on May 6 were in a very preliminary state . The lunar landing plan is still in a preliminary state, NASA says .
 In choosing the lunar landing program as the central feature of its recommended program, the group had no firm intelligence regarding whether the Soviet Union was already embarked on a similar program .
 There is no direct evidence that those preparing the space recommendations had read this intelligence estimate prior to the May 6-7 weekend . They were likely aware of its conclusions .
 The only question about the wisdom of selecting the lunar landing goal as the key step toward space leadership came from Robert McNamara . McNamara wondered whether such an effort was ambitious enough .
 Might the Soviets already be so far along on a lunar landing program that they could do it in a year or two, he wondered . He wondered whether the Soviets could already be working on a moon landing program .
 Might it be better to focus on sending people to Mars, instead, he asked the group . The group is focused on sending humans to Mars .
 Such an initiative had been under study within the government and by a President’s Science Advisory Committee panel .
 McNamara believed that the Air Force was “out of control,” and that if NASA was carrying out a large program with heavy involvement of the aerospace industry, it would be more difficult for the U.S. to get political support from the same firms .
 The only new area suggested for the DOD was the development of large solidfueled rocket motors .
 There was agreement that both liquid-fueled boosters, NASA’s preference, and solid propulsion boosters would be pursued in parallel . The choice of which would be used for the lunar landing mission deferred to a future time .
 The group also agreed that work on a nuclear upper stage for a large rocket should be pursued . Such a stage is unlikely to be available in time for the initial lunar landing attempts, they said .
 The major role for nuclear propulsion would be later missions to the Moon and then future human missions to planets . Nuclear propulsion could be used in future missions to Earth's planets .
 The meeting then turned to how to proceed in preparing a report containing the recommendations that had been agreed to . The meeting also turned to discussing how to prepare a report .
 The Department of Defense had prepared a draft report, written primarily by John Rubel . The report was released by the Defense Department .
 NASA had no similar draft, just a listing of the projects it was proposing for acceleration . NASA has no such draft of its own .
 Robert McNamara suggested using the DOD draft as the starting point and folding in NASA recommendations; James Webb agreed to this approach . Webb agreed with McNamara that Webb would be the first man behind the wheel .
 The meeting then adjourned, with Seamans, Rubel, and Shapley designated as a drafting group to prepare a report by Monday morning a report for McNamara’s and Webb's signatures .
 Webb agreed to use the DOD draft without first reading it . Webb, in fact, had agreed to do so without reading it, Webb says .
 Seamans objected to the approach the draft report took to competing with the Soviet Union in space . The draft report was published by the U.S. space agency in 1961 .
 The draft claimed that “the government had allowed industry to proliferate to too great an extent,” with the result being a diffuse and ineffective effort . The draft claims that the result of the government’s effort was a diffuse, ineffective effort.
 Only ‘two or three or four stalwarts’ would be allowed to compete for DOD and NASA contracts . It suggested ‘winnowing’ the existing aerospace firms .
 He called Webb on Sunday morning, saying, “we’ve got a terrible problem with this report.” Webb called Webb to say, ‘We’re not sure what’s going to happen’
 Webb was on Sunday immersed in making arrangements for a triumphant visit to Washington by Alan Shepard and his Mercury colleagues . Webb was preparing for what would turn out to be a triumphant trip to Washington the next day . Webb: 'It's been a great day for Alan Shepard'
 Seamans, Shapley, Rubel and some of their staff worked into Saturday evening and all day Sunday on the report . They added NASA material to the DOD draft, with Shapley providing budget figures .
 Webb, Seamans, Rubel and Rubel agreed that the report was ready for signature and forwarding to the vice president . Webb: "The report is ready to be signed and forwarded to vice president"
 Webb waited until the secretaries who had been typing the revisions finished their work . He insisted on driving the one secretary who did not have a car to her home during a pouring rainstorm . Webb waited at the woman’s house for a few minutes until the rain let up .
 Seamans was back at the Pentagon by 7:30m. to make sure the report was in shape for Webb and McNamara’s approval . Seaman was back in the office at 7.30pm to ensure the document was in place for approval by Webb and
 The report was delivered to Vice President Johnson that morning . The two men signed a cover letter, and the report was signed by the president .
 Alan Shepard and the six other Mercury astronauts were flown from Grand Bahama Island to Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington and then by helicopter to the White House lawn . Shepard and six other astronauts were brought back to the island after his recovery from his suborbital mission .
 President Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline were met in the Rose Garden by a gathering that included members of Congress, NASA leaders, and others . They were met by a crowd of dignitaries, astronauts and astronauts .
 He noted that “this flight was made out in the open with all the possibilities of failure, which would have been damaging to our country’s prestige.”
 Robert Gilruth, the director of NASA’s Space Task Group that was managing Project Mercury, was present at the ceremony .
 Gilruth added, “it’s got to be something that requires a great big rocket, like going to the moon.” ‘It’ll be the first time the government has tried to take a direct approach to space travel .
 Kennedy seemed to accept Gilruth’s view, “he was a young man; he didn’t have all the wisdom he would have had.” Kennedy added that while Kennedy was only five years older than Kennedy, he was “a young man�
 President Kennedy took Shepard to a meeting of the National Association of Broadcasters . This was not on the planned schedule for the day, but Shepard’s surprise visit provoked a tumultuous welcome .
 Shepard and the other astronauts paraded up Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol . Thousands, assembling with little advance notice, cheered .
 Lyndon Johnson carried a large manila envelope as he left the luncheon to go first to the White House and then to the airport to catch the plane that would take him to Southeast Asia for two weeks .
 WebbMcNamara report recommended sending Americans to the Moon . Webb was part of a report recommending sending America to the moon . Webb's report was published in 1964 .
 The report called for adding $210. million dollars for developing the Apollo spacecraft . The report said the goal of landing a man on the moon requires immediate initiation of an accelerated program of spacecraft development .
 An additional $112.6 million was requested to allow NASA to accelerate development of the large F-1 liquid-fueled rocket engine and related facilities . $62 million requested for DOD to develop a large solid propellant rocket motor in parallel to F-2 development. $62.
 Another $15 million was allocated to DOD for a back up to the Centaur upper rocket stage that NASA was developing . NASA was also developing a back-up to a Centaur that NASA is developing .
 Other increases include $50 million for communication satellites, $75 million for meteorological satellites . $22 million of that amount for NASA and $53 million for Weather Bureau . $30 million for nuclear rocket development, $23 million for NASA .
 The specifics of what programs would receive additional funding was NASA’s primary input into the report . The second section of the report was based on John Rubel's draft material . The report is based on the draft material from Rubel .
 All large scale space projects require the mobilization of resources on a national scale . All large-scale space projects need national resources, says NASA .
 They call for skillful management, centralized control and unflagging pursuit of long-range goals . The U.S. needs to focus on long-term goals, says President Barack Obama .
 Dramatic achievements in space, therefore, symbolize the technological power and organizing capacity of a nation . Dramatic achievement in space symbolizes the power and organization of a country .
 It is for reasons such as these that major achievements in space contribute to national prestige, says NASA . NASA says major achievements such as space exploration contribute national prestige .
 Major successes lend national prestige even though the value of the undertaking may be marginal or economically unjustified . Major successes such as orbiting a man as the Soviets have just done lend .
 The nation must make a positive decision to pursue space projects aimed at enhancing national prestige . The nation needs to make a good decision to invest in space projects .
 "Our attainments are a major element in the international competition between the Soviet system and our own," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The nonmilitary, non-commercial, but “civilian” projects such as lunar and planetary exploration are, in this sense, part of the battle along the fluid front of the Cold War . “Civilian’s’ space exploration is a key part of
 The final section of the report spelled out the specific new space goals that were being recommended . The report was released on Monday .
 The orbiting of machines is not the same as the orbiting or landing of a man . It's the same thing that a man can do in space or in space .
 Webb-McNamara report was necessarily vague with respect to whether the Soviet Union was already embarking on a lunar landing program . The Webb report was meant to be vague on whether the Soviets were already on a program .
 Webb-McNamara report was released in 1964 . Kennedy accepted the Webb-Namara recommendations . Kennedy accepts the recommendations .
 President Kennedy's decision to accept the Webb-McNamara report was almost foreordained . Kennedy met on May 10 with his advisers, including budget officials Bell and Staats; Webb and Dryden from NASA .
 Kennedy did ask the BOB to carry out its normal assessment of the financial and policy implications of his decision . Kennedy did not commit to the specific programs and budget recommendations contained in the report .
 In parallel with Johnson’s review of the space program, others within the Kennedy administration had been reviewing issues related to the defense budget, military assistance programs, foreign aid, and foreign aid programs .
 There was this ample precedent for a second address to Congress less than four months after Kennedy had spoken on the State of the Union . Kennedy's second address was to be delivered to Congress in January .
 Their conclusion was that these expenditures were neither large enough nor properly designed to inject enough stimulus into the economy to by themselves mitigate the ongoing recession .
 Walter Heller, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg proposed that Kennedy approve a substantial public works program rather than new space spending .
 The draft of the internal BOB review was completed on May 18, and sent it to Secretary of Defense McNamara, NASA administrator Webb, and Atomic Energy Commission chairman Glenn Seaborg with a request for immediate comments .
 Welsh of the Space Council also received a copy in the absence of Vice President Johnson, who was still touring in Asia . Welsh received the copy of the book in absence of vice president Johnson .
 The review was the kind of thorough ‘due diligence’ assessment that was the BOB’s responsibility . It was pointed out the implications of the decisions being proposed and examined potential obstacles to their successful implementation .
 Review points out that what was being proposed was an increase of over $2 billion per year . Budget could be $3 billion more than previously planned budgets, review says .
 What would be needed was “a commitment to a long term-effort and to provide the resources it requires’s needed,” says the government . “A commitment to the long-term effort is needed," she says .
 The draft BOB report pointed out the need to consider “the implications of likely and possible outcomes other than complete success” of the lunar landing program . This discussion was missing from the final version of the BOB Report .
 If they did read it, they would have had the benefit of a comprehensive and thoughtful analysis of the implications of the decisions that Kennedy was about to announce, he says .
 The BOB review did not attempt to assign a cost to the overall Apollo project through the planned first landing . The review was conducted by the BOB in 1973 .
 NASA staff estimate for the additional cost of the lunar landing program above what had been previously planned was in the range of $10 to $12 billion . Hugh Dryden had used an $11. billion increment in his April 22 presentation to Vice President Johnson .
 Webb’s administrative discount applied both to announcing a date for the first landing attempt and for the precise cost of the project, Lambright says . Lambright suggests that Webb's discount applies both to announce a date and for a precise cost .
 Webb wanted “a margin of flexibility weighted against what technical experts thought was possible, just in case something went wrong. With respect to the landing date, Webb wanted to be flexible, he said .
 Webb says the $10 to $12 billion estimate “looked much too low to Webb’s estimate . With respect to the projected costs, the estimate looked too low, Webb says . Webb: $10-12 billion is "much too low" for Webb .
 Webb’s objective was to maximize the benefits of an accelerated space program for Earth in terms of research, education, and regional economic development . Webb was the first person to launch a space program to explore the Earth in space . Webb's objective is to maximise the potential benefits of
 Webb consulted with colleagues outside the government to get public support for accelerated program . Webb was consulting with his colleagues outside government and those whose support might be important to the public acceptance of the new effort .
 Webb regretted that he regretted that the two “find ourselves on somewhat different sides of the complex question of manned space flight” Webb and Webb had a confrontation at a Washington social function over the value of humans in space .
 Webb noted that “no one could have ridden down Pennsylvania Avenue with Commander Shepard without feeling the deep desire of those lining the Avenue for something to be proud of and a hero’s hero”
 Webb prepared a May 23 memorandum for the vice president as Johnson returned from his Asian trip . Webb’s most sweeping version of Webb's vision can be found in a memo he prepared for Johnson . Webb's memo is one of the clearest examples of Webb‘s vision for
 On investigation, I find that we are going to have to establish some place where we can do the technology related to the Apollo program . This should be on the water where the vehicle can ultimately be barged to the launching site, he says .
 "We have looked carefully at the situation at Rice, and at the possible locations near the Houston Ship Canal or other accessible waterways in that general area," the mayor says .
 Webb was preempting the decision on where to relocate the Space Task Group as it took on the lunar landing assignment, even though the process through which that decision would be formalized extended for four more months . In essence, Webb preempted the decision to move the space task group as it
 Webb did not stop with Houston; he broadened his horizon to the whole region . Webb's focus was on Houston, Houston, and Houston, Texas . Webb: "I'm looking forward to the future of Houston"
 No commitments have been made, but I believe it is going to be of great importance to develop the intellectual and other resources of the Southwest in connection with the new programs .
 Webb is a long-time Webb friend and chairman of the National Academy Space Science Board . Webb is also a friend of the Webb friend Dr. Dr. Martin Martin, who is on the board of NASA .
 Lloyd Berkner is establishing a Graduate Research Center in Dallas with the backing of Eric Johnston, Cecil Green, and others in that area (estimated at about one hundred million dollars) The center will be located in Dallas .
 He related his vision for Southwest regional development to the nation as a whole . He said he wants to see the Southwest as a model for the nation .
 Webb had little hesitation in using his position at NASA to implement his vision of an improved America . The space program buildup over the next few years that resulted from Kennedy's decision allowed Webb the room needed to put his agenda into practice .
 The overall theme of the speech was the need for U.S. citizens to make sacrifices to meet the challenges facing the country . The speech was given to the title of the address .
 The president outlined his specific proposals, which included measures to continue economic recovery from the recession the new administration had inherited . He also outlined a strengthened civil defense program and increased emphasis on disarmament negotiations .
 Kennedy: All of these initiatives would involve substantial costs . Kennedy: "All these initiatives, these initiatives" would involve significant costs .
 President Obama recommends new action on space exploration . The president says space exploration is the next step in his plan to take action .
 Kennedy’s words as they deviated from the prepared text are indicated in bold italics below . Kennedy's words are indicated by bold italicized language in the remarks below .
 Kennedy skipped a few portions of the prepared text or deleted passages by hand . Kennedy also skipped some of his prepared texts .
 We have examined where we are strong and where we're not, where we may succeed and where may not. With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined our strengths and weaknesses .
 "Now it is time to take longer strides," says President Obama . "Time for this nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement," he says .
 "We have never made the national decisions or marshaled the national resources required for such leadership. But the facts of the matter are that we have never marshaled such resources," says President Obama .
 We have never specified long-range goals on an urgent time schedule, or managed our resources and our time so as to insure their fulfillment . We have managed our time and resources to ensure their goals are met, the company says .
 The Soviet Union has a long lead in developing its own rocket engines . The U.S. needs to make new efforts on its own to compete with Russia .
 We cannot guarantee that we shall one day be first, we can guarantee that any failure to make this effort will make us last . For while we cannot guarantee . that we will one day . be first . We can't guarantee that . we will never be first. We can only guarantee
 "We take an additional risk by making it in full view of the world," says Shepard . Shepard: "This very risk enhances our stature when we are successful" Shepard: We take an extra risk by going into space .
 "Space is open to us now; and our eagerness to share its meaning is not governed by the efforts of others," says the author . Space is open now, and we are eager to share it with others, he says .
 We go to space because whatever mankind must undertake, free men must fully share . We go into space because we want to help free men fully share. We are committed to our mission to space .
 I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth .
 No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind or more important for the long-range exploration of space . None of these will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. No single project will be the most impressive .
 We propose to accelerate the development of the appropriate lunar spacecraft . The lunar spacecraft will be built on the lunar surface .
 We propose to develop alternate liquid and solid fueled boosters much larger than any now being developed, until certain which is superior . The rocket boosters will be larger than current boosters .
 It will not be one man going to the moon, it will be an entire nation, says President Obama . But in a very real sense, the moon will be a nation, he says . The moonwalk will be the first of its kind .
 Members of Congress must finally make a judgment on the issue, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Congress will consider the matter carefully, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "Now this is a choice which this country must make"
 No one can predict with certainty what the ultimate meaning will be of the mastery of space . But all of you have lived through the last four years and have seen the significance of space and the adventures in space .
 There is no sense in agreeing or desiring that the United States take an affirmative position in outer space, unless we are prepared to do the work and bear the burdens to make it successful . But I think every citizen of this country as well as the Members of Congress should consider the matter
 "This decision demands a major national commitment of scientific and technical manpower, material and facilities, and the possibility of their diversion from other important activities where they are already thinly spread," the government said .
 "It means a degree of dedication, organization and discipline which have not always characterized our research and development efforts," says the scientist . It means a high level of dedication and discipline, he says .
 We cannot afford work stoppages, inflated costs of material or talent, wasteful interagency rivalries, or high turnover of key personnel . It means we cannot afford high turnover, work stoppage, or inflated costs or talent .
 Kennedy apparently sensed some in the Congressional audience were “skeptical, if not hostile” and that his request was being received with stunned doubt and disbelief . This likely led to his decision to deviate from his prepared text to try to convince congressmen of what he was proposing
 The editorial thought that “the majority of our people will agree” with the lunar landing goal . The goal is to land the moon on the moon in 1969 .
 Kennedy need not have worried about congressional support of his accelerated space effort . Kennedy needn't worry about congressional, and particularly Senate, support of the accelerated space program he proposed .
 Lyndon Johnson’s earlier consultations with congressional leaders had helped lay the foundation for strong bipartisan support of the initiative . Lyndon Johnson had earlier consulted with Congress leaders .
 The Senate passed a bill that included the full $1.784 billion for NASA that White House had requested for Fiscal Year 1962 . The bill passed without even the formality of a roll-call vote in the Senate .
 The appropriations bill containing NASA funds had a similarly easy ride through Congress . It passed both houses on August 7 and contained a $1,671,750,000 NASA appropriation for Fiscal 1962, only $113 million less than Kennedy had requested .
 There is some uncertainty on how the decision was made to use this phrase, rather than the 1967 date for the first landing attempt that was being used in NASA’s internal planning .
 Webb-McNamara report had suggested an “end of the decade” target for the first lunar landing . The May 8 Webb report had said an ‘end-of-the decade’ target was an end to the decade .
 The first draft of Kennedy’s speech “called for a lunar landing by 1967” and NASA was “aghast” at specifying a particular year .
 “before this decade is out” was universally seen as setting a target of the end of 1969 for the initial lunar landing . A “within the next ten years” interpretation was never acknowledged . “Within the next 10 years’s” definition was never
 John Kennedy pushed for a landing as soon as possible, in 1967 or even late 1966 . Kennedy pushed to a landing in the summer of 1967 or late 1966.
 This shift was the end result of a process in which many factors were involved . This shift is the result of many factors, including many factors involved .
 NASA planners convinced James Webb that human space flight was key to the agency's future . Webb became an effective advocate of NASA’s interests . Webb was a key advocate for NASA .
 The support of the Space Science Board helped allay some of the scientific criticism that the human space flight program had little scientific value . The support from the space science board allays some scientific criticism of the program .
 Alan Shepard’s flight demonstrated both human capability to survive and function in space and the great public enthusiasm for human space flight . The success of Alan Shepard's flight demonstrated human capability and public support for space travel .
 The ability of NASA to withstand an Air Force and industry challenge to its role as the nation's primary space agency strengthened NASA’s claim that it could undertake new, ambitious missions . NASA's ability to withstand the Air Force challenge to NASA's role strengthened NASA's claim to undertake new
 Lyndon Johnson’s personal conviction about the strategic importance of space, coupled with his assignment as head of the Space Council, placed him a forceful advocate of a larger space effort at the side of the president . Johnson's personal conviction .
 Congress has loosened one constraint on the president’s freedom to choose a bold course of action . The consistent call from the Congress, particularly from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, loosens one of the constraints .
 The flight of Yuri Gagarin and the world’s reaction to it provided a strong impetus to make space decisions quickly . The Bay of Pigs added to that pressure, adding to the pressure on space travel .
 New men brought with them ideas of the 'seed time' of the 1950s . New men arrived in the '50s and '60s .
 Among those ideas were the notions that the Third World was the main theater of the Cold War . In that contest prestige was as important as power .
 Their ideas validated a far greater role for government in planning and executing social change . The group's ideas validated the greater role government has in planning for social change in planning .
 The new men cared more for imagery and felt increasing pressure to display their control over affairs in the wake of early setbacks in foreign policy .
 We will probably never know what was in Kennedy’s mind when he decided that Americans should go to the moon . They were technocratic, applying command technology to political problems . Kennedy was technocratic .
 Perhaps Apollo could not be justified, but, by God, we could not not do it . Perhaps Apollo was not justified . Perhaps it was, perhaps it was God's will to do it, but we couldn't not .
 Kennedy had “fired off” to advisers “a constant stream of written questions’s on costs, risks, manpower, alternatives, and administrative responsibility, he said . Kennedy said in the weeks between the Gagarin flight and his May 25 speech, he had �
 Robert Kennedy commented that his brother thought that winning the space race was “very important” Robert Kennedy said that he wanted to win the race in space .
 In anticipation of President Kennedy’s decision to approve a lunar landing project as a top priority national undertaking, NASA on May 2, 1961, had begun in earnest to examine just what would be required . Chapter 8 First Steps on the Way to the Moon is published by NASA .
 New facilities would be needed, new approaches to space flight would be required . New hardware would have to be developed, new facilities would need to be needed .
 This was certainly not the perception of those directly involved with the mobilization of human and financial resources required to carry out the lunar landing project . The moon landing project was launched in 1969 and 1969 .
 The second half of 1961 and most of 1962 were marked by a rapid series of decisions . The decision was made in the wake of a series of rapid decisions by the government .
 To many in the White House and NASA concerned with attempting to meet the late 1967 target date that NASA had set for the first attempt at a lunar landing, there was a sense of urgency . To them, “nerve-racking deadlines” were a daily reality .
 NASA in 1961 and 1962 chose the locations for the facilities that would be required for the lunar landing mission, selected and contracted for the launch vehicles and spacecraft to carry out the mission . This decision resulted in an intense conflict with the White House science advisers .
 NASA reorganized itself for the task of managing Project Apollo while carrying out Project Mercury and getting started on an intermediate human space flight effort, Project Gemini . Project Gemini was the beginning of Project Apollo .
 "This was truly an unprecedented warlike, albeit peaceful, mobilization of national resources," says President Obama . This was truly a warlike and unprecedented mobilization, he says .
 President Kennedy and his White House associates viewed this rapid buildup with mixed emotions . President Kennedy's White House aides viewed the rapid buildup of the U.S. military assets .
 Kennedy made it clear that getting to the Moon before the Soviet Union was one of his top policy priorities . By the end of 1962, Kennedy appeared willing to provide even more resources to NASA if doing so would increase the chances of achieving that objective .
 Kennedy focused his interest on the lunar landing program . NASA argued that across-the-board preeminence was the fundamental goal of achieving it . The lunar landing was only the most visible element of the program .
 Budget projections that had accompanied Kennedy’s May 1961 decision to go to the Moon were admittedly highly uncertain . Budget projections had warned Kennedy that the decisions he was making would lead to a very expensive space effort in the coming years .
 Kennedy did not pay very much attention to that warning . Kennedy was trying to get the country to space leadership .
 Kennedy soon became concerned about the space program’s rapidly growing costs . This concern intensified during 1962 as the full scope of the lunar landing effort became clearer .
 Kennedy pressed staff to make sure that the related costs were fully justified . Kennedy pressed his staff to ensure that the cost of the project was fully justified, Kennedy said .
 Kennedy’s determination to win the race to the Moon remained firm . Kennedy's desire to be first in space justified in his mind the high costs of achieving that position .
 President Kennedy wanted to send Americans to the Moon "before this decade is out" Kennedy made the space program of direct personal interest to him .
 Kennedy could not have anticipated making such a decision within four months of taking office . He had been willing to delegate to Vice President Lyndon B Johnson the administration's lead role in space policy .
 Johnson did indeed take charge of the review, but on a highly personal basis . Johnson took charge of it, but it was on a personal basis, he said .
 There were no formal meetings of the National Aeronautics and Space Council before Johnson forwarded the Webb-McNamara recommendations to Kennedy with his endorsement . There was only one Space Council staff person, executive secretary Edward Welsh .
 Kennedy made the final decision to approve the recommendations of the Webb-McNamara report . The vice president, at Kennedy’s request, was traveling in Asia when Kennedy approved them .
 The absence of Johnson during this critical period was symbolic of his declining role after May 1961 as the first among equals with respect to advising the president on NASA’s programs . Johnson's absence was symbolic .
 Johnson's urging Kennedy to approve a major acceleration of the civilian space program was an important influence on JFK’s decision to go to the Moon . It is very likely that Johnson’�s urging Kennedy .
 Kennedy relied primarily on his White House policy, technical, national security, and budgetary staff . NASA leadership provided him information on the implementation of that decision and to relay his concerns to NASA workforce .
 Kennedy soon realized that what he was likely to get from Johnson and the Space Council staff was unquestioning advocacy for a strong space effort, not the kind of dispassionate analysis that he most welcomed . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm getting from Johnson, but I'm
 Science adviser Jerome Wiesner and his staff raised questions about the choices NASA was making with respect to various aspects of the space effort . NASA's BOB staff thought it was their role, whatever their personal views, to raise questions .
 The predictability of the positions that Lyndon Johnson and the Space Council staff would take on most space issues limited their influence on Kennedy’s policy choices . Kennedy's policy choices were often predictable .
 The Space Council as a body was not central to any of the civilian space decisions of the Kennedy administration . With one exception, developing during 1961 the administration’s approach to bring communications satellites into early practical use .
 By the end of 1962, the council staff had grown to twelve professional staff members, several consultants, and a large support staff . The total staff complement was twenty-eight, with a total of twelve professional members .
 The council was a sizeable element of the executive office of the president . It was comparable in size to the Office of Science and Technology, which dealt with all other areas of science and technology .
 The Space Council budget during the Kennedy administration grew to just over $500,000 per year . The space council budget grew to $1.5 million in 2009 .
 Johnson responds to Welsh's suggestion of a series of “Vice President’s Reports on Space” Johnson said, “I sure like that.”
 There were fourteen formal meetings of the Space Council during the Kennedy administration . Most were devoted to discussion of already-decided activities, rather than formulating recommendations for presidential decision .
 During 1962 and early 1963, the council staff devoted a great deal of time and effort to drafting a statement of national space policy . This initiative was abandoned when both NASA and the Department of Defense opposed issuing such a statement .
 Johnson frequently gave speeches prepared by the Space Council staff on space issues . Johnson allowed staff-prepared articles to appear under his name in various publications .
 Space Council member and chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission Glenn Seaborg and Space Council executive secretary Edward C Welsh . Johnson came prepared with responses to potential press conferences .
 Johnson's Space Council chairmanship was “only briefly satisfying for Lyndon.” As Johnson biographer Merle Miller suggests, “the Space Council Chairmanship was...only briefly satisfied for Lyndon”
 Webb was insistent on having direct access to the president . Webb was the head of an agency newly charged with an effort that was a top presidential priority . Webb is a veteran of Washington bureaucracy .
 Webb was scrupulous in keeping Johnson informed, but he made it clear that he worked for the president, not vice president . Webb kept the vice president informed of Johnson's intelligence . Webb was a good friend of Johnson, but kept him out of touch with Johnson, he said .
 This left little room for the vice president and the Space Council staff to play a central role in most of the decisions on how best to move forward in sending Americans to the Moon . This also left little time for the Vice President and the space council staff .
 It may be useful to depict the structure of White House decision-making for space . The White House took action during the June 1961 to December 1962 period .
 Kennedy defined the lunar landing program primarily as a national security effort . Bundy played an increasingly important role in space policy discussions between 196] and 1963 .
 Bundy’s deputy, Harvard economist Carl Kaysen, and National Security Council career staff member Charles E Johnson played key roles in supporting Bundy on space issues . Kaysens reported directly to Kennedy rather than through Bundy .
 From the start of 1962, Wiesner’s principal staff assistant on space matters was Nicholas Golovin, a physicist who had left NASA at the end of 1961 on less than harmonious terms . The physicist left NASA in 1961 after leaving the agency on 'harmless terms
 Another of Wiesner’s staffers, Eugene Skolnikoff, dealt with the international aspects of the space effort . Another of the staffers dealt with international aspects . The space shuttle program was the first shuttle mission to orbit Earth .
 He leaned heavily on his director of BOB, David Bell, for careful assessments of the budget implications of the fast-paced space program .
 Bell’s deputy, Elmer Staats, and especially career BOB senior staffer Willis Shapley were deeply involved in space matters . Shapley was also deeply involved with space matters, including space .
 Shapley was central to framing policy and budget issues as he drafted various policy papers for presidential review and decision . Shapley's role was to draft policy papers to be reviewed by the White House .
 Kennedy’s top adviser on most domestic policy matters, was Theodore C Sorensen . Kennedy was JFK's top adviser . He was also his speechwriter and speechwriter .
 Kennedy in April 1961 asked Sorensen to organize review of space program that was carried out by Vice President Johnson . Kennedy in . April 1961 had asked for review of the space program to be conducted .
 Sorensen remained involved in space policy decisions as the president’s alter ego on most policy matters . He seldom got directly involved with NASA oversight as the Moon program evolved .
 On politically sensitive matters, Kennedy’s special assistant Kenneth O’Donnell became involved . O'Donnell was involved in the allocation of NASA contracts and the location of NASA facilities . Kennedy's special assistant became involved in NASA contracts .
 Robert Kennedy was the president’s closest confidant on most policy and political matters . Robert Kennedy had only limited involvement on space issues . It is impossible to know how frequently space matters were discussed between the brothers .
 Bundy, Wiesner, Bell and their staff were the primary points of contact between the White House and NASA as the U.S. space effort took its first steps toward a landing on the Moon . It thus fell to Bundy and Wielder to be the primary point of contact
 NASA would have to quickly create several large new facilities . It was clear to NASA managers that as part of the . decision to start a rapid space buildup, NASA would need to quickly .
 The decision on what kind of facilities to build and, politically more important, where to locate them was a high priority issue in the months immediately following President Kennedy’s May 1961 speech .
 Planning for the facility buildup began in earnest even before the speech . The announcement of facility decisions could not be made until August 1961 .
 Project Mercury, the Space Task Group, was managing Project Mercury . The space Task Group needed to be moved from its location at the Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, to its location .
 Human space flight required engineering development, flight operations, and especially project management skills . This move was necessary because of the engineering research-oriented approach that was characteristic of Langley .
 NASA Administrator Glennan heard from Congressman Albert Thomas, whose district included Houston, Texas, in October 1958 . Thomas was the first congressman to hear from Glennan .
 Thomas was chairman of the House of Representatives appropriations subcommittee that controlled NASA’s funding . Thomas is a former member of Congress who controlled NASA's funding .
 Thomas responded “somewhat peevishly” that the decision to locate the new facility in Maryland “had gone through without his sanction since he had been absent” from Washington, Thomas said . Thomas said he was “puzzled” by the decision
 NASA administrator Webb recognized that a separate, new NASA center would indeed be needed to manage the effort . Webb instructed his staff to begin the site selection process .
 President Obama put $60 million in the NASA budget estimates for the new center . He put the money in the budget estimates being prepared for the White House as a down payment for the project .
 The site selection team considered locations in Florida and California, but was also well aware of Representative Thomas’s long-standing interest in having a new NASA installation in Houston .
 NASA representatives visited Houston on May 16, even before the president’s announcement of the lunar landing goal .
 Rep. Thomas made it clear to NASA administrator James Webb that the 1958 Houston offer still stood . Thomas: The implied threat of problems for the NASA budget if it were not accepted still stands .
 Humble Oil donated the land to Rice to be transferred to NASA . The Houston corporation still owned most of the surrounding property . It realized that its value would increase substantially if a major new government facility were located on the university's land .
 George Brown’s construction company, Brown & Root, hoped to get the contract to build the new NASA installation . George Brown's construction company hopes to win the contract for the installation .
 Brown was chairman of the Rice Board of Trustees . He had been a major contributor to Lyndon Johnson’s senatorial campaigns . Brown was also closely allied with Albert Thomas .
 Rep. George Miller was the acting chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics after Overton Brooks fell ill . Rep. Miller was on the panel when Brooks was ill .
 Missouri directed its advocacy through powerful Senator Stuart Symington . Missouri has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 Thomas, Olin ‘Tiger’ Teague and Joe Kilgore made the case for Texas . Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn and Vice President Rayburn were also involved .
 President Kennedy and his top political assistant Kenneth O’Donnell were under pressure from the governor of Massachusetts to locate the new center at Hingham Air Force Base near Boston .
 Volpe wrote Kennedy on July 19, before the site selection process had formally begun, saying that “as one Bay Stater to another,” he wanted to call the advantages of the Massachusetts location to the president's attention .
 The final criteria for site selection, including both eight “essential criteria” and four “desirable criteria,” were approved by top NASA managers in mid-August . NASA managers approved the site selection criteria in August .
 Administrator Webb specifically reiterated the “mild climate” requirement as being essential . Before that approval, Webb had reviewed and specifically reiterated that .
 Webb provided five justifications for the climate requirement . Webb concluded that “selection of a site in an area meeting the stated climate criterion will minimize both the cost and the time required for this project” The Boston area failed to meet the requirement .
 NASA site selection team visited nine potential sites, notably not including Houston . NASA has not selected Houston, Texas, as a possible site .
 Site selection team “felt that locations north of the freezing line were unlikely to meet the requirements” and thus did not originally plan to visit any such site . The site selection team said they did not want to visit sites north of freezing line .
 Delegations representing sites in Virginia and Rhode Island not being considered by the selection team pleaded their case in presentations directly to NASA's James Webb and Hugh Dryden .
 Massachusetts delegation met with NASA leaders to argue for consideration of Hingham site . Senator Benjamin Smith, JFK's former college roommate, was appointed in December 1960 to fill JFK’s Senate seat .
 A large meeting of Boston business interests sponsored by the leading local newspaper, The Boston Globe, also called upon the president to select the site .
 Governor Volpe called Webb on September 8, again asking whether the team would visit Massachusetts . Webb has been in Massachusetts since 2008 . Webb is the son of James Webb, a former presidential candidate .
 Volpe told Webb that “great political pressure was building up” for such a visit . Volpe: “Great political pressure’s been building up" for a visit to Russia .
 Volpe told Webb that he could make public his intervention with Webb in order to relieve some of the political pressure on the governor . Webb responded that “it was most difficult to promise this without doing so in many other cases,” but told Volpe that it was “
 The only other site visited on the basis of political intervention was in St. Louis, Missouri . The site was visited by the president of the United States .
 John F Kennedy followed this process closely, and Webb kept him informed . Webb briefed him on the likely outcome on September 11 . Kennedy was briefed on the likelihood of the outcome .
 The president wanted NASA to have full responsibility for the site selection decision . NASA will be responsible for the decision, he said .
 Webb later revised this account of the selection process, saying that Kennedy had at some point called Albert Thomas to seek his support for several bills before the House of Representatives . Webb later said Kennedy had asked Thomas to support several bills in the House .
 MacDill Air Force Base near Tampa, Florida, was scheduled for closure as a Strategic Air Command airfield . The team’s first choice, flying in the face of political pressures from Texas interests, was the base's first choice .
 Webb and Dryden would have accepted this recommendation, given their broader perspective and the need to consider political factors . It is interesting to speculate whether Webb and dryden would accept this recommendation .
 Webb and Dryden met on the evening of September 13 and again on the morning of September 14 to review the site selection team report and hear the results of its last minute visit to Massachusetts . Webb: "We're looking forward to a long-awaited trip to Massachusetts. We're looking
 The public announcement of the selection of the Houston location came on September 19 . The Houston location will be the first of its kind in Texas .
 James Webb had advocated in his May 23 memorandum to Vice President Johnson had come into being . The arc of new NASA installations along the Gulf of Mexico coast in the southeastern region of the U.S. had come to an end .
 Locations for new Apollo facilities were settled expeditiously . NASA was slower in selecting what approach to use in getting to the Moon and thus what spacecraft and launch vehicle would be needed .
 Wiesner: “Six months have elapsed since the decision to put man on the moon, yet none of these crucial hardware programs have progressed beyond the study phase.” He noted that “six months’s elapsed” since the announcement of the moon landing .
 It is hoped that there will be no further field stations beyond these already announced, he said .
 NASA is one week away from contracting for the Apollo command and service module, one element of the spacecraft needed for the lunar landing . NASA had issued a contract on August 10 to the MIT Instrumentation Laboratory for the guidance system .
 Delay in selecting the design of launch vehicle for the lunar mission had meant that its procurement had had had to wait .
 There were two reasons for the delay in selecting the launch vehicle for the lunar mission . The launch vehicle will be the first vehicle to carry out the mission .
 Webb-McNamara memorandum had anticipated a collaborative effort to define a family of launch vehicles . NASA-DOD effort to meet both agencies’ requirements and advance the development of both liquid fuel and solid fuel propulsion systems .
 The group started work in July 1961, and by the fall had become bogged down in very detailed studies . By the fall, the group had become deadlocked over the relative roles of liquid-fueled boosters in the lunar landing program .
 The group suggested a new Air Force-developed launch vehicle, called Titan HI, with lift capabilities closely resembling the Saturn 1] vehicle that NASA was developing .
 This uncertainty would continue well into 1962 and become a focus of NASA-White House controversy . Indeed, this uncertainty would have continued well through 1962 .
 A series of NASA studies examined alternatives for accomplishing the lunar mission . A final decision on whether to approve a lunar landing effort had been made on May 2 .
 The first of these studies took as its starting point a ‘direct ascent’ approach, in which the spacecraft for the lunar mission would be launched by a giant booster with eight F-1 engines in its first stage . The spacecraft would have to be carried out by an F-
 The spacecraft would fly directly to the Moon and land intact on the lunar surface . It would be the first time a spacecraft has ever landed on the Moon .
 A portion of the spacecraft would then take off from the Moon after the astronauts had completed their exploration, and return directly to Earth . The spacecraft would return to Earth in part of a mission to the Moon .
 This approach meant designing a seventy-five-ton spacecraft, almost forty times the weight of the Mercury capsule, that would “back down” to a lunar landing . During the landing, the astronauts would be on their backs at the other end of the craft, more than eighty
 The direct ascent approach also required that the fuel for the return journey and the heat shield needed for reentry into the Earth’s atmosphere, both of which were heavy, would have to be carried to and then launched from the lunar surface . The fuel and heat shield required for re
 A large and heavy spacecraft would require a very powerful booster called Nova to send it to the Moon in a single launch . The booster is called Nova and would need to be able to launch it in the next two months .
 The more von Braun thought about the technological leap required to develop the gigantic Nova vehicle, the more it looked for alternatives to making such a jump . The more NASA looked at alternatives to developing the giant vehicle .
 This approach would allow the lunar spacecraft and the rocket stage needed to send it toward the Moon to be divided into two or more pieces, each piece launched separately . Each piece could be launched separately to launch to the Moon .
 One or more rendezvous in Earth orbit would then be needed to assemble the pieces into a single spacecraft . The spacecraft would then need to be assembled into a one-off spacecraft .
 An alternative EOR approach was to send the complete spacecraft and its Earth departure stage fueled with light liquid hydrogen into Earth orbit with one launch . An alternative approach would send the entire spacecraft and the Earth-bound departure stage to Earth orbit .
 A second launch would carry into orbit the comparatively heavy liquid oxygen used as the oxidizer for burning the hydrogen fuel . The oxygen would then be transferred to the lunarbound rocket stage . Then the oxygen would be transferred onto the lunar bound rocket stage.
 Using an EOR approach meant that a launch vehicle significantly smaller than the Nova could be developed for the lunar mission . The Nova launch vehicle was developed for a mission to the moon .
 It did not solve the problem of how to land a single large spacecraft on the lunar surface . However, it still does not solve a problem of landing a large spacecraft .
 Several versions of a smaller launch vehicle were proposed during the 1961 studies . A smaller version of the vehicle was also proposed .
 The Saturn C-2 that had been part of NASA’s plans in the spring was soon abandoned . An “Advanced Saturn” with several powerful F-1 engines in its first stage became the focus of attention .
 The two-engine version became known as the Saturn C-3 and the C-4 . The four-engine versions of the Saturn were also known as C-2 and C4 .
 NASA should develop an “intermediate vehicle” that had five F- engines in the first stage, four or five J-2 engines in its second stage, and one in its third stage . Rosen reported that “to exploit the possibility of accomplishing the first lunar landing
 The four-engine Saturn C-4 had a “hole” in the center of its four first-stage F-1 engines . Adding a fifth engine would be relatively straightforward, adding a fifth would be easier .
 Adding a fifth engine would increase first stage thrust at liftoff to 7.m. pounds . Adding the fifth engine to the launch force would increase thrust to 7m pounds . It would be the first time the plane has had a five-engine engine .
 The recommendation for a five-engine first stage for the launch vehicle was quickly accepted by NASA leadership . The recommendation was soon called the Advanced Saturn C-5 and ultimately the Saturn V . The Saturn V was the first stage of the Saturn Saturn vehicle .
 NASA budget for 1963 was 50 percent greater than had been projected just six months earlier . Wiesner noted in his November 20 memorandum that the NASA budget being discussed for Fiscal Year 1963 was greater than expected .
 Budget projections accompanying the accelerated space effort had projected a NASA budget of $3.029 billion for FY1963 . President Kennedy had approved in May that President Kennedy approved that accelerated space program .
 NASA submitted its FY1963 request to the BOB several months later had grown to $4.238 billion . The request was a 40 percent increase over the May estimate . NASA submitted the request for FY1963 was $3.7 billion .
 In May the BOB had thought that NASA’s projections for future budgets “appeared to us to be understated,” Bell said . He said that BOB anticipated a $3.3 billion budget request for FY1963, although it had not used that number
 Bell estimated that the NASA budget would continue to increase, reaching $4. billion in FY1964, $5.billion in FY 1965 . Bell said that NASA budget will continue to rise in FY1966 . Bell: NASA budget expected to reach $5 billion in 1965 .
 At the end of 1961 the accelerated space effort was projected to cost at least $2.2 billion more than had been estimated just six months earlier . This meant that at the . end of the 1961 space effort, the accelerated . space effort had to be accelerated to cost $2 billion
 The rapidly increasing costs of the U.S. space program continued to trouble President Kennedy after he sent his $3.787 billion Fiscal Year 1963 request for NASA to the Congress in early 1962 .
 There was no parallel single national security space budget request . Department of Defense and intelligence space programs were incorporated into the general DOD budget, rather than receiving separate budget treatment .
 Increasing DOD expenditures for space were also of concern to the president . The president also expressed concern about increasing DOD expenditures .
 Kennedy asked the BOB in June 1962 to carry out a comprehensive review of all U.S. space efforts . Kennedy asked for a total overview of the United States space program .
 Kennedy expressed concern about the geographical distribution of NASA funding . Webb also reported that he had received complaints from states such as “Michigan, Pennsylvania, and the eastern states” that NASA was focusing its expenditures on California .
 Richard Callaghan, a Kennedy loyalist and congressional staffer, was sent to NASA as a special assistant to Webb . The White House wanted to provide the White House with its own channel of information .
 States west of the Mississippi River received 56 percent of NASA prime contracts . States east of the river received 44 percent of prime contracts, Kennedy said .
 When both prime contracts and first-tier subcontracts by the prime contractors were considered, 53 percent of the work was in the East and 47 percent in the West, Webb continued . Webb continued, saying that when both prime . contracts were considered by the . prime contractors, he said,
 Webb also noted that in the second half of 1961 Massachusetts had received 64 percent more in NASA funding than it had received in the first half of the year . Massachusetts also received more funding from NASA in second half, 1961 .
 The BOB was intended to lay out in a consistent format the five-year space programs of the Department of Defense, NASA, the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Reconnaissance Office, the organization developing and operating U.S. reconnaissance satellites, the very existence of which was highly classified
 It is not clear whether it was the president himself who was raising this question . Given his interest just a few months later to push for an earlier date, this seems unlikely .
 President Kennedy was more skeptical of the value of Apollo than was the president . Kennedy's budget, technology, and policy advisers were making sure that Kennedy recognized the full implications of his space commitment .
 Kennedy was paying particular attention to controlling rapid increases in spending in discretionary areas such as space and defense . Short-term concerns in mid-1962 about a possible recession, talk of a temporary tax cut, and a desire to avoid an unbalanced federal budget .
 The satellite programs were classified at such a high level that only relatively few people inside the government were cleared to possess the binders . These were put into two loose-leaf binders and, because intelligence satellite programs included, were classified .
 Report examined the budget impacts of slipping the target date for the first landing attempt until late 1968 . The report examined the short-term budget impacts on the budget .
 James Webb was reminded of President Kennedy’s concern about the rising costs of the NASA program . Webb was once again reminded of Kennedy's concern about rising costs .
 Kennedy sent a brief memorandum to Webb about the cost of the new Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston . Kennedy asked Webb about reports that the cost had increased from $60 million to $123 million . Kennedy sent Webb a brief memo asking him about the price of the center .
 Webb said that “the figures quoted are substantially correct; the implications are not,” Webb said . Webb provided a lengthy explanation of the reason for the higher cost figure .
 In a note to budget director Bell, the president said it seemed to him that the cost of the new center was “excessive” and the cost increase “does raise the question of funding of the entire program’s program”
 A year had passed since the second Soviet orbital flight of cosmonaut Gherman Titov on August 6, 1961 . Titov made his first orbital orbitary flight in August 1961 .
 Titov, unlike Yuri Gagarin, had experienced significant motion sickness during his seventeen-orbit, day-long flight . Titov had completed his one orbit with no ill effects . Gagin had completed one orbit .
 On August 11, 1962, the Soviet Union launched its third human space flight . The next day, much to the surprise of Western observers, launched a fourth human mission .
 The two Soviet spacecraft passed close to one another early in their joint mission . The two cosmonauts communicated using their on-board radios, and, according to some reports, saw each other’s spacecraft . They did not have the maneuvering capabilities required for a rendezvous attempt
 The U.S. didn't see the Soviet Union's ability to carry out a space rendezvous . Until the lack of that capability became evident, there was concern that the Soviets had beaten the United States to that milestone .
 His response suggests both his continuing commitment to catching up with the Soviet Union and his recognition of how expensive the space effort was becoming . His response suggested both his continued commitment to catch up with Soviet Union .
 The launch of two men within 24 hours seems to have caused a good deal of pessimism in the U.S. Q.
 It’s a tremendous job to build a booster of the size that the Soviet Union is talking about, and also have it much larger size, which we are presently engaged in the Saturn program . The U.S. is working on the Saturn booster program .
 Before the end of this decade is out, the United States will be ahead, he says . But he says he believes that before the U.S. is ahead, it will be out .
 It's going to take us quite a while to catch up with a very advanced program which the Soviets are directing and there’s no indication they are going to quit . And it’ll take us a long time to catch-up with the advanced program, says CNN's
 We increased after I took office, after 4 months, we increased the budget for space by 50 percent over that of my predecessor . The budget was 50 percent higher than that of his predecessor .
 This year's space budget was greater than the combined eight space budgets of the previous eight years . The fact of the matter is that this year we submitted a space budget which was greater . This year’s space budget will be greater than any previous eight-year budgets .
 "We might as well recognize that we're behind now and we're going to be for a while," he says . "But we might well recognize ... that we’re behind now," he adds .
 U.S. launch of its Mariner II spacecraft to Venus on August 27 went well; for the first time, the United States was on its way to another planet . The White House was anxious to contrast the White House's success with the Soviet failure .
 On August 31, Kaysen sent a memorandum to the White House discussing how best to announce this and prior Soviet failures without revealing the classified means through which the information was acquired .
 On September 5, Lieutenant General Marshall Carter, acting director of the CIA, provided to President Kennedy a “fact sheet” on six Soviet failures of probes to Venus or Mars .
 Webb sent a letter to the chairmen of the Senate and House Space Committees detailing the Soviet failures . Webb's letter was intended to be leaked to the media, and the press soon picked up the story . The White House decided to accept this risk .
 NASA calculated that 40 percent of the cost of launch vehicles was related to their electronic components . This presented a problem with respect to NASA’s ability to manage its contracts with industry and academia . The cost was 50 to 70 percent .
 Experience with early robotic spacecraft suggested that there were significant differences in the reliability requirements for electronic components in space as compared to on Earth .
 NASA employees at the time were more interested in the structural and propulsion aspects of spacecraft and launch vehicle design and development than their electronic aspects . Most NASA employees were more focused on the structural aspects of the spacecraft .
 A new NASA laboratory, or “field center,” was created in 1962 to manage NASA’s electronics research . The report concluded that the best approach to gaining the needed competence was to create a new NASA lab .
 The NASA leadership had already reached the same conclusion several months earlier . The issue then became where to locate the new center . The new center will be located in Texas .
 President Kennedy was of course from Massachusetts, and thus such a decision could appear as if it had been influenced by his desire to bring some of the benefits of the space buildup to his home state .
 Kennedy also “stated that he was prepared to accept it in his budget” and “agreed that it should not be introduced into public discussion until the budget was to go to Congress” in early 1963, Kennedy said . Kennedy also agreed that he would accept the proposal
 Webb buried the initial funding for the new center in the NASA budget request submitted to the BOB in September 1962 . This was not difficult to do, since the initial request of $5 million was very small compared to the overall $6. billion NASA budget requests .
 Webb was a former director of the BOB . Webb was well versed in ways to manipulate the normal process of BOB review . Webb has been accused of manipulating the normal review process in the past . Webb is a former member of the National Security Council .
 Webb asked Kenneth O’Donnell to check with the president to make sure that Kennedy still agreed with NASA’s decision to develop the new center . Webb asked Bell to make the president make sure Kennedy agreed with the decision .
 There was no leak to the press of this decision until the budget became public with its submission to the Congress in mid-January 1963 .
 NASA's House of Representatives oversight committee was not pleased with the decision . NASA made the decision without prior consultation with the committee, the committee says .
 The committee and NASA remained at loggerheads over whether NASA could proceed with its plans . Over the next several years, NASA and the committee had to work together to find out what was wrong .
 There was also opposition from some Senate members who believed that the areas they represented should have been able to compete for the new NASA center .
 President Kennedy met with Webb and Karth on June 11, 1963, to discuss NASA's plans to create a new space center . Kennedy personally got involved with Webb, who thought that the new center was not really needed .
 Kennedy was "very gracious,” but he was unable to change Karth’s mind regarding the issue . Kennedy was “very gracious” to Karth, Karth said . Karth: “Kennedy was very gracious to me, but I’
 It was not until 1966 that the Congressional opposition died down, even though the Electronics Research Center had become operational in 1965 .
 This was too late for the center to have much of an impact on the Apollo program . The center was too small to have a much of a positive impact on Apollo .
 The Electronics Research Center was to have a short lifetime . NASA announced in December 1969 that as part of its post-Apollo retrenchment, it had decided to close the facility .
 Jerome Wiesner at the end of 1961 might have been concerned by what appeared to be too slow a pace in NASA’s implementation of the lunar landing decision . To those at NASA involved in the effort the rate of activity during 1961 and 1962 seemed extremely rapid .
 In the weeks following Wiesner’s November 20, 1961, memorandum, NASA chose the contractors for the Apollo spacecraft and the first and third stages of the Saturn V vehicle . The Apollo spacecraft was the first vehicle to be built .
 By the start of 1962, construction had begun at all the new facilities that would be required for Apollo . The new facilities were completed by the end of that year .
 A major reorganization to prepare the space agency for managing Apollo was announced on November 1, 1961 . The Office of Manned Space Flight was created as one of the major program units at NASA .
 Brainerd Holmes was chosen as associate administrator for manned space flight . Holmes was a dynamic young executive from RCA . He was chosen to be the head of the space agency .
 Webb and Seamans had thought briefly about asking Wernher von Braun to become the human space flight manager, but that possibility disappeared when Hugh Dryden said that he would retire if it became reality . Webb had considered asking von Braun for the position, but he declined .
 On April 11, 1962, President Kennedy assigned to Project Apollo the highest national priority, designated DX . This gave the undertaking first call (together with some defense and a few other space efforts) on whatever human and physical resources were needed for its accomplishment .
 It was thus clear by mid-1962 that the mobilization of the resources needed to accomplish a lunar landing was well underway . The mobilization of resources needed for the landing of a lunar lander is well underway, says the author .
 President Kennedy concluded that it was time for him to take a first-hand look at the unfolding effort . In the fifteen months following his May 25 speech, the realism of that warning became increasingly evident .
 President Kennedy visited the facilities being developed for the accelerated space effort in September 1962 . President Kennedy made a critical decision to make a decision on the lunar landing project .
 The decision was the best approach to getting astronauts to the lunar surface . That decision was made to get astronauts on the moon surface . The moonwalkers were able to walk on the surface of the moon .
 NASA in July 1962 had selected as its preferred approach rendezvous in lunar orbit, a way to the Moon that had emerged in its consideration only at the very end of 1961 .
 Kennedy’s science adviser Wiesner and his staff did not agree with this choice, and were actively pressuring NASA to reverse it in favor of an Earth orbit rendezvous approach . Kennedy's science adviser said he was pushing NASA to change its approach .
 Kennedy learned that some within NASA believed that the first landing on the Moon could come as much as a year sooner than the late 1967 target that was at that point NASA’s target . Kennedy, as was his style, asked many questions .
 To advance the landing date by that many months would require requesting from Congress an extra short-term supplement to the NASA budget . There was considerable debate during October and November 1962 about the wisdom of that action .
 Adding more money to the human space flight budget was strongly advocated by associate administrator for manned space flight Brainerd Holmes, but equally strongly resisted by NASA administrator James Webb . Webb is also opposed to adding more money for human space flights .
 Holmes left NASA in mid-1963 . Holmes' disagreement with Holmes escalated into tensions that culminated in his departure from NASA . Holmes is credited with saving his life in space .
 The debate over extra money for NASA led to a November 21 White House meeting . President Kennedy and Webb disagreed about the priority of the lunar landing program compared to other NASA activities .
 NASA had requested $5.712 billion for the 1964 budget for NASA . That request was 55 percent more than the $3.674 billion requested in September 1962 . Even pursuing that path required a 55 percent increase in funding .
 The continuing exponential increase in NASA funding came at a time when Kennedy and his White House advisers were striving to limit overall budget growth . The financial demands of Apollo approached 4 percent of the total federal budget . Apollo's financial demands for Apollo approached .
 President Kennedy toured the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama . The first stop on the President Kennedy’s two-day tour was to inspect the facilities being developed for Apollo . President Kennedy visited the center to learn more about the Apollo mission .
 White House and NASA were at the time of JFK’s trip embroiled in a dispute with NASA over the wisdom of that choice . This approach had emerged in the first half of 1962 as NASA's preferred approach .
 Kennedy interrupted von Braun's description of the LOR approach . Kennedy interrupted, saying “I understand that Dr. von Braun’s approach is not a good idea’, Kennedy said .
 Wiesner: "Wiesner doesn’t agree with this,” and calling his science adviser to join the discussion . “I'm going to talk about it with my science adviser,’ he says .
 Key to the LOR concept was separating the functions of the lunar landing mission between two spacecraft . The concept was intended to be a single heavy spacecraft . LOR was conceived of the direct ascent and Earth orbit rendezvous approach to the landing .
 After the crew and lunar samples were transferred to the CSM, the LEM could then be discarded . The LEM was then discarded by the end of the mission .
 Identifiable in the image are center director Wernher von Braun, NASA administrator James Webb, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, and director of defense research and engineering Harold Brown .
 NASA associate administrator Robert Seamans Jr. Jr. is partially visible behind von Braun . von Braun is seen in the background of a photo taken by von Braun.
 Most of those in this photograph participated in a brief but spirited debate about the wisdom of the lunar-orbit rendezvous approach to the lunar landing mission (NASA photograph)
 The weight reduction resulting from this separation of functions made it possible to launch the whole lunar landing mission with one Saturn V booster, rather than the two that would be required by the Earth orbit rendezvous approach . This weight reduction resulted in this weight reduction .
 The LOR concept had been brought to Seamans’s attention in an impassioned nine-page letter from John Houbolt, an engineer at NASA’�s Langley Research Center, in 1961 .
 NASA sent a summary of its comparison of the various options to science adviser Wiesner . NASA on July 3 sent the summary to science advisor . NASA says it will announce a decision in August .
 Project Gemini, the just-initiated effort to gain that experience, was at that time not scheduled to have its first flight until late 1963 . This was especially the case since there had been no experience with rendezvous, and Project Gemini was not scheduled for flight until 1963 .
 Given the end of the decade deadline, the choice of mission approach would have to be made before the feasibility of its key element, rendezvous, had been demonstrated . The choice of the mission approach must have been made before it had to be demonstrated .
 NASA’s engineering analyses showed that LOR was safer than EOR, but Wiesner and his staff did not trust those analyses . LOR is the name of the LOR asteroid, which was created in the 1970s .
 The principal staff person supporting Wiesner on space issues was Nicholas Golovin, who had been forced to resign his position at NASA the preceding fall and left the space agency with “bitter gall” in his throat, only to be quickly hired by Wieser .
 Golovin was tenacious in his criticism of NASA’s choice of LOR during 1962 . He became a particular irritant to the space agency as NASA attempted to move forward . Golovina was a major critic of the agency's choice of the LOR .
 Wiesner was also hearing from the space vehicle panel of PSAC that it had serious reservations about the LOR choice . PSAC also has serious reservations that LOR will be the vehicle's LOR .
 The panel had followed NASA’s planning for the lunar mission throughout the year . The panel followed NASA's planning for a lunar mission through the year.
 Members of the panel together with Wiesner met with NASA leadership on July 6 to outline their concerns . The panel met with the NASA leadership to outline concerns .
 NASA forced to change its message for July 11 press conference to saying that the LOR choice was tentative and subject to further study and review . NASA was forced to say that the choice of LOR was tentative .
 Jerome Wiesner transmitted the PSAC views as an attachment to a July 17 letter to James Webb . In that letter he also set forth his own views of the Senate committee .
 President Kennedy’s “end of the decade” deadline was being felt within NASA . Pressure from the White House science office was a barrier to NASA moving ahead with its plans, NASA says .
 Wiesner and his assistant Golovin continued to intervene in NASA’s decision process during July and August . On September 5, a few days before the president was to visit various NASA installations, he again wrote Webb reiterating his concerns .
 President Kennedy visited Huntsville and was party to the Wiesner-NASA debate . This is where the situation stood as President Kennedy was in Huntsville .
 Kennedy flew to Cape Canaveral, the next stop in his tour of space travel . Kennedy was asked what the likely outcome of the controversy would be .
 NASA assembled all of its analyses into a document that it hoped would be a final comparison of the approaches to carrying out the lunar landing mission . NASA sent the document to Wiesner on October 24 .
 NASA report was accompanied by a “peevish’s” letter from Webb to Wiesner . Webb wrote a letter to the NASA director of the project .
 President Kennedy was totally involved with dealing with the problem of Soviet missiles in Cuba, Webb wrote . Kennedy was not going to take time to referee the NASA dispute with his science adviser .
 Webb and Wiesner talked by telephone on October 29, the Monday after the Cuban missile crisis was resolved . Webb: "We'll be able to talk to each other for the next few weeks"
 Wiesner said that his message to the president would not be to overrule any decision NASA might reach, but rather to be sure that a full and honest assessment had been made of all the options . He still questioned whether this was the case .
 Webb told Wiesner he “thought it better not to go to a formal hearing or involve the President personally in the decision,” Webb said . Webb thought that “involving the President couldn’t be avoided” because someone would ask Kennedy whether the
 Wiesner and three PSAC members met with Webb and his senior staff to go over again the White House objections to LOR . He recommended that NASA select instead a two-person flight using the direct ascent approach .
 Choosing this approach would mean that North American would manufacture spacecraft that would land on the Moon, not just the ship that would ferry astronauts from the Earth to lunar orbit and back . The approach would be a step further down the way the spacecraft would land .
 NASA refused to alter its position that LOR was the preferred approach . NASA has refused to change its position on LOR .
 By this time, Webb was aware of Kennedy’s desire to accomplish the initial lunar landing at the earliest possible date in order to give maximum assurance of accomplishing the landing before the Soviet Union did . Webb was also aware that Kennedy wanted the landing to occur before the Soviets did .
 NASA now has all the pieces in place to “drive forward vigorously” on Project Apollo, NASA says . Webb’s letter to Kennedy says NASA is ready to begin a mission to the moon .
 Kennedy’s approach with respect to the LOR decision was again typical of his management style as president . Kennedy's approach to the decision is typical of the president's management style, he said .
 He welcomed a wide variety of views being expressed while decisions were being made . But seldom if ever forced on an operating agency of the executive branch a course of action disagreed .
 If Kennedy felt that a wrong policy was being pursued, he was more likely to remove the agency head than insist on his carrying out a White House—imposed perspective .
 At Huntsville, he saw one of the very large F-1 engines that would be used to power the Moon rocket . He witnessed a test firing of the first stage of the Saturn 1 booster that generated 1. million pounds of thrust .
 At the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station and the NASA Launch Operations Center on Merritt Island in Florida, he saw the launch pad from which two Saturn 1 boosters had already been successfully launched . He was briefed on the Gemini and Apollo programs .
 Kennedy was surprised to discover that he and Seamans had both been members of the Class of 1940 at Harvard . Kennedy was shocked to learn that he had been in the class of 1940 .
 Various government agencies had suggested to the White House what Kennedy might say . Material had been submitted to JFK’s top speechwriter Theodore Sorensen from various agencies .
 Most of Kennedy’s speeches as president, including this memorable space address, were group products . Even so, most of Kennedy's speeches were group speeches . Kennedy's space address was a memorable space speech .
 Space is there, and we’re going to climb it, and the moon and planets are there . Well, space is there and we're going to go climbing it, says CNN.com .
 The Mercury and Gemini spacecraft were developed at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation in St. Louis, Missouri . The spacecraft were built for the Gemini and Mercury .
 President Kennedy asked NASA administrator James Webb whether it was possible to get to the Moon earlier than the late 1967 target date that NASA was using in its planning . NASA administrator Webb says it's possible to reach the Moon in less than 50 years .
 Kennedy met space flight head Brainerd Holmes for the first time during the Huntsville stop on the tour . This question was prompted by Kennedy’s conversation with Holmes .
 Holmes had come to NASA in October 1961 . He was impatient with the pace of the Apollo program and James Webb’s resistance to an accelerated program .
 Time magazine featured Holmes on the cover of its August 10, 1962, issue . In the issue’s six-page story “Reaching for the Moon,” Holmes was frequently mentioned, but not at all .
 Webb wrote to Kennedy on October 29, responding to the president’s question of what it would take to move the target date for the first lunar landing to 1966 . Webb responded to Kennedy's question of whether the date should be moved to 1966, Webb said .
 By this time, NASA had sent BOB a request for a $6.6 billion budget for FY1964; this represented a 68 percent increase over the agency’s FY1963 budget . NASA had requested a $1.2 billion increase in the budget .
 NASA also estimated that the first lunar landing might be targeted six months earlier if there was an immediate $427 million supplement to the FY1963 NASA budget . NASA estimates the first moon landing might have been possible six months early .
 To target the first landing in late 1966, NASA planning would have to be drastically revised . A supplementary $900 million would need to be provided in FY1963; in addition, the NASA budget for FY1964 would also have to increase to $7. billion .
 Holmes had asked Seamans to approve a $440 million FY1963 budget supplement, saying that such an increase would allow the first lunar landing attempt to come in late 1966 . Holmes at some point in this period had formally asked for the increase in funding .
 Seamans “couldn’t believe’s claim that the program could be accelerated by twelve months with such a relatively modest budget increase. Seaman: “I’m not sure what happened to the program. It was accelerated by 12 months with
 Holmes then asked Webb and Dryden for a meeting; both also gave him a negative response . Webb then denied Holmes’s request; Dryden also said he would not meet with them .
 Only Lamont Lamont was able to make the meeting because Sidey’s plane was grounded . Wiesner did so on November 16; only Lamont made the meeting .
 He quickly called a cabinet room meeting to find out for himself what was going on .
 The meeting was also an occasion to review NASA’s budget proposal for Fiscal Year 1964 . The meeting took place on November 21; it was also a review of the budget .
 The BOB had not yet forwarded to the president Webb’s October 29 letter about the budgetary implications of accelerating the target date for the first lunar landing . Webb‘s letter was sent to the BOB about the budget implications .
 The letter had been referred to one of the staff agencies of the executive office, in this case BOB, for review and a decision of whether it needed direct presidential attention . Like many communications to the president from government agencies, it was referred to BOB for review .
 Kennedy may well have wondered why he had not heard from Webb after asking him about this possibility on his September tour . That could have added to his concern about the accuracy of the Time article . Kennedy may have asked Webb why he hadn't heard from him after asking about the possibility .
 Kennedy had also been immersed with the Cuban missile crisis and the midterm congressional elections in the interim .
 Budget director Bell prepared a November 13 memorandum on the NASA budget situation that incorporated the schedule and budget estimates in Webb’s October letter . This memorandum was distributed to all participants in the meeting . Webb's October letter was sent to the budget director .
 NASA’s budget request for FY1964 was $6. billion, including $4. billion for the lunar landing program and $1.1 billion for all other NASA activities . NASA's budget request was $5 billion .
 To keep the program on an “optimum” schedule aiming at a mid-1967 landing, Bell told the president, would require a supplementary appropriation of over $400 million in 1963 and about $550 million above the estimates for FY1964 .
 NASA’s recommended program aiming at a late 1967 landing would not require a FY1963 supplement, but would require the full $4.4 billion funding in FY1964 . NASA's recommended program would require a full FY1964 supplement .
 President Kennedy may have been warned that the race to the Moon he thought the United States was running may not have been a race at all .
 Kennedy was still in a race mentality when he met with the White House on November 21 . But as the November 21 meeting unfolded, it became clear that Kennedy still had race mentality .
 "This is important for political reasons, international political reasons. But this is important to political reasons," he says. "But this is not the only reason"
 If we get second to the Moon, it's nice, but it’s like being second any time. If we're not second, we’re not first, we're second to Moon, but first to the moon. If you want to be second, it�
 If we’re second by six months because we didn’t give it the kind of priority , then of course that would be very serious . So if we're second by 6 months because of that, it would be a very serious thing, he says .
 "Obviously you wouldn’t put it on that priority except for the defense implications," he said . "Obviously it would be a good thing to see that happen," he added .
 The Soviet Union has made this a test of the system. And the second point is the fact that the Soviet Union . And the first point is that it is a test for the system, says CNN.com .
 "Everything we do ought really to be tied to getting on the Moon ahead of the Russians," says President Obama .
 The program is one of the two things, except for defense, the top priority of the U.S. government, except defense, it's the most important program .
 I think it’s good, I think we ought to know about it, we’re ready to spend reasonable amounts of money, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I think it's good"
 The only justification for it in my opinion is because we hope to beat them and demonstrate that starting behind, as we did by a couple of years, by God, we passed them. But we’re talking about these fantastic expenditures which wreck our budget and all these other domestic programs
 Brainerd Holmes apologized for letting his differences with James Webb get into the press . Holmes: "I'm sorry for letting my differences with Webb get in the press"
 President Kennedy requested a letter from NASA stating clearly the agency’s position . Just before he left the meeting, President Kennedy asked for a letter .
 Dryden drafted a relatively brief reply; Seamans prepared a more extensive response . Dryden: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 James Webb had stayed home from work with a severe migraine headache . Webb took his draft to James Webb, who had a migraine headache, to his draft draft . Webb's draft was the first time Webb had been drafted by Webb . Webb was drafted by James Webb after he suffered a migraine
 Seamans and Webb revised the letter to their and Dryden’s satisfaction . The letter was sent to President Kennedy on November 30 .
 At that point, final decisions on the NASA FY1964 budget had still not been made, so the letter included a plea for approval of NASA’s $6.6 billion request . Final decisions had not yet been made on the budget for NASA .
 President Kennedy did not easily give up on the idea that the lunar landing program could be accelerated . President Kennedy would not give up the idea .
 Wiesner thought that funds in this amount might be transferred from the Department of Defense budget to pay for DOD involvement in NASA’s Project Gemini . Project Gemini is a new NASA program to test out rendezvous activities in Earth orbit .
 Wiesner told the president that funds in that amount could be used to advance the date of the first Saturn V launch by some five months . There is some chance that this acceleration could allow an earlier attempt at the landing .
 Wiesner noted that “the date of the first lunar landing attempt can’t be accelerated only” if Saturn V availability were advanced, he said . He said the date of landing attempt could be accelerated .
 Kennedy the same day sent the Wiesner memorandum with these suggestions to Vice President Johnson, asking for his views . Kennedy later sent the memo to the Vice President .
 Kennedy had once again accepted the position of NASA administrator Webb Webb on how best to go forward . Kennedy had accepted the role of administrator Webb to lead NASA's mission to Mars .
 BOB made reductions in both the lunar landing budget and the “other activities” portion of the NASA request . BOB also reduced the amount of the moon landing budget .
 The president in midJanuary 1963 sent a budget proposal to the Congress requesting $5.712 billion for NASA . The budget request was almost half-billion dollar cut from what NASA had requested in September . The president sent the proposal to Congress in mid-January 1963 .
 The increase was not what NASA had hoped for, but it still reflected a 55 percent jump over NASA’s FY1963 appropriation . The increase is 55 percent higher than the FY1963 budget for NASA .
 The White House appeared to have accepted the arguments set forth in the November 30 NASA letter . The lunar landing program, though clearly a very high NASA priority, was in itself insuffi158 .
 Kennedy accepted NASA’s argument that preeminence in all areas of space activity was the more appropriate goal . Kennedy was no longer totally focused on how soon the U.S. could get to the Moon .
 At least some of the president’s associates, and perhaps Kennedy himself, questioned whether getting to the Moon before the Soviet Union remained a compelling national objective . In addition, some of Kennedy's associates and perhaps himself questioned whether the country's objective was still a compelling objective .
 Kennedy had the idea that space might be a particularly promising arena for tension-reducing U.S.-Soviet cooperation as he entered the White House in January 1961 .
 JFK’s initial priority on becoming president was to make space an area for U.S.-Soviet cooperation . In light of his soon-to-be-made decision to enter a space race in competition with the Soviet Union, it is worth noting .
 Kennedy came into the White House believing that science and technology could be used as tools to advance foreign policy interests and reduce international tensions . Kennedy hopes that the habits of cooperation developed in sectors such as science and tech could spill over into areas more central to security interests .
 Kennedy’s transition task force on space reinforced the view that space offered a promising area for cooperation . Kennedy's space task force says space offers a potential area of cooperation .
 The report of the Wiesner panel said that “our space activities, particularly...in the exploration of our solar system, offer exciting possibilities for international cooperation with all of the world .
 President Kennedy soon followed up the call in his inaugural address “to explore the stars together” with a more detailed and specific proposal . President Kennedy followed up with a proposal for a space program in the 1960s .
 Today this country is ahead in the science and technology of space, while the Soviet Union is ahead of us . The Soviet Union has the capacity to lift large vehicles into orbit, the author says .
 Both nations would help themselves as well as other nations by removing these endeavors from the bitter and wasteful competition of the Cold War . The United States and other nations would benefit themselves by removing the programs from the  Cold War.
 The White House in late May 1961 made one more attempt to engage the Soviet Union in a cooperative mission to the Moon . Even as Kennedy announced his decision to send Americans to the lunar surface, he said cooperation was more desirable path than competition .
 Kennedy offered to Nikita Khrushchev a range of cooperative possibilities after John Glenn's orbit of the Earth . Kennedy offered the Soviet-Russian offer in 1962 after the successful flight of John Glenn .
 Khrushchev agreed to discuss possibility of cooperation with NASA in 1962 and 1963 . NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences discussions reached agreement in principle to cooperate .
 There was only modest substantive cooperative activity in subsequent months and years . However, there was only substantial substantive cooperative action .
 This chapter focuses on attempts during 1961 and 1962 to foster U.S.-Soviet cooperation in space . President Kennedy was a direct personal interest to President Kennedy . This chapter includes attempts to foster cooperation between the two countries .
 Kennedy believed direct cooperation between the two Cold War rivals was likely to make a greater contribution to an overall reduction in bilateral and thus global tensions . In a reversal from the position taken during the Eisenhower administration, where the emphasis with respect to space cooperation was on developing international arrangements and controls .
 NASA from its inception did develop such relations, particularly with Canada and the countries of Western Europe, but those emerging relationships are not discussed here .
 A 1959 Soviet-sponsored General Assembly resolution had called for setting up a United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and for convening a U Nations Conference on space matters .
 McGeorge Bundy replied to Secretary Rusk on February 28 . After several weeks of discussion within the White House on how best to follow up the president’s speech initiatives, Bundy replied .
 To address this situation, the White House set up a “Task Force on International Cooperation in Space” in early February .
 The group was composed of non-governmental people . It includes members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee . NASA, the Department of State, NASA, and the White House science office .
 The group was chaired by Bruno Rossi, a professor of physics at MIT . Rossi had been a member of the Wiesner transition panel on outer space .
 It came up with twenty-two specific proposals for U.S.-Soviet space cooperation . The proposals range from projects involving only data exchanges or coordination of separate projects to intimate cooperation .
 A U.S.-Soviet “Rendezvous on the Moon” project would establish an international base on the surface of the Moon . At the first meeting on February 17, one of the members of the task force, Richard Porter of General Electric, submitted a memorandum suggesting a
 The group found this proposal intriguing . Porter suggested that “if agreement could be reached on this major project between the U.S. and the USSR, all other bilateral and multilateral cooperative projects involving the USSR would become feasible and operative”
 On March 8, Rusk met with new NASA administrator Webb and deputy administrator Dryden . Webb and Dryden will be the next two heads of the agency for the next year .
 Rusk wondered “what the purpose was of activities in space on this major scale. Rusk in reply wondered ‘what was the purpose’
 Rossi task force submitted its final report to Wiesner on March 20 . Rossi Task force submitted final report on March 21 . Rossi task forces have yet to respond to Rossi's request .
 An early start on U.S.-Soviet space cooperation was not in the cards, however, however . The Soviets and the United States are unlikely to work together in space .
 President Kennedy was receiving initial indications that the Soviet Union was unlikely to be receptive to the kind of initiatives he had in mind . Even as the task force began its work, President Kennedy received initial indications he was not ready to work .
 On February 13, he congratulated Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev on the launching of a Soviet scientific probe to Venus .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev summit meeting is hoped for international cooperation . Kennedy: "We try to work out as many ideas as possible for utilization in the proposed conference"
 As President Kennedy and his associates discussed how best to react to this newest Soviet achievement in space, notions of a cooperative initiative took a back seat . The Soviet Union's success in space was a major setback for the country .
 Kennedy made one more attempt to engage the Soviet Union in space cooperation . The preference for cooperation was never far from Kennedy’s mind, he says .
 On May 16, President Kennedy received a letter from Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev formally accepting Kennedy’s February suggestion that he and Kennedy meet . The Soviet premier accepted Kennedy's proposal to meet .
 Khrushchev suggested that the meeting would take place in Vienna in early June . The meeting would be held in Vienna, Austria, in June .
 This was the first (and what turned out to be the only) time the two superpower leaders met face-to-face . The first time they met was the only time they were in contact .
 Kennedy’s suggestion for such a meeting came after several rounds of communications between Moscow and Washington . This late acceptance of Kennedy's suggestion for the meeting was a late acceptance from Moscow .
 In preparing for the meeting with Khrushchev, the idea of proposing U.S.-USSR space cooperation was resurrected . Planning for setting the goal of setting a lunar landing before the Soviets was in its final stages .
 One of the papers was a memorandum for the president from the Department of State . The other was the April 13 report on possible cooperative initiatives .
 The president did have some concrete possibilities for improving relations, he said . However, “the president did not have the opportunity for proposing them arise.”
 Beginning in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs crisis, the president had established a secret, back-channel line of communication with the Soviet leadership . The president established the line in the wake of the crisis in Cuba .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy developed a relationship with Georgi Bolshakov, a mid-level agent of the intelligence service of the Soviet Army, the GRU . The GRU agent was working under the cover of being a Soviet reporter in Washington, D.C.
 In the weeks before the summit, Robert Kennedy and Bolshakov met privately several times . Robert Kennedy: "I'm sure you can't wait to see what's going on in Russia"
 The attorney general used the GRU agent to communicate President Kennedy’s thinking on what might be accomplished at a summit meeting directly to the Kremlin . The agent also received back messages from the Soviet leadership, particularly with respect to the possibility of a summit agreement on a nuclear test ban as
 There was no response to this suggestion, and the president proceeded with announcing the lunar landing project on May 25 .
 Space was one of four areas of scientific cooperation initially identified for possible discussion at the June 3-4 Vienna summit . The others were nuclear science, earth science, and life science . Kennedy and Khrushchev met on June 3, 4, in Vienna .
 This memorandum listed only four potential cooperative projects, two of them in space and two in nuclear science .
 The Soviet leader insisted that he would sign a peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic by the end of the year . The new East German government would then have the right to cut off U.S. access to Berlin .
 Kennedy responded that this was unacceptable, and that if necessary the United States would use force to assure its access . Kennedy responded: "If necessary, the U.S. would ... use force" Kennedy responded .
 The only opportunities for more relaxed conversation came at two luncheons for the U.S. and Soviet delegations .
 At the June 3 lunch hosted by President Kennedy, talk turned to the flight of Yuri Gagarin and then to the possibility of lainching a man to the Moon .
 None of the other proposals for scientific cooperation prepared for Kennedy’s use were discussed .
 Khrushchev was responding to Kennedy's suggestion that perhaps Soviet and U.S. lunar missions could be coordinated in their timing in order to save money . He said so far there had been few practical uses of outer space launchings .
 The reason for this overnight change of mind, even if he had been serious in his response on the preceding day, was apparently Khrushchev’s consultations with his advisers . The reason behind the overnight change was apparently his consultations .
 In addition, “the military men came out against this proposal—they wanted to protect their secrets.” The military men also opposed the proposal, the author says .
 Nikita Khrushchev explains his unwillingness to cooperate in space as being due to the Soviet weakness in intercontinental ballistic missiles . In his memoirs, he says his reluctance to cooperate was due to a lack of cooperation in space .
 "They would have learned its limitations, and from a military standpoint, it did have serious limitations," he says . Thus, “they would have ... learned its ... limitations,” he adds .
 During the remainder of 1961, Cold War tensions were high and the Berlin Wall was erected . The outlook for any significant space cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union was correspondingly bleak .
 President Kennedy’s proposal to the Congress and the nation that the U.S. embark on an extremely ambitious space effort, with Project Apollo as its centerpiece, received widespread political support . Project Apollo was the centerpiece of Kennedy's proposal .
 The idea that the lunar landing program might be a joint U.S.-Soviet undertaking appeared stillborn . Other areas of potential space cooperation remained unexplored . The moon landing program was stillborn, and other areas of cooperation remained unknown .
 John Glenn completed the first U.S. orbital space flight on February 20, 1962 . John Glenn was the first American to complete an orbital flight into space . The first space flight took place in 1962 .
 Among the congratulations for the success received at the White House was a February 21 telegram from Nikita Khrushchev from the Soviet Union .
 On the next day, Kennedy sent a replying telegram to Khrushchev, saying “I welcome your statement that our countries should cooperate in the exploration of space.” Kennedy said in a reply to the message .
 Bundy sent out a revised memorandum on February 27, adding the executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to the list of those being asked to develop the cooperative proposals . Bundy has sent a revised version of the memorandum .
 "There is real political advantage for us if we can make clear that we are forthcoming and energetic in plans for peaceful cooperation with the Soviets in this sphere," he said .
 NASA proposed to include only those projects that it judged both technically and politically desirable . NASA tended to emphasize information exchanges rather than more extensive and intimate cooperation .
 This was consistent with the approach that had been developed by Hugh Dryden and NASA’s international affairs head, Arnold Frutkin .
 NASA argued that any cooperative undertaking must have meaningful substantive merit as a necessary condition . NASA said it would not be undertaken primarily for political reasons . NASA says any cooperative effort must have substantive merit .
 Only through the intervention of the White House science office was a broader range of potential projects added to the draft list of proposals . The White House Science Office added the proposal to the list of possible projects .
 Jerome Wiesner was, together with President Kennedy, interested in cooperative undertakings that might produce substantial political benefits, even if their technical contributions were relatively minimal . President Kennedy was also interested in cooperatives that might have political benefits .
 Wiesner and his staff were often at odds with NASA over the space agency’s conservative approach to space cooperation . NASA has been criticized for its conservative approach .
 The letter reflects the State Department's concern that the potential contributions of other nations be recognized . The letter did not link any potential bilateral discussions to the upcoming initial meeting of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space . The results of the bilateral talks would be reported to the Committee
 Rusk told Kennedy, “if you approve this proposed letter, we would plan to deliver it promptly...without publicity for a sufficient period of time to allow for a serious Soviet reply.” Rusk said . Rusk: “If you approve it, we plan to
 It first listed some relatively modest proposals for specific areas of cooperation, including a joint weather satellite system . It also proposed cooperation in space tracking, research on the Earth’s magnetic field, and space medicine .
 There was no mention of specific cooperation in human flights to the Moon or even in Earth orbit . There were no specific plans for cooperation in space travel .
 He reacted favorably to most of the U.S. proposals contained in Kennedy’s letter . He added to the list of areas for possible cooperation . Joint robotic exploration of the Moon and the planets .
 Dryden was a member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in the Soviet Union . Dryden is now a senior official of NASA and thus knowledgeable about space policy .
 The delegations agreed to meet again in one or two months . The talks identified several areas of mutual interest for further negotiations .
 Both NASA administrator Webb and Space Council executive secretary Welsh agreed that such a step-by-step approach was preferable . Wiesner also thought that this would probably have to be the way to proceed .
 From May 30 to June 8, 1962, there was a second round of meetings between a United States delegation, once again headed by Dryden, and a Soviet delegation, headed by Blagonravov . The meetings took place in Geneva between the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Under secretary of state George Ball wrote the president on July 5 to inform him of the results of these discussions and to propose a future course of action . Ball wrote to inform the president of the discussions .
 Bundy: "I know that you have been concerned lest ... Dryden make agreements that might come under political attack" Bundy: Dryden should not make agreements “under political attack’s” Bundy: “You have been ... concerned lest Dryden ... make agreements ...
 President Kennedy’s June 1961 suggestion to Nikita Khrushchev of cooperation in going to the Moon . The three initial areas for cooperation were quite limited in comparison with both the hopes of early 1961 and early 1961 .
 This incremental approach, favored by NASA and the State Department, was not sufficient for President Kennedy . President Kennedy was not satisfied with the incremental approach .
 As 1963 unfolded, he once again sought Soviet cooperation in going to the Moon . He sought cooperation from the Soviet Union to go to the moon .
 Kennedy’s suggestion to Khrushchev at the June 1961 Vienna summit that the U.S. and the Soviet Union cooperate in flights to the Moon was made privately, and was not subsequently widely reported .
 1962 discussions on space cooperation were carried out on a low-key basis . Results were only made public only after agreement had been reached .
 President Kennedy’s next cooperative initiative came in a most public fashion . In contrast, President Kennedy's next cooperative effort came in an unprecedented fashion . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy’s proposal came as a major surprise to all but a few people who had been involved in preparing his United Nations speech or had been advised by the president of his intent . Kennedy's proposal to speak at the United Nations came as surprise to many .
 Kennedy had been mulling the idea for some time . Decision to include the proposal in the speech was made just a day or two before September 20 .
 The offer was the personal initiative of the president and a few of his closest advisers . The offer is a personal initiative, the president said .
 Responsible for drafting the UN address were presidential assistant Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. and State Department official Richard Gardner .
 President Kennedy continued to push NASA to come up with ways of turning the proposal into reality . Between the September 20 speech and his assassination two months later, Kennedy hoped for a positive response to his proposal .
 The second was to prevent the field to be occupied to the Russians to the exclusion of the United States. The first was to stop the field being occupied by the Russians, the second was preventing the U.S.
 American scientific prestige and American scientific effort were at the top. And the third was to make certain that American prestige and U.S. scientific prestige were at top .
 The three goals all would have been assured in a space effort which culminated in our beating the Russians to the moon . Those three goals would have all been assured .
 All three of them would have been endangered had the Russians continued to outpace us in their space effort and beat us to the moon .
 A joint Soviet-American venture to the moon would also have been assured by the Soviet-U.S. mission . But all three goals would have been achieved by a joint Soviet and American venture to moon .
 The difficulty was that in 1961, although the President favored the joint effort, we had comparatively few chips to offer . "The difficulty was . in 1961," President Eisenhower said .
 "There was a very real chance we were even with the Soviets in this effort. There was a real chance," he says . "There were a very good chance we might be even with them," he adds .
 He first tried to once again engage Nikita Khrushchev in discussions on a test ban treaty, but progress toward that objective was slow .
 Kennedy was interested only if Russia showed it was ready to cooperate, they say . Kennedy was hoping for a genuine rapprochement between Russia and the U.S. Kennedy, they suggest, “only if the Russians showed they were willing to cooperate .
 The President in mid-1963 was actively considering resurrecting the idea . The idea was actively considered by the President of the United States .
 He certainly did not seem to think that he was “in pursuit of an illusion,” but rather pursuing a course of action that was in the U.S. interest .
 An August 9 Central Intelligence Agency memorandum on “The New Phase of Soviet Policy” provided evidence that Kennedy’s strategy was well conceived . The memo was published by the CIA on August 9 .
 By mid-1963 there was increasing criticism of the lunar landing program from both sides of the political spectrum .
 Kennedy “was understandably reluctant to continue that rate of increase.” Sorensen replied that Kennedy was “reluctant” to continue the increase .
 Kennedy considered resurrecting a cooperative proposal for the Moon . One issue was whether the U.S.-USSR race to the Moon was real, Kennedy said . Kennedy considered a cooperative plan to return to the moon .
 The White House in 1963 in fact did not know whether there was an ongoing Soviet effort to send people to the Moon . In 1963, the White House didn't know whether the Soviets were working on a mission .
 It is believed that the Soviets intend to compete vigorously in the early exploration of the moon and that this effort will include manned flights, although probably not early manned landings .
 It is not yet possible to settle with assurance whether the Soviets are engaged in a manned lunar landing program . The Soviets are competing with the United States.
 Definitive indications of the Soviets being in such a race have not been found, but could be submerged to such an extent that they might exist without being so identified .
 In December 1962, it was estimated that there was a better than even chance that the Soviets had a competitive manned lunar landing program . No firm conclusion could be reached on the possibility .
 A later review of pertinent material produced essentially the same judgment . A review of the material produced the same conclusion .
 At present there is still no firm evidence of the existence of such a program . However, because of the passage of time, it is estimated that a competitive program aimed at the 1968-1970 time period is somewhat less likely than before .
 Design work on a large booster able to carry out a manned lunar mission was already underway . Those developments were not yet known to USS intelligence services .
 There was a debate within the Soviet space system over the wisdom of a lunar mission . There was also a debate over the assignment of responsibility for such a mission .
 On July 17, 1963, there were press accounts that British scientist Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank Radio Observatory, was saying, “a month ago I believed, like everyone else in the West, that the US-Soviet Moon race was a real struggle
 He reported that Keldysh had informed him of “the rejection of the plans for the manned lunar landing” because of several uncertainties regarding the feasibility of such a mission . He said that several uncertainties are still being considered .
 Keldysh also said that “the manned project might be revived” if progress in the next few years gave hope that such an undertaking would indeed be feasible .
 The Soviet Academy of Sciences had limited involvement in, and knowledge of, the Soviet space program . Yet, some politicians and some politicians saw the statements as authoritative .
 President Kennedy was kept aware of the issues raised by Lovell’s letter . Lovell's letter was kept in touch with Kennedy .
 The reality was that neither President Kennedy, nor NASA, nor anyone else in the United States government knew the true state of Soviet space efforts as of September 1963 .
 Each participant in the decision process brought his own values and objectives to the deliberations .
 JFK still interested in actively pursuing the idea of cooperation with the U.S. government . JFK had given up on the idea during the difficult days of 1961 and 1962 .
 Kennedy for the first time had publicly stated his preference for a cooperative approach to lunar exploration . As noted above, in his July 17 press conference, Kennedy said he would like to explore the lunar surface .
 President Kennedy asked Dobrynin if he would be prepared to discuss this subject during his forthcoming visit to the U.S. to attend the United Nations General Assembly’s opening sessions . Kohler referred to President Kennedy's August 26 conversation with Dobynin .
 Kennedy first asked Kohler for his views on the concept of a joint lunar mission . Kennedy asked him to share his thoughts on the idea of a moonwalk .
 President Kennedy and others discussed the concept between July and September 1963 . But there is no doubt that the concept had been widely discussed by President Kennedy .
 Kennedy kept a previously scheduled September 18 appointment with NASA administrator James Webb to discuss space policy and budget issues . Kennedy kept the appointment to discuss a variety of space policy issues .
 National security adviser: Webb open to possible cooperation with Soviets in lunar landing effort . Webb told Bundy that there had been “more forthcoming noises about cooperation from Blagonravov in the UN’s UN .
 Kennedy had all but decided to proceed with the cooperative proposal . Kennedy met Webb on September 18 to discuss the proposal . Webb is a former congressman from New Hampshire .
 Webb’s fear was that damage might be done by the U.S. program without any real prospect of achieving anything . Webb: “We’ll never be able to achieve anything insofar as the Russians were concerned.”
 Webb also felt that there had not been sufficient consultation within the administration and with congressional leaders . Webb said there was not enough consultation with the administration . Webb also said there had been insufficient consultation with Congress and the White House .
 No one in the Congress had been consulted on the proposal, no one in Congress was consulted . Indeed, given the last minute insertion of the cooperative proposal into the speech .
 The cooperative proposal was incorporated in Theodore Sorensen's final draft of Kennedy’s U.N. speech, prepared only on September 19 .
 The same day, Bundy telephoned Webb and told him that the president had decided to go ahead with the proposal . Webb was the only person in the country to discuss the proposal with Webb .
 Kennedy’s September 20 address was intended to set out the role of the United Nations in his strategy of peace . Kennedy's September 20 speech set out his strategy for peace in the world .
 U.S. and Soviet Union and allies could find more areas of agreement, he says . Such a pause, he suggested, could lead to the two countries finding more areas to agree on .
 Reactions to Kennedy’s proposal were quick to appear and mixed in character . Reactions were quick and mixed . Kennedy's proposal was a proposal for a presidential candidate .
 The trade publication Missiles and Rockets was most negative, rejecting “such a naive internationalist approach to the lunar project’s .
 Some members of Congress questioned whether the Kennedy was intending to back away from the commitment to a U.S. lunar landing program . Many members of the Kennedy administration had been willing to approve exponential budget increases in 1961 and 1962 .
 Webb took Kennedy’s word on the basis of “full faith and credit” that his reason for suggesting cooperation was related to broader strategic issues, Webb says . Webb says Kennedy told Webb that reducing his support for Apollo was not his understanding of the reason for the proposal .
 The belief that you have to build one success on top of another if the peace is to be won is the key to winning the war of peace .
 He had scored one important international success with the test-ban treaty . The treaty was the first major test ban treaty in the world .
 Thomas wrote to President Kennedy on September 21 . Thomas had used his position as chair of the House appropriations subcommittee in control of NASA funds to bring the Manned Spacecraft Center to the Houston area . Thomas was chairman of the subcommittee .
 "This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to cooperate with others are not in conflict," President Obama says .
 "We do not make our space effort with the narrow purpose of national aggrandizement," NASA says . "We are not making space effort for the sake of national glory," NASA director says .
 We make it so that the United States may have a leading and honorable role in mankind’s peaceful conquest of space . The U.S. should lead in a leading role in the world's peaceful conquest .
 It is this great effort which permits us now to offer increased cooperation with no suspicion anywhere that we speak from weakness . It is that this effort permits us to offer more cooperation, not suspicion of weakness, says President Obama .
 The U.S. space program "enlarges the international meaning of our own peaceful American program in space," says President Obama .
 U.S. is committed to a space program to which we have been committed as a country for more than two years, says President Obama .
 If cooperation is possible, we mean to cooperate, says President Obama . "We shall do so from a position made strong and solid by our national effort in space," he says .
 The same strong national effort will serve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also against possible hazards to our national security . If cooperation is not possible, we must plan for this contingency too .
 There was no immediate response to the president’s proposal from Nikita Khrushchev or any other official Soviet source .
 A new report from a new source appeared that seemed to counter the idea that the Soviet Union had abandoned or postponed its lunar landing program . The White House waited for a Soviet reply, the White House said .
 Leonid Sedov said it would be two or three years “at least” before an initial Soviet lunar landing attempt . The Washington Post reported on October 8 that Sedov was the “father of the Sputnik”
 Americans want to land a man on the moon by 1970, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I have a report to the effect that the U.S. wants to land the moon"
 We do not want to compete with the sending of men to the moon without careful preparation. We want to be able to compete . We do want to make sure we don't compete with men to go to the the moon .
 There were a number of interpretations of Khrushchev’s remarks within the U.S. intelligence community .
 The U.S. lunar landing decision has also “contributed in a non-belligerent way to imposing major strains on the Soviet economy and their ability to carry out expansionist objectives” The United States lunar landing also ‘contributed’
 In the first weeks of November 1963 there was seemingly a real opportunity to act on President Kennedy’s initiative to turn the lunar landing program into a cooperative enterprise . In 1963, President Kennedy's initiative was seemingly an opportunity to become a cooperative venture .
 In the weeks following the president’s United Nations speech, the lack of a Soviet response had left the U.S. unsure on how to proceed .
 Webb sent a copy to the White House, where it was approved by McGeorge Bundy the same day . Webb sent it to the president, but Bundy approved it the next day . Bundy's approval of Webb's proposal was approved the next morning .
 NASA once again preferred a cautious, step-by-step approach . In thinking about how the president’s proposal might be implemented, NASA chose a cautious approach .
 NASA pointed out that even the modest cooperative activities agreed to in June 1962 had not yet been implemented by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was "seriously delinquent" in this respect, NASA said .
 On October 25, McGeorge Bundy requested that interested parties prepare concrete proposals for how to proceed with planning for space cooperation negotiations with the Soviet Union . Bundy asked interested parties to prepare proposals .
 Wiesner suggested to Kennedy that “It might be extremely advantageous to you . publicly offer this plan to the USSR...while the Khrushchev statement is still fresh in the mind of the public.”
 If the proposal is accepted, it will have established a practical basis for a cooperative program . The proposal would be accepted by the government .
 It is not clear whether the “efforts” he was referring to were the cooperative overture to the Soviet Union or to the lunar landing program itself .
 I did not get any assurances that Mr Khrushchev or the Soviet Union were out of the space race at all . I didn't get assurances that the Soviet U.S. would be out of space race .
 The Soviets have made a very intensive effort in space, says CNN's John Sutter . "There is every evidence that they are continuing and that they have the potential to continue," he says .
 I think that he said before anyone went to the moon, there should be adequate preparation . "I think that . He said before . anyone went . to the . moon, he said . There should be . adequate preparation," he added .
 In my opinion the space program we have is essential to the security of the U.S. "It is not a question of going to the moon," says President Obama .
 Nikita Khrushchev finally addressed President Kennedy’s proposal in a statement at a November 1] Kremlin reception . President Kennedy's proposal was first made public in November 1963 .
 He suggested that “were a relaxation in international tension in relations between states not only reached morally, but were it supported by practical steps in the field of disarmament, then the sphere of cooperation between states in exploring outer space could be materially expanded .
 The USSR and the United States pooled their efforts in exploring space for scientific purposes, specifically for arranging a joint flight to the moon . We consider, with due attention to the proposal of the U.S. President, that it would be useful if the USSR and . the . United States
 According to Khrushchev’s son Sergey, this indeed is what happened in the weeks following Kennedy's U.N. speech . According to Sergey, the events took place in weeks after Kennedy's UN speech .
 NASA’s plans were “procedural rather than substantive in character,” says Schlesinger . NASA preference is on exchange of information on existing programs and plans .
 Schlesinger: NASA remains ‘rather negative about the whole idea’ of lunar collaboration . It was “rather negative” about the idea, he said . NASA is “reluctant’ about lunar collaboration,” he added .
 Schlesinger suggested that to move the effort forward “an expression of Presidential interest in their progress” might be appropriate .
 By this point in the Kennedy administration, the vice president often had not been included in the development of new space initiatives . Even so, his seeming lack of involvement in a fundamental shift in U.S. space policy is notable .
 The White House moved quickly on Schlesinger’s suggestion of an expression of presidential interest in moving forward on planning for cooperation . The proposal was quickly accepted by the White House .
 On November 8, Schlesinger and National Security Council staff person Charles Johnson drafted a presidential directive in this vein . “dependable people in NASA and State,” who were reported to be “enthusiastic” about such a message, they said .
 NASA administrator Webb "heartily" concurred with draft directive . Webb also “heartily” agreed with the draft directive, Webb said .
 Ten days later, President John F Kennedy was dead, felled by an assassin’s bullets in Dallas . President Kennedy was killed in Dallas, Texas .
 With him died the possibility of U.S.-Soviet cooperation in going to the Moon, although there was sufficient momentum behind the Kennedy initiative to keep it alive for a few more months . With him dead, there was enough momentum to keep the initiative alive .
 Adlai Stevenson was scheduled to make a speech to the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on November 27 . The speech was already in preparation in early November .
 State Department official on U.N. matters, Harlan Cleveland, had developed a reasoned justification for continuing to push the cooperative effort . Cleveland: "The United Nations has a right to cooperate"
 Ambassador Stevenson raised with new President Lyndon B Johnson the question of what he should say about President Kennedy’s proposal . Cleveland reported that after a November 23 Cabinet meeting, Ambassador Stevenson had raised the question with President Kennedy .
 Cleveland suggested that President Johnson be asked to review and concur with the specific language on this issue in the final draft of Stevenson’s speech .
 Secretary of State Rusk sent the draft speech to the White House on the next day for presidential review . The draft speech was sent for review by the president of the United States .
 We believe that there are areas of work—short of integrating the two national programs—from which all could benefit, we believe . We believe there are ways of work, short of integrating programs, to help all Americans .
 Stevenson included those words in his speech, which was actually delivered on December 2 . Stevenson included them in his December 2 speech .
 Frutkin was reported as ‘very pleased’ with the revised text, which reflected NASA’s approach to cooperation . Frutkins was reported to be ‘proud’ of the revised version of the text .
 "He wanted to get the lunar issue off the front burner. But as the U.S. waited for a Soviet offer, he wanted to avoid the issue, he said . The U.N. had to wait for the Soviet offer .
 Webb suggested a joint program of unmanned flight projects to support a manned lunar landing . Webb suggested that “on balance, the most realistic and constructive group of proposals which might be advanced to the Soviet Union... relates to a joint . program of . unmanned flight .
 The Soviet Union did not fully honor even the agreements on limited cooperation that had been reached in 1962 . Some modest U.S.-Soviet cooperation did eventually take place, especially in the biomedical area .
 As the months passed, President Johnson turned his attention to his ambitious agenda for the Great Society . President Johnson spent the months working on his ambitious plans .
 The United States was of course first to the Moon, and the Soviet Union experienced a series of failures in its lunar program . The U.S. was the first country to land on the moon .
 The opportunity to test space cooperation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union had passed . The chance to test whether dramatic space cooperation could serve as a counterweight to their Cold War rivalry had passed.
 The successful outcome of the Cuban missile crisis, the easing of tensions over Berlin, and the signing of the Limited Test Ban Treaty may have suggested to Kennedy that demonstrating U.S. technological superiority vis-a-vis the Soviet Union through a spectacular space achievement had lost some of its urgency
 President Kennedy’s rationale regarding the reasons why he had decided to accelerate the U.S. space program matured in the course of 1963 . President Kennedy's rationale for the accelerated program of space exploration matured .
 In November 1962 he had disagreed with James Webb, who had argued that the goal of the acceleration was preeminence in all areas of space activity . In response, Kennedy had insisted that “everything we do ought really to be tied to getting on the Moon ahead of the Russians,
 Kennedy justified the fast-paced space program primarily in terms of its overall contribution to national power rather than as a race to the Moon . Webb won his point; from mid-1963 on, Kennedy defended the program .
 President Kennedy’s May 25, 1961, declaration that “we should go to the Moon” led to little Congressional or public questioning of the ambitious lunar landing goal as a high national priority .
 Leading newspapers and other shapers of public attitudes seemed caught up in the excitement of Project Mercury and the initial steps toward the Moon . Project Mercury was the first step toward the moon .
 As 1963 began, questioning of the lunar landing project began to emerge in various circles . The wisdom of the commitment to Apollo became the focus of a national discussion on the best path forward .
 President Kennedy sent to Congress a budget request for NASA of $5.712 billion . President Kennedy on January 17, 1963, sent a Fiscal Year 1964 budget request to Congress for NASA . NASA was criticized for being too expensive for Project Apollo .
 President Kennedy was questioned about the pace of the U.S. space program as compared to that of the Soviet Union . Kennedy was the president of the United States during a March 21 press conference in Washington .
 "We are expending an enormous sum of money to make sure that the Soviet Union does not dominate space," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Dwight Eisenhower suggested that “the space program, in my opinion, is downright spongy” Former President Eisenhower said the space program is “prettyly sponger’s”
 This is an area where we particularly need to demonstrate some common sense . This is where we need common sense. This is the case for us to demonstrate common sense, we need to do so .
 I don't think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies. I don’t think we . should look at the prospect of being second in the 1960s and '70s . I don
 He has disagreed with this, I know, at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut out by the Congress, and I am sure it will be, he says .
 Abelson suggested that “the lasting propaganda value of placing a man on the moon has been vastly overestimated” Abelson said . Abelson: “The lasting propaganda . value of the placing of a man . on the . moon has vastly underestimated, he said .
 Abelson’s editorial received attention well beyond the scientific community . His criticism was noted in front-page articles in prominent newspapers and in an April 20 appearance on Today .
 At an April 19 meeting with newspaper editors, he noted that “the space program...is now under some attack.” The space program is now under attack, he said .
 Bundy added that “what the President would like particularly to have is an account of the deficiencies of the space program as it was, and was projected, under the outgoing Administration.” Bundy added . Bundy: “What the President . would like to have a . account of
 Kennedy soon also decided to use the Space Council to coordinate the process of developing the defense of his space program . Kennedy also used the council to coordinate development of the program .
 NASA’s James Webb first sent a four-page cover letter with a sixty-three page attachment; this was later reduced to a seventeen-page memo signed by Webb . Webb's original cover letter still had ten pages of attachments; Webb's version of the letter was signed by
 The AEC response discussed only the organization’s efforts to develop nuclear power sources for space uses . The response to the AEC's response was a response to questions about space power .
 McNamara suggested that the coordination problem was of “sufficient importance” that it required attention at the White House level . McNamara: The coordination problem is of "sufficient importance" that it needed attention at White House .
 A “principals only” meeting of the Space Council was held on the afternoon of May 7 to review and approve the vice president’s report to the president . The meeting was held for the first time .
 Lyndon Johnson read from a seven-page draft prepared by the Space Council staff . Welsh read the president’s questions and Lyndon Johnson indicated the intended replies .
 Johnson delivered the Space Council’s report to President Kennedy on May 13 . It painted the overall situation in very positive terms . The report was delivered to Kennedy in May .
 A much more fundamental issue is at stake is whether a dimension that well can dominate history for the next few centuries will be devoted to the social system of freedom or controlled by communism . Whether a dimension of freedom will dominate history is devoted to freedom or to communism .
 We cannot close our eyes to what would happen if we permitted totalitarian systems to dominate the environment of earth itself . We are not afraid of totalitarian systems dominating the environment itself, says author .
 Our space program has an overriding urgency that cannot be calculated solely in terms of industrial, scientific, or military development . For this reason, our space program must be considered as an urgent priority .
 Wiesner discussed it with President Kennedy on May 16, telling him that “the impact of the NASA program on the nation’s supply of scientists and engineers is much greater” than that indicated in the report, he said . President Kennedy: “The impact of
 NASA might require the services of only 7 percent of the total supply of U.S. scientists and engineers . It would utilize up to 30 percent of those involved in research and development, he suggested .
 The individual on McGeorge Bundy’s staff with primary responsibility for tracking space issues was Charles E Johnson . Johnson was the person who was responsible for monitoring space issues . Johnson worked for Bundy in the mid-'70s .
 Johnson replied to Bundy that while the “purple prose” in the report’s conclusion left him “quite unimpressed,” his primary concern was that the report might be released as a public statement of the administration's position on space program .
 Kennedy himself remained committed to proceeding with the accelerated space program he had endorsed in May 1961 . The questioning of the program’s values and implementation by his senior staff suggested that there was a public debate over the proper goals and pace of the space program .
 The report suggested that “the question is not, then, whether man will ultimately reach the moon and beyond,” it said . It suggested that the question was not, but the question is whether man ultimately reached the moon . The report also suggested that man will eventually reach the
 The Kennedy administration in May began an intensified effort to respond to the critics of its space program . Kennedy administration has been criticized for its program .
 There was general agreement in the hearings that the deadline set for the first lunar landing was probably conducive to waste . There was no agreement that the American science enterprise was being distorted by so much attention to space .
 The strongest protest against the program was a written statement submitted to the committee by Warren Weaver, vice president of the Alfred P Sloan Foundation . Weaver projected as Apollo’s ultimate cost, which Weaver projected .
 President Kennedy was faced with lingering doubts regarding whether Russia in fact was intending to go to the Moon . Kennedy was also faced with questions regarding the possible hostile purposes of the Soviet space program . Kennedy suggested to Soviet Union that sending men to Moon become a cooperative undertaking .
 On July 22 he sent a memorandum to Robert McNamara and James Webb, noting “the lead article in the Reader’s Digest this month states that the Soviet Union is making a major effort to dominate space while we are indifferent to this threat.”
 Webb: NASA program is to develop ‘the power to operate in space’ and “as insurance against surprise and as the building of the necessary underlying capacity” for an accelerated military space program . Webb: The U.S. needs to develop the necessary capacity to operate
 The Department of Defense reply to Kennedy’s questions was signed by deputy secretary Roswell Gilpatric . Kennedy asked about the cost of the U.S. military response to his questions .
 A rapidly convened meeting of the Space Council on July 31 discussed the appropriate reply to the president’s questions . The Space Council met July 31 to discuss the appropriate response to President Obama's questions .
 Webb had participated in the July 31 Space Council meeting . Webb's preference on Webb’s part to report directly to the president rather than working through the Space Council . This is a somewhat disingenuous comment, since Webb participated in that meeting .
 Webb's belief in the military value of NASA’s activities was not shared by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . McNamara was not convinced of the value of the NASA program .
 The $5.712 billion budget request for NASA in January 1963 was almost $500 million less than what NASA had requested from the White House the previous September . The budget request still represented a 55 percent increase over NASA’s appropriation for Fiscal Year 1963 .
 The president’s September 20, 1963, United Nations proposal to turn lunar exploration into a cooperative undertaking was viewed with dismay by NASA and its congressional advocates . Most of the reductions in the NASA budget, particularly by the House of Representatives, predated the cooperative proposal .
 In June and July, the House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut a total of $475 million from the NASA budget . The House on August 1 approved a NASA FY1964 authorization of $5.203 billion .
 The full Senate on August 8 authorized a $5.511 NASA budget . NASA fared somewhat better in the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, but took a $201 million reduction .
 On August 28, after a conference committee had compromised on the differences between the two bills, the Congress approved a $5.351 billion NASA authorization . This amount was almost $400 million less than the president had requested and $850 less than what NASA the previous fall had thought needed to
 The White House made no public statements in support of reversing the cuts in the NASA budget . Science adviser Wiesner in August 2 memorandum to President Kennedy did note that the House cuts in robotic missions would make it difficult to ascertain lunar surface characteristics .
 NASA’s hope that there would be no further cuts in its budget proved illusory . NASA hopes it will be able to continue to work in the next few years .
 Authorization bills set the upper limit on the funding for a particular federal agency . Actual funds available are contained in the congressional appropriation for the agency .
 Hearings on NASA FY1964 appropriation began in the House of Representatives on August 19 . Hearings began on the NASA budget for FY1964 appropriations .
 Webb urged the Appropriation Subcommittee on Independent Agencies, which had jurisdiction over NASA, to approve the full amount that Congress would soon authorize . Webb in his testimony urged the subcommittee to approve full amount of funds .
 On September 24, in the aftermath of President Kennedy’s United Nations speech, the House subcommittee approved a $5.5 billion NASA appropriation . The subcommittee approved the funding on September 24 .
 The full Appropriations Committee confirmed the $5.5 billion budget on October 7 . James Webb says NASA could not achieve a lunar landing before 1970 at that budget level .
 The House of Representatives approved the $5.5 billion NASA appropriation on October 10 . Even so, the House approved the funding for NASA in October .
 NASA's expectation was that the Senate Appropriations Committee would restore the $250 million that the House had cut from the NASA authorization level . NASA hopes the Senate will restore that amount .
 The Senate committee on November 13 approved a NASA FY1964 budget of $5.19 billion, only $90 million above the House level . However, taking the White House and NASA “somewhat by surprise,” the Senate committee approved the budget . NASA's FY1964
 As the appropriations bill was being debated on the Senate floor, Senator J William Fulbright proposed an additional 10 percent cut in the NASA budget . Fulbright: NASA budget will be reduced by 10 percent .
 The Senate rejected this proposal, but did accept an amendment from Senator William Proxmire to reduce the budget to the House level of $5. billion . The Senate did accept this amendment, but rejected the proposal .
 Congressional budget cuts and widespread criticism were not the only threats to Apollo’s success during 1963 .
 James Webb and Brainerd Holmes never recovered from their differences in the final months of 1962 with respect to requesting additional funding to try to move forward the date of the initial lunar landing attempt . The relationship between Webb and Holmes was never recovered .
 It became increasingly clear that Webb and Holmes could not work together effectively . The pair were not able to work together in the months leading up to Holmes' death .
 Holmes and Webb got into a public argument during a reception at Webb’s home . During that evening, the two men got into an argument . Holmes was convicted of attempted murder of Webb .
 NASA sought president’s assistance in quickly finding a replacement for Holmes . NASA sought the president's assistance .
 Webb sought J FK’s help in recruiting to the NASA position Ruben Mettler, president of Space Technology Laboratories, an organization providing systems engineering support for the Air Force ICBM .
 Webb told the president that Mettler had “exactly the qualifications and the experience necessary...and has the complete confidence of men like Secretary McNamara and Dr. McNamara” Webb . Webb told Webb that Webb had the “complete confidence” of the president .
 Holmes’s successor was George Mueller, a senior associate at the Space Technologies Laboratories, George Mueller . NASA was not able to convince Mettler to leave his West Coast position .
 George Mueller asked two senior NASA engineers to conduct a quick and discreet inquiry into the state of the Apollo program . Mueller asked them to look at the state-of-the-apart program .
 Mueller showed this report to Robert Seamans, who directed that it not be distributed, much less publicized . There are reports that he told Mueller to destroy the report since it was so at variance with what NASA was saying publicly, but some copies were retained .
 By the end of October Mueller mandated a dramatic change in the Apollo schedule, known as “all up” testing . This required that all parts of the Saturn V launch vehicle be tested together .
 Given John Kennedy’s avid reading of the general media, it is probable that he noticed the Times and Newsweek stories .
 The program’s troubles in maintaining its schedule are likely to have played a role in a major White House review . The review of civilian and national security space programs was just beginning in early October 1963 .
 If Soviet Union had responded positively to Kennedy’s September 20, 1963, offer to cooperate in sending people to the Moon, there could have been profound changes in the character of the Apollo program .
 There is strongly suggestive evidence that Kennedy’s advisers, if not the president himself, were thinking about significant changes in the national space program in the October-November 1963 period . Even if such cooperation were not to have materialized, there is strong suggestive evidence .
 Changes might have included relaxing the schedule aimed at an initial lunar landing by late 1967, or even abandoning the Moon goal altogether .
 John Kennedy's inner circle was very uncertain in the fall of 1963 whether the White House would maintain the lunar landing program on its planned course . That questioning extended to John Kennedy’s inner circle, and it was uncertain .
 The White House in late September 1963 initiated a sweeping review of the United States civilian and military space programs and the balance between them . The review was prompted by President Kennedy's concern over the increasing costs of the U.S. space effort .
 National security adviser McGeorge Bundy replied on October 4 that he and White House congressional liaison Larry O’Brien had discussed Teague’s letter with the president . Bundy replied that the White House had discussed the letter with Teague . Bundy said that Teague's letter was a
 Bundy told Teague that Kennedy asked Bundy to contact Teague with “an interim answer to the important question which you raise” Bundy said Kennedy asked him to respond to the national security implications of the cooperative proposal . Bundy said Teague was asked to provide an "interim answer
 What precisely was meant by the tantalizing term ‘new expressions’ was not specified . What exactly was meant to be .
 Others argue that more emphasis should be placed on human flights in Earth orbit carried out under Department of Defense auspices .
 Webb suggested in a 1969 interview that “I don’t know whether it meant Schlesinger and Sorensen’s or whether it was the disarmament arms control or whether Mr McNamara.” was not clear to Webb who the members of this �
 On October 5, 1963, senior officials from NASA and Department of Defense met at the Pentagon with McGeorge Bundy . In this context, James Webb and Robert McNamara were meeting with Bundy .
 Bundy informed the officials that the NASA and DOD efforts would not only be used to rationalize the overall space program, but also to contain costs . Bundy said the efforts would be used in the overall national space program to balance civilian and national security efforts .
 NASA and DOD in October and November conducted a series of separate studies on the various elements of their individual programs .
 During November and December, they carried out five joint studies in the areas of launch vehicles, manned Earth orbital activities, communications satellites, geodetic, mapping, and weather satellite programs .
 These studies were not completed until January 1964, and with one important exception discussed below, did not lead to major changes in the already planned NASA and DOD space efforts .
 Finney: The question is not whether to go to the moon or not, but whether the U.S. should pursue a lunar expedition . Khrushchev had seemed to suggest that if the Soviet Union was not engaged in a competitive lunar effort, it would be a problem .
 Charles Johnson of the National Security Council staff suggested to McGeorge Bundy that there was “some merit in trying to unhitch ourselves from the idea of going to the moon in this decade as a hard proposition”
 This was because “technology comes from passing certain critical points.” Technology comes from “passing certain critical point’s,” the author says . “This was because of the need for technology to be able to communicate with people,’ she says
 On October 30, Seamans, who was acting NASA administrator because both Webb and Dryden were absent, tried to reach Bundy to voice NASA’s concerns with respect to what the president might say at his October 31 press conference .
 Budget official Willis Shapley relayed NASA's concerns to a budget official . He was unsuccessful in contacting Bundy and so relayed NASA’s concerns to Shapley . The budget official was unsuccessful to contact Bundy and relayed his concerns .
 NASA and the White House would find themselves in an “extremely awkward position” if it were to be indicated that the current objectives of the manned lunar landing program are likely to be relaxed or abandoned” before ongoing White House reviews were completed .
 The space agency reported to the White House that during the preceding 48 hours it “had received important expressions of support for the present program and timetable” Some of this support is from unexpected sources, the agency said .
 President Kennedy was aware of the arguments among his associates for and against slowing down the pace of the space buildup . Kennedy was very likely aware of those arguments .
 Kennedy said Khrushchev's statement that the Soviet Union did not have a lunar landing program was incorrect . Kennedy: "I think that we ought to stay with our program. That program is continuing"
 Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral on November 16, 1963 for a tour of progress being made by NASA in the Gemini and Apollo programs . Kennedy made the short flight to Cape Canaveral from his family home in Palm Beach, Florida for an inspection tour .
 He also took a helicopter to a Navy ship offshore to witness the launch of a submarine-based Polaris missile . The launch of the Polaris missile was also a highlight of the visit .
 Kennedy was briefed on the Gemini program by astronauts Gus Grissom and Gordon Cooper . Kennedy was first briefed by the astronauts during the Gemini era .
 A Saturn 1 booster was sitting on that launch pad for a planned December launch attempt . He then had a short presentation on Apollo by George Mueller in the launch control center at Launch Complex 37 .
 As his party left the control center, the president lagged behind to inspect the launch vehicles being used by NASA . The launch vehicles ranged from the small Redstone booster that had been used for suborbital launches of Alan Shepard and Gus Grissom to the mighty Saturn V .
 President Kennedy briefed on Apollo plans by associate administrator for manned space flight George Mueller on November 16, 1963 . President Kennedy was briefed on the Apollo program by Mueller in 1963 .
 Before leaving the launch pad, Kennedy walked over and stood directly underneath the rocket . Kennedy's Secret Service detail was uncomfortable at the moment .
 He recognized that with the upcoming launch the United States would finally surpass the Soviet Union in lifting capacity . He had pursued from his first presidential decisions on space .
 The party then flew by helicopter over the Saturn V launch facilities under construction at Launch Complex 39 on Merritt Island . Kennedy had been shown a model of the complex during his earlier briefing .
 Kennedy said to Seamans: "I’m not sure that I have the facts really straight” with respect to the launch capability of the Saturn 1 . Kennedy returned to the mainland after witnessing the Polaris launch, he said .
 He asked Seamans to get on the press plane to emphasize that the U.S. would soon close the weight-lifting gap in space .
 Back off of being first to the Moon did not seem to be on Kennedy’s mind in November 1963 .
 In remarks he planned to deliver in Dallas on November 22, Kennedy would have said “the United States of America has no intention of finishing second in space.” In Dallas, Kennedy planned to say that the U.S. would not be second . Kennedy would say “
 The pace of the lunar landing program was not an issue in the joint NASA-DOD effort . NASA and the Defense Department worked together to land the moonwalkers .
 The focus with respect to human space flight was the balance between NASA and DOD in Earth-orbital spaceflight activities . Rather, the focus of the mission was to balance between the two agencies in spaceflight .
 The Department of Defense was becoming increasingly interested in the military and intelligence potentials of humans in orbit . There were suggestions that DOD might take over from NASA the leading role in the Gemini project .
 NASA examined what was “the minimum manned earth-orbit program required to support a manned lunar landing” The space agency wanted to make sure that there were enough Gemini flights to satisfy its requirements in support of Apollo .
 In late November, a report summarizing BOB’s conclusions was drafted by the BOB staff . The report was drafted in consultation with senior representatives of NASA and the Department of Defense .
 This report had two sections dealing with the “Manned Lunar Landing Program” and the other with “Military Space Objectives” The report had a particular focus on the future of a separate Air Force effort in human space flight .
 This draft best represents the analysis and conclusions that would have been presented to the president for final decision if he had lived . This draft is a draft version of the president's autopsy report .
 The bottom line of the 1963 Special Space Review was that there was no reason for “backing off” the lunar landing goal . The moon landing goal was still a priority for the U.S. mission .
 It is unlikely that either President Kennedy’s top advisers or the president himself would have countermanded this conclusion, had Kennedy lived to consider that choice . Kennedy's top advisers and the president would have countered that conclusion .
 James Webb, Robert McNamara, Jerome Wiesner, Edward Welsh, Kermit Gordon, and their top associates met on November 30 to consider the draft Special Space Review . The possibility of changes in Apollo was not even discussed .
 The group decided to cancel the Air Force DynaSoar program and replace it with the Manned Orbital Laboratory program . The program is a small outpost combining the Gemini spacecraft and an attached module with room to experiment with military and intelligence payloads .
 Without even reaching the level of a presidential decision, Apollo had survived an intense and wide-ranging review with its basic character ‘20 intact . ‘ 20’ is the name of Apollo 20 .
 The recommendation to continue Apollo on its current path would most likely have been welcomed by the president .
 John F Kennedy repeatedly made clear his view that the United States should continue its effort to assume the leading position in space .
 Kennedy’s excitement during his November 16 visit to Cape Canaveral in recognizing that the upcoming Saturn 1 launch would give the United States the lead in space . Kennedy referred to that soon-tobe-realized achievement several times in remarks on November 21 and the morning of November 22 as
 Frank O’Connor, the Irish writer, tells in one of his books how, as a boy, he and his friends would make their way across the countryside . When they came to an orchard wall that seemed too high and too doubtful to try, they took off their hats
 The assassination of President John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963, had, of course, many consequences . Chapter 14: The Race to the Moon . Chapter 13: The Kennedy assassination had many consequences, including the loss of the U.S. President .
 President Obama turned the United States space program into a memorial to the fallen president . The moon landing effort was turned into a tribute to his legacy . The president died in 1973 .
 There was essentially no chance that the new president, Lyndon B Johnson, would modify the goal set by President Kennedy in 1961 . President Kennedy had himself so strongly recommended that Johnson had himself strongly recommended .
 Kennedy’s commitment to achieving that feat “before this decade is out” sustained the program through delays and difficult times, including the death of three Apollo 1 astronauts in a launch pad accident on January 27, 1967 . Apollo 11 astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on
 The broadest historical significance of the initial journeys to the Moon may indeed take centuries to fully appreciate . It is certainly possible to evaluate the impacts of the lunar landing program to date and of John F Kennedy’s .
 John F Kennedy stands as one of the most successful and important of U.S. presidents . Kennedy's commitment to Apollo Apollo was a major success story for Kennedy .
 This public image, however, is not universally shared by scholars of the presidency and of U.S. government . This is not the case for scholars of American government, however .
 A half century after John Kennedy entered the White House, they disagree on how best to evaluate the Kennedy presidency . A half-century after JFK's presidency, John Kennedy is remembered for his achievements .
 Kennedy demonstrated with respect to space a steadiness of purpose and a clear understanding of the arguments for and against implementing his choice . In deciding to go to the Moon, Kennedy demonstrated that he understood the reasons behind his decision .
 He had the flexibility to pursue a cooperative path if it were open to him, but his judgment that space leadership was in the U.S. national interest made him determined to compete if competition was necessary .
 His science adviser Jerome Wiesner said he became convinced that space was the symbol of the twentieth century . As his science adviser said, “I think he became . convinced that . space was a symbol of space .
 The validity of this assumption of American exceptionalism is open to challenge, but that's not my point . I think the validity of the assumption of exceptionalism should be challenged, but not the point .
 President Dwight Eisenhower had come to a different judgment of the importance of space achievement in terms of preserving U.S. global leadership . Eisenhower saw space achievement as being based more on a sound defense, fiscal soundness, and social stability .
 John Kennedy, with his much more activist approach to government, had an opposing view . John Kennedy had an opposition view. John Kennedy was an activist.
 U.S. has benefitted over the past half century from this decision, says President Obama . "I believe that this was a wise judgment, one from which the United States has benefited," he says .
 The principle that the U.S. should be the leading spacefaring nation has served the country well . Perhaps the technical capabilities developed for Apollo were too large and too expensive for subsequent regular use .
 Kennedy’s 1961 decision to enter a space race with the Soviet Union is closely resembling the rational choice model of decision-making . Kennedy chose the best option with the best ratio of benefits to costs . The decisionmaker assesses various options for achieving that objective, and selects the best
 It is important to note that what makes this decision process “rational” is the purposeful evaluation of alternatives to achieve a stated goal . The goal itself is a matter of judgment, and must be evaluated on the quality of that judgment .
 Kennedy judged that what other nations thought about American power and resolve to use it was as important, if not more important, than the reality of that power . As image-conscious as he was, he judged that .
 Kennedy judged that the potential contributions of space capabilities to military power justified a significant investment in developing those capabilities, albeit through a peaceful, civilian-led effort . In addition to the potential contribution to space capabilities, Kennedy judged it justified an investment .
 The choice of sending Americans to the Moon emerged from a rapid but searching assessment of what space activity would best achieve a dramatic space “first” before the Soviet Union . The Moon served as the focal point for the development of various space capabilities .
 It was this decision process that can best be characterized as rational, it was a rational decision . The decision process was rational, the author says .
 Budget official Willis Shapley: "There was never a major decision like this made with the same degree of eyes-open, knowing-what-you’re getting-in-for" Shapley says .
 Science adviser Jerome Wiesner agreed, saying that he and Kennedy “talked a lot about do we have to do this.” Science adviser said that Kennedy and his staff “took a lot’s a lot of time to think’t we have
 Time/Life reporter Hugh Sidey suggests that the Moon project “was a classic Kennedy challenge.” Sidey says Kennedy's Moon project was a classic challenge .
 Sidey added that in deciding to go to the Moon, Kennedy “heard the poets’s poetry.” Kennedy ‘heard the poems.’ Sidey said .
 We have in the tape recording of his November 21, 1962, meeting with his . space and budgetary advisers . We have an uncensored record of his thinking on the reasons behind his commitment .
 Kennedy was not a space visionary, according to the study . The study concludes that Kennedy did not have a space vision .
 Kennedy’s decision to go to the Moon was not made once and for all time in April and May 1961 . Commitment Reviewed and Reiterated . It is important to realize that Kennedy's decision not made in April 1961 .
 In 1963, Kennedy saw an opportunity to cooperate with the Soviet Union in going to the Moon as a means of reducing U.S. costs while achieving other important strategic objectives . If the Union had responded positively, it certainly would have changed the character of Project Apollo .
 There was not a single decision to aim at a lunar landing, but rather a series of decisions . The resulting choice was to proceed with the program to land Americans on the Moon “before this decade is out” either as a unilateral undertaking or cooperatively .
 Only at the very end of Kennedy administration was serious consideration given to slipping the end of the decade schedule . The decision made was to reject such slippage and to stay with the planned schedule .
 Kennedy's commitment to Apollo can be best understood in terms of how he carried out his presidency overall . Kennedy’s consistently reiterated commitment to the Apollo project can be explained in terms terms of his presidency .
 JFK's commitment to Apollo in these terms is particularly useful . Viewing JFK’s commitment to the Apollo mission is particularly helpful .
 Kennedy’s space policy was a reflection of his broader objectives as president . Kennedy's space policy reflected his broader goals as president, he says . Kennedy was president in the early 1960s .
 John Kennedy was more focused on the totality of the U.S. space program than was John Kennedy . A program aimed at sending Americans to the Moon could serve as a focal point for the development of space capabilities of strategic value for the United States .
 These were the reasons John F Kennedy decided in 1961 to go to the Moon, and they remained the objectives of Apollo at the time of his death . The objectives of the mission to the moon were still the reasons for the mission .
 Kennedy’s assassination was the political foundation for White House decisions to allocate resources for Apollo . This stability in the actual reasons for the lunar race served as a political foundation . Kennedy's assassination served as the foundation for Apollo's success .
 Kennedy's willingness to stay course in the face of increasing criticisms of the path in space that he had chosen indicates the quality and strength of John F Kennedy’s original decision to go to the Moon .
 The question is whether a rational approach was the predominant influence on policy choice in the 1961-1963 period . Politicians and personalities also played a part in the decision to take action .
 I believe the preceding narrative suggests that this indeed was the case. I believe it indeed was . I believe that this is the case . I also believe it was a good idea that this was .
 A rational decision process can address both solving current problems as well as finding a way to achieve longer-term goals . A rational process can help solve current problems and find a way of achieving longer term goals, experts say .
 The immediate stimulus to the decision to go to the Moon was the threat to U.S. global leadership posed by the world’s reaction to Soviet space successes at the same time as the . United States looked weak in its conduct of the Bay of Pigs fiasco .
 Kennedy's desire to regain his personal prestige and his administration's momentum were also addressed by the Apollo choice . Kennedy’s desire for a personal prestige was also addressed .
 Kennedy’s space strategy was well-crafted to achieve this outcome . Finding a way at the same time to move away from current problems and to pursue a worthy goal is an optimum policy-making objective .
 John Kennedy shared with others in his family an intensely competitive personality . That characteristic certainly influenced the way he interpreted the U.S.-Soviet space relationship . John Kennedy was a competitive personality, and that characteristic influenced the Kennedy family .
 As Manned Spacecraft Center director Robert Gilruth commented, “he was a young man; he didn’t have all the wisdom he would have had”
 Kennedy’s youthful faith in the future, his fundamentally competitive personality, and his broader conception of the national interest that made him willing to accept the costs and risks of the lunar enterprise . It was a combination of Kennedy's youthful faith and his competitive personality .
 In 1964, political scientist Vernon van Dyke suggested that Kennedy’s need to restore national pride was the basic motivation for the U.S. lunar landing program .
 Words like “desperately” and “panic” do not seem to describe Kennedy’s state of mind . Kennedy considered whether to use a “space achievement which promises dramatic results” as a tool of his foreign policy .
 On April 14, before the invasion began, Kennedy met with his space advisors and commented that “there’s nothing more important” than getting the U.S. into a leading position in space . Kennedy: “There’ll be a great thing for the
 Kennedy’s final approval of the acceleration of the space effort came on May 10 . The summit meeting with Khrushchev was not finally set until a week later . Kennedy's approval of acceleration of space effort was approved by May 10, 1962 .
 Kennedy sent out feelers regarding a possible agreement at the summit meeting on U.S.-Soviet cooperation in going to the Moon . This is inconsistent with assertion that the need for a “quick, theatrical reversal” of Kennedy administration fortunes before the summit was a key factor in Kennedy
 President Kennedy’s commitment to a lunar landing program as the centerpiece of an effort to establish U.S. space leadership was the result of thoughtful consideration . In summary then, I conclude that President Kennedy's commitment to the program was a deliberate consideration .
 The commitment was publicly embellished with rhetorical flourishes, but at its core was a Cold War-—driven but rational policy choice . The commitment to the U.S. in the Cold War was public, but it was a rational choice .
 The commitment also reflected values deeply embedded in the national psyche . The commitment was also reflected in the country's national spirit .
 I suggested that the Apollo decision reflected assumptions at the core of Western liberal philosophy . I suggested then that the decision was based on assumptions at core of the West .
 That man can do whatever he chooses, given only the will and the techniques and resources required, is a belief that reflects motivations and characteristics basic to Western and particularly American civilization .
 Specific decisions on what a government should do are made by its leaders . Specific decisions should reflect a lasting conception of the national interest rather than more parochial concerns or the specifics of their character .
 Through such decisions, the values and aspirations of a society can then be expressed through state action . The values of the society can be expressed by state action, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The liberal perspective is that it is appropriate for the Federal government to undertake large-scale programs aimed at the public good . It has been embraced by American presidents such as Woodrow Wilson, notably Franklin D Roosevelt with his New Deal initiatives, John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson .
 The proposal to focus massive government resources on a lunar landing effort reflected only one of the two dominant strains in American political thought . The one that sees government steering of U.S. society as legitimate is legitimate .
 Conservative thinking as it applies to the commitment to Apollo was best articulated by historian Walter McDougall in his 1985 prize-winning study... the Heavens and the Earth .
 Project Apollo and other initiatives proposed by Kennedy in his first months in office resulted in “an American-style mobilization that was one step away” from the Soviet approach to a planned society, he says .
 To McDougall, “the commitment to go to the moon did more than accelerate existing trends in space," he says .
 This call for concentration of effort was also found in Wernher von Braun’s April 29, 1961, letter to Vice President Johnson responding to the questions President Kennedy had asked .
 McDougall’s analysis is derived more from his overall conservative perspective than from the facts of the situation in 1961-1963 . Overall, however, the analysis is more conservative than from his conservative perspective .
 Neither Kennedy nor Webb’s management approach called for strong centralized control . John Kennedy and James Webb went to extraordinary lengths to achieve success on the moon .
 The policy and budget decisions that steered Apollo in its early years were made through the normal decision-making process, not in a war-time or Soviet style . Apollo's budget and policy decisions were made in the normal process of making a decision .
 Franklin D Roosevelt was president of the United States in the early 1930s . Roosevelt was an activist president who pushed for FDR's agenda . Roosevelt's administration was inspired by his father's activism .
 Both Johnson and Webb were committed New Dealers who used their positions in government to take actions that in their view would be for the common good . Both were committed to the public good .
 The debate over the appropriate role of the federal government in undertaking large-scale efforts on behalf of the U.S. citizenry is a continuing one . A full discussion of that role is well beyond the scope of this study .
 What can be discussed is what lessons can be drawn from the Apollo experience, and particularly from the way it was initiated by President John Kennedy, should there be a desire to begin another expensive multi-year government initiative .
 Project Apollo became the twentieth-century archetype of a successful, large-scale, government-led program . Project Apollo was the first program to be a successful government-funded program .
 Only the construction of the Panama Canal between 1904 and 1914 and the Interstate Highway System over several decades beginning in the 1950s rivaled Apollo in terms of the scope and difficulty of the task and the scale of human and financial resources .
 Eggers and O’Leary attribute much of the successful execution of the lunar landing program to the leadership of NASA administrator James Webb . Webb led NASA to the successful landing program .
 President Kennedy gave Webb a great deal of freedom to manage NASA as Webb saw fit . Webb was given the power of NASA to manage the agency's mission to the moon .
 A number of times between 1961 and 1963 Kennedy heard from others, often science adviser Jerome Wiesner or budget director David Bell, who questioned or disagreed with the path chosen by Webb . Webb was the president of the United States in 1963 .
 In particular, Wiesner waged a vigorous campaign to overturn NASA’s choice of the lunar orbit rendezvous approach for carrying out the landing mission .
 Brainerd Holmes let it be known to Kennedy that Webb opposed his suggestion that the schedule for the first lunar landing be accelerated . Kennedy shared Holmes’s desire for the earliest possible landing .
 Even the Mercury astronauts took their plea for an additional flight in the Mercury program directly to President Kennedy . President Kennedy took the request directly to the president .
 Kennedy deferred to Webb as the individual responsible for carrying out the space program . Webb is the person who should make these decisions, Kennedy said in every instance .
 The objective sought must be known to be feasible, with a high degree of probability, at the time of the decision to seek it is made . The objective must be know to be known, with the highest probability, of being feasible with a good chance of being successful .
 The objective must have been the subject of sufficient political debate so that the groups interested in it and opposed to it can be identified, their positions and relative strengths evaluated, and potential sources of support have time to develop . The objective should have been subject to enough political debate .
 Some dramatic “occasion for decision,” such as a crisis resulting from an external or domestic challenge, must occur to create an environment in which the objective and the policies to achieve it become politically feasible, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: A dramatic ‘occasion
 There must be in leadership positions in the political system individuals whose personalities and political philosophies support the initiation of new large-scale government activities aimed at long-term payoffs . Those who have the political skill to choose the situations in which such activities can be initiated successfully .
 Even writing in 1970, I recognized that the first of these conditions was very limiting, and would not work when the end desired required both technological breakthroughs and significant changes in deep-seated behavior patterns .
 What was unique about going to the Moon is that it required no major technological innovations and no changes in human behavior, just mastery over nature using scientific and technological knowledge available in 1961 .
 There are very few, if any, other potential objectives for government action that have these characteristics . There is no other potential objective that has these characteristics.
 The reality is that attempts to implement other large-scale nondefense programs over the past forty years have never been successful, in the space sector or in the broader national arena . Attempts to implement nondefence programs have not been successful .
 President Bush in 1989 and President George W Bush in 2004 set out ambitious visions for the future of space exploration . But neither of those visions became reality . Political and budgetary support needed for success was notably missing .
 Recent attempts to re-create a space race mentality by positing that China was intending to send humans to the Moon before a U.S. return have fallen flat .
 This proposal was met with skepticism and political controversy; as I write these words, its fate is still unclear . The fate of the proposal is unclear .
 In the nonspace sector, there have been few opportunities for largescale government programs that do not require for their success a combination of technological innovation and significant changes in human behavior .
 The attempts to declare a “War on Cancer,” for example, required not only research breakthroughs but also changing the smoking habits of millions of Americans . The attempt to declare “war on cancer,’s need to be successful, experts say .
 Attempts to move toward U.S. “energy independence” run afoul both limited research and development spending and the complex ties between nonUnited States energy suppliers and the United States financial and government sectors .
 Providing adequate health care for all Americans turns out to be a political, not merely a technical, challenge . Providing health care to all Americans is a political challenge, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Managing global environmental change has both high technical uncertainties and challenging social inertia to overcome . Managing global climate change has challenges to overcome, such as high technical uncertainty and social inertia . Managing environmental change is a challenge for the world's future .
 If this is indeed the case, then there is little to learn from the decision to go to the Moon relevant to twenty-first century choices, says author .
 The Apollo experience has little to teach us beyond its status as a symbol of a great American achievement . Other approaches to carrying out large-scale government programs will have to be developed, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It may be the symbolic character of America’s voyages to the Moon that is the most important heritage of the program .
 The image of the Earth rising over the lunar surface taken by Apollo 8 astronaut Bill Anders on Christmas Eve 1968 and of Apollo 11’s Buzz Aldrin standing next to the American flag at “Tranquility Base” have become iconic, communicating to subsequent generations that the
 JFK chose to go to the Moon as a means of restoring U.S. prestige that he judged had been lost during Eisenhower administration . John Kennedy chose the trip to the moon as a way of restoring the United States prestige he judged lost in Eisenhower administration.
 What prestige is, it would be hard to describe precisely, It may be nothing more substantial than an effect produced upon the international imagination—in other words, an illusion . The prestige is what prestige is .
 It is, however, far from being a mere bubble of vanity; for the nation that possesses great prestige is thereby enabled to have its way, and to bring things to pass which it could never hope to achieve by its own forces .
 In terms of both shorter-term and more lasting impacts on U.S. international prestige and the associated national pride, Apollo was a substantial success . The Apollo mission was a major success for the United States .
 Within months of JFK’s clarion call, NASA and U.S. industry mobilized in a high-profile pursuit of the lunar landing goal . NASA and United States industry were mobilized .
 Kennedy effectively undercut the unilateral Soviet space advantage in dramatic space achievements well before any comparable U.S. success . By declaring that the United States intended to take a leading position in space, Kennedy undercut the Soviet advantage .
 The United States space program of the 1960s was a source of international prestige and national pride . Projects Mercury and Gemini were the first steps in JFK’s lunar quest .
 The psychological advantages of early Soviet space successes were quickly and effectively countered . The psychological and political advantages of the Soviet space program were quickly countered .
 Americans who were abroad at the time of the first Moon landings attested to an immense flow of admiration for the U.S. that could accomplish such a feat . Apollo astronauts returning from post-mission international tours all said they admired the country .
 Johnson: "We are left, however, with a very substantial residue of admiration and prestige" Johnson: “We are . left with very substantial . residue of admire and prestige .
 Kennedy channeled one dimension of U.S.-Soviet rivalry into what some have described as “the moral equivalent of war” Some have described it as ‘moral equivalent to war’ rather than armed confrontation . By choosing a Cold War arena that did not involve military or
 During the Kennedy administration the United States was racing only itself to the Moon . As it turned out, however, the U.S. was only racing itself .
 By 1963 the Soviet Union had begun to develop a large space rocket capable of sending a cosmonaut to the Moon, it had not yet decided to use it for lunar missions . We now know that by 1963 the . Soviet Union was not yet ready to use the rocket to send a
 Central Intelligence Agency analysts identified activity at the Soviet launch site in central Asia as a launch complex for a very large rocket . It was not until spring 1964 that the site was identified as the site for a large rocket launch .
 He continually referred to U.S.-Soviet competition in going to the Moon in public statements defending his decision to go to the moon . He referred to the competition in his public statements .
 This was certainly the politically expedient thing to do; it would have been far more difficult to maintain political support for Apollo if the threat of Soviet competition had been absent . This was the politically .
 Several of President Kennedy’s advisers in 1962 and 1963 alerted Kennedy to the lack of evidence in support of Soviet lunar intentions . Kennedy was aware of the mid-1963 claims by Bernard Lovell that the Soviets did not have a lunar landing program .
 He seems to have accepted Webb’s argument that the United States lunar program was an extremely valuable focal point for developing overall U.S. space capability . Webb argued that it should proceed, cooperatively if possible but unilaterally if not, even if the Soviet Union did not have a
 Critics have argued that the Apollo program was an unfortunate reflection of misplaced U.S. priorities . Both during the Kennedy administration and during the rest of the 1960s, critics have argued .
 President Kennedy was aware of these criticisms, and in 1963 worked to prepare answers to the program’s doubters . In 1963, Kennedy prepared answers to those who questioned the program's effectiveness .
 Apollo came to culmination at a time when the U.S. was experiencing urban riots, civil rights conflicts, political assassinations, and a seemingly pointless war in Southeast Asia . Apollo came at the height of the civil rights and civil rights struggles .
 In starting Apollo, Kennedy gave more weight to the situation in 1961 than to the longer-term situation in which the landings would actually take place . In starting the Apollo mission in 1961, Kennedy said: "In 1961, the situation was more important than in 1961"
 From his perspective in spring 1961, Apollo looked like the right thing to do . Apollo's mission to the moon was "the right thing" to do, he says .
 Project Apollo must be viewed as a positive example of Kennedy's vision for the Apollo program . Project Apollo was launched in 1968, and Kennedy's first mission was to carry out Apollo 11 .
 If not for the achievements of the U.S. space program at the end of the decade there would be little positive for Americans to remember from that time . Although it is impossible clearly to separate the positive impacts of Apollo from the many negatives .
 Apollo’s impact on the evolution of the U.S. space program has on balance been negative . By contrast, the impact of Apollo has been positive .
 Apollo turned out to be a dead end undertaking in terms of human travel beyond the immediate vicinity of this planet . No human has left Earth orbit since the last mission in December 1972 .
 Apollo and whatever human exploration efforts might follow it would so rapidly be brought to a close . Like many others close to the space program, I was caught up in the excitement of the initial lunar landings, and could not conceive of the possibility that Apollo would end .
 Most of the Apollo hardware and associated capabilities, particularly the magnificent but very expensive Saturn V launcher, quickly became museum exhibits to remind us, soon after the fact, of what once was had been done . What happened, however, was that most of the . Apollo hardware  became .
 For the first time in history, the Moon is not just a mystery and a muse, but a nightly rebuke . The Moon is no longer just a muse and muse, it's a nightly reminder of the nightmarish .
 By being first to the Moon, the United States achieved the goal that had provided the sustainable momentum that powered Apollo . After Apollo 11, that momentum very rapidly dissipated, and there was no other compelling rationale to continue .
 President Richard Nixon had no stomach for a major post-Apollo program aimed at building a large space station . The station would be built in preparation for eventual human missions to Mars . President Nixon rejected the program .
 Nixon decreed, “we must think of them as part of a continuing process...and not as a series of separate leaps, each requiring a massive concentration of energy.” Instead, he said, ‘we must . think of . them as . part of an ongoing
 There were in the 1960s proposals, called the Apollo Applications Program, to use Apollo hardware for a variety of Earth orbit and deep space missions . The Apollo hardware was intended to be used in Earth orbit, deep space .
 Only one of those missions, the Skylab space station, ever came to fruition . Its May 1973 launch was the last use of the Saturn V . The booster's production line had been shut down in 1970 .
 The 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Program mission was the last use of an Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn 1B launch vehicle . It was the first use of the Apollo spacecraft . The mission was also the last ever use of a spacecraft and a rocket .
 The United States started over in human space flight in 1972 . The shuttle program was followed in 1984 with the development of a space station . The U.S. limited itself to orbital activities in near vicinity of Earth .
 Kennedy set a firm deadline for the first lunar landing . Kennedy put NASA in the position of finding a technical approach to Apollo that gave the best chance of meeting that .
 This in turn led to the development of the Saturn V launcher, the choice of the lunar orbit rendezvous approach for getting to the Moon, and the design of the Apollo spacecraft optimized for landing on the Moon .
 It has determined the priorities, the engineering designs, and the scientific objectives of the space program in this decade . It is quite likely to control future space work for the remainder of this century .
 The consequences of selecting the lunar orbit approach to the Moon landing were of concern to Kennedy’s science adviser Jerome Wiesner as he opposed the LOR choice .
 NASA during the second half of the 1960s became what James Webb had feared, a one-program agency . Given the budget constraints of the period, there was no money available for major new starts on alternative programs .
 The Apollo program created in NASA an organization oriented in the public and political eye toward human space flight and toward developing large-scale systems to achieving challenging goals .
 It created from Texas to Florida the institutional and facility base for such undertakings . The project was created in Texas and Florida . It created .
 NASA entered a four-decade identity crisis from which it has yet to emerge . With the White House rejection of ambitious post-Apollo space goals, NASA has struggled to find an identity crisis .
 Repetitive operation of the space shuttle and the extended process of developing an Earth-orbiting space station have not been satisfying substitutes for another Apollo-like undertaking .
 The innocent clarity of purpose, the relatively easy and economically painless public consent, and the technical confidence ...are gone and will probably never occur again . "The innocent clarity ... is gone and probably never ever occur again," the author says .
 Trying to recreate those by-gone moments by sloganeering, frightening, or appealing to mankind's mystical needs for exploration and conquest seems futile considering all that has happened since Jack Kennedy set the nation on course to the Moon .
 Brewer’s comments of more than two decades ago might usefully be applied to the twenty-first century NASA and its supportive space community . NASA still struggles to maintain the approach to human space flight developed during the Mercury, Gemini and Apollo programs .
 The conditions that made Apollo possible and the NASA of the 1960s a “perfect place” were unique and will not reoccur . It is well beyond the scope of this study to discuss the future of the U.S. space exploration program .
 Apollo will forever be a milestone in human experience, and particularly in the history of human exploration and perhaps eventual expansion . Apollo's mission to the Apollo 11 mission was a "milestone in human history"
 Apollo may not have followed the best route, nor have been motivated by the same concerns that will stimulate future space exploration . Like other ventures into unknown territory, Apollo may have not been motivated to explore .
 The Apollo 8 ‘Earthrise’ picture is surely one of the iconic images of the twentieth century . Apollo 8 was the first mission to photograph the Earthrise in 1969 .
 The perception alone cannot justify the costs of going to the Moon, but it stands as a major benefit from going there, one that has influenced human behavior in many ways . That perception is not enough to justify the cost of the trip .
 I hope that sometime in the future, humans will once again choose to venture beyond the immediate vicinity of Earth . I hope it's possible that humans will venture beyond Earth .
 "I believe that the urge to explore is a fundamental attribute of at least some human cultures," he says . He says he believes that exploring is an attribute of human cultures .
 Michael Collins, the Apollo 11 astronaut who remained in orbit as Armstrong and Aldrin experienced being on the Moon, has commented that the lasting justification for human space flight is “leaving”
 As future voyages of exploration are planned, I also hope that the United States chooses to be in the vanguard of a cooperative exploration effort involving countries from around the globe .
 "There are two things I judge as certain, whenever those voyages take place," he says . "There is two things that are certain, such as the voyages," he adds. "Whenever there is there, there is no doubt that there will be."
 One is that they will not be like Apollo, a grand but costly unilateral effort racing against a firm deadline to reach a distant and challenging goal . One reason is that Apollo is not a grand, but a long-term, unilateral effort . Another reason for the project is that it will
 The other is that President Kennedy’s name will be evoked as humans once again begin to travel away from Earth . President Kennedy will be remembered for his role in the Kennedy era .
 John F Kennedy, like the astronauts who traveled to the Moon during Apollo, was a true space pioneer . Kennedy was the first man to travel to the moon and the first astronaut to do so .
 The highway costs were paid through a special user tax, not general government revenues . It's not directly comparable to the funding appropriated through annual congressional actions for Apollo .
 The point that Joseph Kennedy expected his eldest living son to run for public office is made in almost every biography of John F Kennedy and his family . Chapter 1 Before the White House: The Kennedy family is proud of his legacy .
 Kennedy may have dictated it himself . Who actually composed this response for Kennedy’s signature is unknown .
 Kennedy’s close aide Theodore Sorensen noted that “Senator Kennedy signed very little of the correspondence he approved for his signature and dictated even less of it.”
 As a footnote to this history, the author was present at the Los Angeles Coliseum as Kennedy made his acceptance speech .
 CORONA flew its first successful mission in August 1960, before JFK’s question . President Eisenhower had approved the program in February 1958 . JFK's question was not answered .
 The CORONA program was very highly classified, and clearly Senator Kennedy was not aware of its existence . Senator Kennedy did not know about the program, which was classified .
 In what seems to be Kennedy’s handwriting, the notation “Library” appears on the first page of the paper, indicating that it may have been read by the candidate . In what appears to be the handwriting, Kennedy appears to have read the paper .
 Theodore C. Sorenson, Counselor, 199, 203; author’s interview with Theodore C Sorensen, May 28, 2009 . Sorennsen was Counselor of the University of Columbia University, Columbia University .
 This account of the space issues facing President-elect Kennedy is by design very selective . It's by design to be selective, and it's not the first time Kennedy has been in space .
 He intended the diary only for his children, but NASA prevailed on him to have it published . The result of the diary is fascinating reading .
 T Keith Glennan, Oral History Interview, February 20, 1987, GlennanWebb-Seamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum . Glennan interview was conducted by Glennan in 1987 .
 The first U.S. attempt to launch a satellite called Vanguard failed on December 6, 1957 . Vanguard was the approved United States IGY entry, which was the first attempt to enter the IGY .
 Vanguard was even lighter than Explorer 1, weighing only a little over 3 pounds . Explorer 1 weighs only over three pounds . Vanguard was the first Explorer 1 to have a lighter, lighter Explorer 1 .
 The panel’s skeptical view may also have been influenced by two recent failures in the Mercury program . The panel's skeptical view was also influenced by recent failures .
 The first suborbital test of the Mercury-Atlas combination on July 29, 1960, was a complete failure . The first test was a failure in July 1960 .
 On November 21, 1960, a test launch of a Mercury capsule atop a von Braun—developed Redstone rocket rose only a few inches off the launch pad before settling back to the ground . The test launch was the first of its kind in the history of space travel .
 The Mercury-Redstone combination was to launch the first few U.S. astronauts on suborbital flights before NASA would commit to sending an American into orbit . Mercury and Redstone were to launch first few United States astronauts .
 Kistakowsky, Scientist in the White House, 409; Glennan, Birth of NASA, 292 . Glennan: The birth of NASA is the birth of the nation's first major space agency .
 Seamans was the “privileged source’s source” source quoted in Logsdon, Decision, 35 . Seaman was quoted as the ‘privileged’ source of information .
 George M Low, “Manned Lunar Landing Program’s” October 17, 1960 in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Volume VII, 457 .
 Interview with Senator Clinton Anderson, August 18, 1967, in Logsdon, Decision, 68 . Anderson: "I'm not a politician. I'm a Democrat. I want to be a Democrat." Anderson: 'I'm a Republican. It's a Democrat'
 The order in which other goals were listed was also shifted from that report to move ‘national prestige” to the top of the list .
 The task force report also covered the U.S. ballistic missile program . That portion of the report will not be discussed here .
 Michael Bechloss, “Kennedy and the Decision to Go to the Moon,” in Launius and McCurdy, Spaceflight and the Myth of Presidential Leadership, 54 . Bechlost: ‘Kennedy’s decision to go to the moon was a
 A February 2, 1961, memorandum from C Berg of the Bureau of the Budget notes that Wiesner had informed the NASA staff that he “disociates” himself from the content of his task force’s report .
 It is not clear that Dryden was ever told of this message from Clifford . Dryden is not known if Clifford ever told Dryden of the message .
 Dryden says he submitted his resignation but no acknowledgement had been received . Dryden: "I had submitted my resignation but had no acknowledgement of it" Dryden remembers that he had submitted resignation .
 In a speech to the National Press Club on March 16, 1967, Lyndon Johnson said that he had interviewed nineteen people . In a press conference after the Apollo 8 flight in December 1968, he put the number at twenty-eight .
 In his careful biography of James Webb, W Henry Lambright also uses the number nineteen . Lambright's biography of Webb was also published by Lambright .
 For Wiesner’s comments, see interview by W Henry Lambright, November 15, 1990, NHRC, folder 7106 . For Wieren's comments, read W Henry's interview with Jerome Wiesern by WHenry Lambright in 1990 .
 Webb asked whether he was being hired to implement a predetermined policy . Webb asked Lyndon Johnson, not President Kennedy, if he was hired to carry out a pre-election policy .
 Roswell Gilpatric was interviewed by W Henry Lambright, December 17, 1991 . He was interviewed in a telephone interview with Lambright in 1991 . The interview was published in 1991 by Lambright .
 Lambright’s notes from the interview can be found in NHRC, folder 7106 . Lambright's notes can be seen in the NHRC archive of the interview .
 Department of Defense Directive 5160.32, “Development of Space Systems,” March 6, 1961, was issued .
 This force increases as an object is accelerated or decelerated, such as during a space lift-off or reentry . At the Earth’s surface, it is 1 at the surface, 1 at Earth's surface . This force is 1 per cent higher than at the Earth
 Letter from Jerome B Wiesner to Hugh Dryden, March 7, 1961, NHRC, folder 012506 . Letter from . Jerome B . Wiesners to Hugh . Dryden .
 The instructions given to Low’s group are discussed in Seamans, Project Apollo, 8.5 .
 Excerpts of the report are reprinted in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol. 2 .
 Newell in 1961 was NASA’s top scientist and its liaison to the Space Science Board . Newell was NASA's top scientist in 1961 .
 This was one of the many similar organizational histories prepared during the final year of the Johnson administration .
 Elmer Staats was the Deputy Director of the Bureau of the Budget and a holdover from the Eisenhower administration . Staats served as the Director of Budget .
 No author, “Possible Questions and Answers on the Soviet Venus—Probe for the President’s Press Conference on Wed. Wednesday” No author .
 Letter from James E Webb to the Director, Bureau of the Budget, March 17, 1961, NHRC, folder 012504 . Webb's letter was sent to the director of the bureau of the budget . Webb wrote that Webb wanted to use the government's budget to help fund the
 Bell had been a junior budget examiner when James Webb had been the BOB director during the Truman administration . Bell had worked for Webb when Webb was in charge of BOB .
 James E Webb, “Administrator’s Presentation to the President,” March 21, 1961 . Webb was the president of the U.S. Army in 1961 .
 See also Robert Seamans, Oral History Interview, November 2, 1987, Glennan-Webb-Seamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum .
 The Soviet statement was reported in Swenson, Grimwood and Alexander, This New Ocean, 332. It was published in the book "This New Ocean," by Alexander .
 Draft of Wiesner’s letter shows the state of his thinking in the immediate aftermath of the Gagarin flight . It is not clear if the memorandum was actually sent to the president .
 Sidey wrote to fellow veteran journalist Robert Sherrod, who was working on a book on the space program, describing the April 14 meeting . Another source is a letter dated December 6, 1971 that Sidey sent to Sherrod describing the meeting .
 Kennedy’s interaction with Sidey is a revealing example of how JFK used the press to further his interests . Sidey's interaction with Kennedy is one of the most revealing examples of JFK's use of the press as a political tool .
 Every history of the Kennedy presidency contains a detailed analysis of the Bay of Pigs failure, the decisions that led to it, and its aftermath . Every history contains an analysis of what led to the failure .
 The quote is from an interview with Walt Rostow, at the time of the Bay of Pigs on McGeorge Bundy’s national security staff, in Strober and Strober, Kennedy Presidency, 349 .
 NASA Presentation to the Vice President, April 22, 1961, NHRC, folder 012504 . NASA Presentations to the vice president, April . NASA presentation to the . Vice President . NASA presentation to . the vice . President .
 For a biography of Bernard Schriever, see Sheehan, A Fiery Peace; for the definitive von Braun biography, see Neufeld, Von Braun. For a biographer of Schriev, see Schrivere . For a definitive biography of von Braun,
 Such a demonstration of the U.S. ability to rendezvous with and capture a satellite in orbit and return it to Earth would have been seen by the Soviet Union as a very provocative act .
 Letter from Richard N Gardner to the Vice President, April 24, 1961, NHRC, folder 12288 . Gardner to Vice President: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to fly"
 The other two private citizens invited by Vice President Johnson to participate in the space review did not submit written inputs . Vice president Johnson invited the other private citizens to submit written input .
 Frank Stanton in an August 18, 1967, letter to the author wrote that his involvement was “minimal” George Brown, asked by the NASA History Office for his recollection of the consultations, said that he did not remember them at all .
 Author’s interviews with James Webb and Letter from James E Webb to Dr. Dr. Webb . James Webb has written a letter to the author of the book .
 This account of May 6-7 meetings is drawn largely from an oral history interview of Robert Seamans, March 27, 1964, JFKL, oral history .
 Central Intelligence Agency, “Soviet Technical Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” National Intelligence Estimate Number 11-5-61, 25 April 1961, 34, 42, 44 .
 Letter from Jerome Wiesner to David Bell, May 10, 1961, NHRC, folder 12288 . Letter from Wieser to Bell was sent to Bell in May 1961 . Letter was a letter from Jerome to Bell .
 It appears that Wiesner had not yet seen the May 8 report that resulted from the May 6-7 meetings, which had already proposed setting as a new goal the creation of such a system . Given the date on the letter, it appears that the report had already been made public
 The Life & Times of Alan Shepard, America’s First Spaceman, is published by the National Air and Space Museum . The Life and Times of Shepard is published in the National Museum of Space History .
 The final “Staff Report on Proposed Increases in Space Programs,” dated May 20, 1961, can be found in NHRC, folder 012457 .
 The suggested answer was “women demonstrate every day versatility reaching far beyond the confines of the kitchen’s kitchen.”
 It is interesting to contrast this first-hand account of the reception to Kennedy’s address with accounts in other Kennedy biographies .
 In an interview with the author on May 28, 2009, Sorensen suggested that his use of the word “hundreds” was an exaggeration .
 Sorensen has not been able to locate in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library archives .
 This document is one of the histories of all Federal agencies prepared at the end of the Johnson administration . This document was released in the late 1960s .
 For a discussion of locating Saturn production and testing facilities, see Bilstein, Stages to Saturn, chapter 2 . See Bilstein's Stages To Saturn, for more information on Saturn .
 This account of the site selection process is taken from this attachment . Site selection process was taken from the attachment .
 Kenneth O’Donnell’s views on the site selection process can be found in a telephone interview with Robert Sherrod, May 13, 1971 .
 Sherrod was a veteran journalist who started, but never completed, a detailed history of the events leading up to the Apollo 11 mission . Sherrod's interview notes can be found in NHRC, folder 13288. Sherrod never completed a detailed Apollo 11 history .
 Webb spoke to the National Press Club on September 12, 1961 . Webb was the first president of the U.S. to speak to the press . Webb's first public address was in September 1961 at the Press Club .
 Unless otherwise, Wiesner quotations are from the November 20 memorandum . This article includes quotes from Wiesners' November 20 memo .
 The group's report was not issued until almost a year after it had completed its work . Reflecting the controversies surrounding its efforts, the group’s report was released almost one year later .
 Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol. Vol. Americans to the Moon, was published in the 1970s and 1980s . Launius is credited with helping launch the Apollo 11 mission .
 Letter from James E Webb to the President, June 1, 1962, NHRC, folder 012518 . Webb to President: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future" Webb's letter was sent to the president of the United States in 1962 . Webb: "We
 Military Division, Bureau of the Budget; “Draft Staff Report—Special 34. Military Division” Military Division of Bureau of Budget; . “ Draft Staff Report’s” is a draft draft .
 Willis Shapley was interviewed by Glennan-WebbSeamans Project for Research in Space History, National Air and Space Museum . Shapley: "Willis Shapley is the only person who has ever been in space history to be interviewed by the museum"
 Webb to the President, March 21, 1963, NHRC, folder 012518. Webb's letter was sent to the president of the U.S. Webb wrote that Webb wanted to use the government to protect the environment . Webb said that Webb was a hero of the day .
 Committee on Science and Astronautics, Toward the Endless Frontier, 224—225 . Committee on science and Astronauts, Towards the Endless frontier, 224-225. Committee on the Astronauts' mission to space .
 Interview of Jerome Wiesner by W Henry Lambright, November 15, 1990, NHRC, folder 7106 . Interview with Jerome Wieren by WHenry Lambright . Wiesern's interview with Lambright was published in 1990 NHRC .
 Houbolt’s letter is reprinted in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol. 1 .
 The “C-5 direct” approach would have reduced the crew size to two rather than three astronauts . It would have sent their spacecraft directly to the lunar surface without any need for a rendezvous .
 Wiesner, November 7, 1962, reprinted in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Volume VII, 585 . The book was published by Launius in 1962 .
 For a discussion of the process through which Kennedy's speeches were developed, see Sorensen, Counselor, chapters 12 and 18 .
 Bell's memorandum was never put in final form and signed by Bell . Bell was the only person to sign the memorandum . Bell has been in charge of the U.S. Department of Defense since 1994 .
 Interview with John F Kennedy published in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, November 1960, 347. Interview with JFK published in November 1960 . Interview with Kennedy appeared on November 30, 1960 .
 Kennedy emphasized matching the Soviets in rocket thrust . Kennedy also emphasized matching Soviet rocket thrust in the 1960s .
 Frutkin was NASA official in charge of international affairs during the period covered by this study . He was NASA's top official at the time .
 In 1962, U.S. ambassador to Soviet Union became Soviet specialist in Department of State . Susan Kohler was a State Department specialist .
 Richard Reeves, in his President Kennedy, suggests that Kennedy’s final words were even stronger . Richard Reeves: Kennedy's final words may have been stronger .
 He quotes the President as saying “Then, Mr Chairman, there will be war.” He quotes him as telling the House of Representatives: “Mr Chairman’s office will be at war. Mr Chairman”
 The description of Khrushchev’s June 3 reaction as “half joking” is in Sorensen, Kennedy, 544. The description is in Kennedy, Kennedy's 544th edition .
 Khrushchev added “from the perspective of today this was definitely a mistake.” The former Soviet leader said “this was definitely the mistake’s’ decision .
 Sergey Khrushchev is not always reliable source of specific historical information . It is unlikely that his father consulted Korolev in the twenty-four hours between the two Kennedy-Khrushchev luncheons .
 Rusk also noted that the Department of Defense had been involved in preparing the letter . Rusk: The Department of Defence had also been involved .
 The fact that Kennedy had made a proposal to Khrushchev in Vienna for joint lunar missions was not widely known at the time of the summit or in early 1962 .
 The reference to Congressman Olin Teague , who was chairman 52 oo NO 10. oo No 10. 10.
 The phrase “pursuit of an illusion” is the title of the chapter in Harvey and Ciccoritti, U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space discussing Kennedy’s UN proposal .
 It is fair to surmise that the analysis in the book’s chapter on the cooperative initiative, and indeed the portions of the study that deal with the 1961-1968 period when Webb was NASA administrator, reflect to a significant degree Webb's views . The book's chapter on
 As suggested previously, this analysis appears to reflect the perspective of James Webb on Kennedy's views at the time .
 Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Estimate Number 11-1-62, “The Soviet Space Program,” December 5, 1962 . The Soviet space program was the subject of a CIA report .
 The quote is taken from Bernard Lovell, “Soviet Aims in Astronomy and Space Research,” New Scientist, July 25, 1963, 175 .
 An audio tape of the September 18 meeting between Webb and Kennedy exists, but as of November 2010 it has not yet been released by the Kennedy Library . The Kennedy Library has not released the tape .
 Kennedy was likely aware of a general skepticism about the proposal among NASA's leaders . Finney's story may have prompted Kennedy's comment about not being undercut by NASA .
 Drew Pearson, “JFK Vetoed Experts on Space Bid,” Washington Post, September 26, 1963, F11l. Pearson: ‘JFK vetoed experts on space bid, Washington Post .
 The language of the letter bears the unmistakable eloquence of Sorensen’s writing style . The letter was written by the author of the book, "Sorensens"
 Sedov was one of the few Soviet scientists connected to the Soviet space program whose identities were publicly known . Sedov's identity was not publicly known until his death . He is one of only a handful of Soviet scientists linked to space program .
 Khrushchev’s remarks were reported in the government newspaper Izvestia and quoted in Harvey and Ciccoritti, U.S.-Soviet Cooperation .
 It should be noted that this memorandum was discussing both the October 25 and November 1 statements by Khrushchev . The memorandum was also discussing the October 1 and October 25 statements . It should also be noted, that this was a reference to the October 4 and 1 statements .
 NOTES on the Soviet Manned Lunar Program,” Spaceflight, November 2003 and March 2004. “Spaceflight” is published by Spaceflight magazine .
 U.S.-Soviet Cooperation, 125, quoting a Pravda report. Harvey and Ciccoritti, U.K. A.S. and Soviet Cooperation .
 The shift in Khrushchev’s views, as reported by his son, is described in Siddiqi, Challenge to Apollo, 400 . The shift was described by his own son in a book published by his father .
 Sergey Khrushchev, in Launius, Logsdon, and Smith, eds., Reconsidering Sputnik, 282. The former Soviet Union leader's memoir is published in Moscow, Russia, Russia and Ukraine .
 The text of the speech can be found in the Department of State Bulletin, December 30, 1963, 1011 .
 Eisenhower letter is quoted in NASA, Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1963, 112 . Eisenhower letter was quoted in an article by NASA in 1963, 1963 .
 The content and language of this memorandum suggests that it was drafted by the staff of the Space Council . Staff may have been unhappy that Kennedy had been bypassed by Kennedy’s earlier request to James Webb for information to help defend Apollo .
 John Disher and Del Tischler, “Apollo Cost and Schedule Evaluation” in Logsdon with Launius, Exploring the Unknown, Vol. Vol. 2 . The Apollo cost and schedule evaluation of the Apollo program is discussed in the book .
 Dryden by this time had been diagnosed with what turned out to be a fatal cancer . Dryden often spent time away from NASA undergoing medical treatment .
 NHRC: “NASA’s suggestion to Mr Bundy on position on manned lunar landing program” October 30, 1963, NHRC, .
 Letter from Olin E Teague to NASA Historian Eugene Emme, January 24, 1979, NHRC, folder 012499 . Teague wrote to Emme that Teague wanted NASA to learn more about Teague's role in NASA .
 NHRC: “National Manned Space Flight Program,” November 21, 1963, both in NHRC, folder 3802 .
 Seamans with revised draft of the introduction and manned lunar landing section of the space report, November 13, 1963, NHRC, folder 10668 . NHRC: "Manned lunar landing is the answer to the problem of manned lunar landings"
 Seamans, November 22, 1963, with attached November 20 draft of Special Space Review, NHRC, folder 10668 . Seaman: "Space One" was a space shuttle mission to orbit the Earth in 1963 .
 The renaming of the geographical area in Florida was reversed in 1973 to return to the historical designation Cape Canaveral . Cape Canaveral is now known as the Canaveral Canaveral .
 Quoted material here and in the rest of this chapter is drawn from the previous chapters, unless otherwise noted . The rest of the chapter is based on the previous chapter .
 I have drawn heavily from my analysis in The Decision to Go to the Moon in preparing the current chapter . The decision to go to the moon was made in the decision to leave the country in the 1970s .
 James N Giglio, “John F Kennedy and the Nation” in Giglio and Rabe, Debating the Kennedy Presidency, 134 . Giglio’s article is published by Giglio & Rabe .
 Kennedy’s language as he justified Apollo is discussed in a panel of experts on Apollo Apollo quotes . Kennedy's language of Apollo, Apollo, is a powerful metaphor for Kennedy .
 Murray and Cox, Project Apollo, provide the best account of the many NASA managers and employees who made Apollo successful . Project Apollo was the Apollo One of NASA's most successful missions .
 Giglio and Rabe, Debating the Kennedy Presidency, 7.7.9.9, in Giglio . Stephen Rabe . Giglio, Rabe: "John F Kennedy and the World"
 Scientific American, June 1994, for a discussion of the Soviet lunar program . Read this article in full .
 Columbia Accident Investigation Board, “Report, ‘Report,” Volume 1, August 2003, 209 . Columbia Accidents Investigation Board: Report, "Report, Volume 1," August 2003 .
 Daniel Boorstin, “The Rise of Public Discovery” in Space Policy Institute, Apollo in Its Historical Context, 21.05 .
 The global televising of Neil Armstrong’s first steps on the Moon was possible because the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium had completed its global satellite network just a few weeks before the lunar landing .
 NASA: A Technological History of the Apollo/Saturn Launch Vehicles, NASA SP-4206 . NASA: The Apollo and Saturn launch vehicles were launched in the 1960s .
 Henry Dethloff, Henry C Suddenly, Tomorrow Came: A History of the Johnson Space Center, NASA SP-4307. Dethlsoff: Suddenly Tomorrow Came. Tomorrow Came . Tomorrow Came was a History of Tomorrow Came, Tomorrow came: A . History of Johnson Space
 The Private Diary of President Eisenhower's Special Assistant for Science and Technology . Eisenhower's special assistant for science and technology . Eisenhower wrote the private diary of Eisenhower's .
 U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Astronautics, voted to pass the bill . The bill was passed by the House in 1996 .