 The October Crisis is also known as October Crisis or the Caribbean Crisis . The crisis was known as the 'October Crisis' or the 'Caribbean Crisis'
 Soviet Union began building missile sites in Cuba in 1962 . It began when Soviet Union started building missile bases in Cuba . The site was built in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 It is one of the important confrontation which came after Berlin wall during Cold War Era . It is also one of important confrontation .
 During the Crisis, American deployed missiles in Italy and Turkey . Soviet Union deployed ballistic missiles in Cuba . American deployed missile missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 Kennedy Administration reached an agreement with Soviet Union to remove Jupiter Missiles from Turkey and in exchange Soviet agreed to remove the Nuclear Missiles . Later on Kennedy Administration agreed with Soviets to remove nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for removing the missiles from Turkey .
 USA does not want the communist Soviet to expand its communism or socialism across the world . USA on the other hand does not . want the . other hand . to expand . its communism . across the . world .
 Cold war started from 1945 with USA and Soviet Union being the main parties . So a Cold war was started with the Cold War between the U.S. and USSR .
 During 1959, Fidel Castro took over the power in Cuba he nationalized all the American companies . Fidel Castro nationalized the U.S. companies in Cuba .
 USA broke all economic relations with Cuba, stopped all the aid provided to Cuba and also stopped buying Cuban Sugar . In response, USA stopped all aid and stopped buying Cuba's sugar .
 This became a disaster for Cuba since USA was the largest buyer of Cuban Sugar . Cuba was the biggest buyer of sugar from USA .
 Russia came to rescue the economy of Cuba by buying Cuban Sugar at higher prices . Russia also bought Cuban Sugar from the government of Cuba .
 Castro then turned to USSR and signed contract with Nikita Khrushchev to sell the Cuban Sugar . Castro then signed contract to sell sugar to the USSR . Castro later turned to Russia and signed deal to sell Cuban Sugar to USSR .
 Castro asked Nikita Khrushchev to built Missile sites in Cuba to protect himself from any American Threat . After the failure of Bay of Pigs Invasion, Castro was sure that he might not survive the second invasion of USA .
 This event led to the establishment of direct phone link between Soviet Union and USA which was called as hotline to avoid any miscommunication in the Future . This event also led to establishment of . direct . phone link . between Soviet and USA .
 Countries like USA, USSR were amassing nuclear stockpile since World War which further threaten the peace and safety of this world . Countries like U.S. and Russia have been stockpiling nuclear weapons since WWII .
 Countries needs to resort to more on dialogue instead of waging war to solve any confrontation . Countries must resort to dialogue rather than waging war instead of war, writes CNN.com.com .
 Policy Makers needs to design the policy keeping other countries in mind . Policy makers need to make sure they keep the policy in mind of other countries .
 Government needs to expand its communication channels with other countries and work closely to increase the cooperation and development . Government must also work closely together to increase cooperation .
 UN needs to play a central role to encourage the countries to sign disarmament of Nuclear Missiles treaty . UN must also play a key role in encouraging nations to sign a nuclear disarmament treaty .
 USA and USSR did signed a treaty to destroy some of its stockpiles but still they need to do lot of work in this area . USA and Soviet Union signed a deal to destroy stockpiles .
 Finally, all the countries should work together to become a Nuclear Free World . All the countries need to become nuclear-free world .