 Leaders of both nations handled the crisis with varying degrees of success . The leaders of both countries handled the situation in the U.S.
 In some ways, the American leader Kennedy can be seen to have handled the crisis better than Soviet leader Khrushchev . Kennedy can still be seen as the leader of the U.S.
 Middle Kennedy stood up to some of his military advisors who wanted to invade Cuba . Middle Kennedy had also successfully stood up against some of the military advisors .
 Kennedy was calm under pressure and able to negotiate a more effective solution . This could have caused nuclear conflict which would have had devastating world consequences . Kennedy was able to avoid a nuclear war and negotiate a solution .
 Many had doubted him after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . This helped him to be recognised as a strong leader, which was important .
 Some believe Khrushchev handled the crisis better than his counterpart . However, some believe he handled the situation better . Some say he handled it better .
 He had prevented an American invasion of Cuba, and had a guarantee that no further invasion attempts would take place . He had also guaranteed that there would be no further attempts to invade Cuba .
 Cuba remained a Communist ally for the Soviets so close to America . This meant that Castro remained in power, and Cuba remained an ally of the Soviets . Cuba was the only communist country in the world to have a Communist Party .
 Although this was a secret agreement, it still meant that the Soviet Union had achieved one of its main aims during the crisis .
 It removed much of the threat America held over the Soviet Union, and also marked a huge step towards the peaceful coexistence of the two countries . The U.S. and Soviet Union are now living peacefully in peaceful relations .
 Overall, I believe Kennedy handled the Cuban missile crisis best and as a result secured the most from it . Overall, he believes Kennedy handled it best .
 Kennedy successfully stood up to the Russians without causing nuclear war . Cuba was still a Soviet satellite, but missiles had been removed from Cuba .
 This student written piece of work is one of many that can be found in our GCSE International relations 1945-1991 section . The above preview is unformatted text .
 Khrushchev put the ball into the U.S. President's court . By announcing to Kennedy his proposal to the Soviet Union he put the issue in the President's hands .
 The Cuban dictator planned to reduce the oppressive aspects of communism and bring in common capitalist aspects . Within this concept he planned to bring communism to a capitalist state .
 Czechoslovakia was split since Eden had left them in the dark about the vital facts about Suez including the secret meeting between France Israel and Britain and had made this decision by himself . These reforms were very popular amongst the citizens of Czechoslovakia .
 In February 1943, the German army surrendered at Stalingrad . In conclusion from the sources and my own knowledge I know that the majority of the public supported In . February 1943 .
 Hitler had already fired his Commander-in-Chief, leaving the position available to anyone who sufficiently impressed Hitler . Hitler's interference was the main ... the main question was whether he had interfered .
 This meant that the generals were more concerned with impressing Hitler, making battles look decisive and dramatic, than considering in depth tactical details such as minimising casualties . Hitler was more interested in impressing the Nazis than in fact reducing casualties in battle .
 The USSR feared a Muslim takeover in the USSR and thus invaded Afghanistan to establish a communist government . The USSR invaded Afghanistan in order to establish the communist government in Afghanistan .
 Source does not show how the other events were just as important . However, this source does show how important events were .
 In addition, this source was published in the daily mail which tells me that this it is exaggerated to interest the audience. In addition to this, this is published in addition to the fact that this is not true, it is said to have been exaggerated by the media .
 This source cannot be academically referenced or used to confirm a series of events . Therefore, it cannot be used as a source to confirm events in the past .
 Two superpowers then became intensely involved in the conflict by rushing arms to their client states . The two superpowers rushed arms to each other's client states in order to protect their own interests .
 Because of potential of nuclear conflict between superpowers --> dangerous time for the world . Because of the potential of a nuclear conflict, it's a dangerous time to be optimistic about the future .
 Sign up to view the whole essay and download the PDF for anytime access on your computer or smartphone .
 Teachers' study guides highlight the really important stuff you need to know . They include the most important things you know from the internet .