 Its transmission o^the revelatipn of its contents in any janner to Jin unauthorized perslon is prohibited blr law . The transmission of the contents of this article is prohibited .
 At seven on the evening President Kennedy informed the nation that intelligence efforts had uncovered a Soviet pK t to leapfrog American defenses by placing medium and intermediate range missiles and jet bombers in Castro's Cuba .
 He also directed increased close surveillance of the military buildup in Cuba . He also threatened ""further action"" by the Armed Forces if the buildup continued .
 It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . Furthermore, in unmistakable language, he warned the Soviet U.S.
 Khrushchev also threatened that U.S. aggression against Cuba could lead to thermonuclear world war . Khrushchevitch threatened that United States aggression against . Cuba . The threat was made in reference to the threat of nuclear war .
 The Soviets avoided a direct naval clash by diverting nearly all Soviet-bloc ships en route to Cuba . The Soviets diverged nearly all ships enroute to Cuba from the Soviet Union .
 The President's warning that further action would be taken became creditable when alarge U.S. military buildup in Florida and the Caribbean became apparent . Aerial surveillance soon confirmed that the work in Cuba had been halted .
 United Nations Secretary U Thant used his offices to promote direct U.S.-Soviet exchanges in which Khrushchev and Kennedy communicated terms for a settlement . U.N. Secretary U. Thant was Secretary of State at the time .
 The threat of war lessened when Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the Cuban bases and remove the missiles under U.N. supervision . The U.S. agreed to remove missiles under United Nations supervision .
 U Thant failed to persuade Cuban Premier Castro to accept U.N. inspection . Cuban premier Castro refused to accept UN inspection .
 The Soviet actions amounted to virtually complete acceptance of the demands made by President Kennedy . Nevertheless, the Soviet actions were not the first to accept the President Kennedy's demands .
 The Cuban Crisis proved many things that needed to be proved . The Cuban crisis was the beginning of a new era in American history .
 A cold war could change to a hot one, emphasizing the necessity to have war readiness materiel in true readiness-both as to amount and condition . Those tense hours showed how quickly a cold war can change .
 Air Force Logistics Command furnished effective logistics support, it was not an easy job . Logistics support was essential to the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s .
 The command had to meet support requirements without a supporting USAF-approved program . The command was forced to meet requirements without an Air Force-approved support program .
 This situation necessitated crash actions to obtain or redistribute assets, with the result of costs being high and logistics support not possible .
 It was clear that to avoid a similar situation in future emergencies, the Air Force would have to do more advance planning . The Air Force will have to take steps to avoid future emergencies .
 USAF headquarters (upon AFLC recommendation) established an ad hoc committee to study the problems of support for contingency operations . In February 1963 USAF headquarters established the committee .
 The emphasis necessarily would be upon having assets on hand, either prepositioned at forward bases or in back-up stock . The emphasis would be on having assets in reserve or in backup stock .
 Advance planning for the roll -back after a crisis is also important and merited study . However, advance planning for a roll-back after the crisis was also important, study finds .
 This study should be in sufficient detail to insure maintaining both an operational and logistics support capability, the command's War and Emergency Plans Branch said .
 The roll-back of supplies and equipment was a big undertaking . The vehicles were of many types, including refueling, fire, and cargo handling trucks, forklifts, cranes, and cranes .
 Although the original intention was to return all nonTAC equipment to the owning commands, it did not work out that way . Instead, it was intended to return the equipment back to the owners commands .
 Additional items were added prior to the Cuban Crisis, and still more were added as the result of experience gained in that contingency . Additional items have been added as a result of the experience gained from the experience .
 POL located closer to the critical bases during the Cuban emergency, the Air Force leased two retail distribution station terminals from industry .
 Industry met the demand on very short notice . However, normal supply costs were exceeded . Cargo lots were less than the maximum and required premium transportation .
 Chief of Staff directed the major commands to keep a historical record of their participation in the Cuban Crisis .
 Headquarters AFLC historians and the field historians prepared separate chronologies and documentation of the command's participation in the crisis . Under instructions from the USAF Historical Liaison Office, Historians prepared separate, detailed chronologies .
 These chronologies did not represent a complete, analytical history of the command's role . The chronologies do not represent an analytical history .
 Many of the source documents were hastily prepared during the emergency . Many of these documents were hurriedly prepared in the emergency.
 The stringent deadline for the chronologies precluded a complete check of conflicting and uncertain evidence . And the stringent deadline . precluded . a thorough thorough thoroughness .
 This summary represented only the best evaluation that could be drawn at that time and within the space of a few days . Again, this summary represented the best possible evaluation of a player .
 Historians lacked the perspectives of time and complete knowledge of other command' s participation in the crisis actions . The historians lacked the perspective of time . The historian's view of the crisis was incomplete .
 A deadline of less than 24 hours was levied on these evaluations . However, in the rush of events that surrounded the crisis a deadline was imposed .
 No more than a cursory look could have been taken at the AMA crisis operations . Consequently, no more than an immediate look could be taken at AMA .
 AMA observations might be colored by incomplete knowledge of the total situation, or might be locally defensible but not reflect a general condition . Moreover, the observations of a particular AMA might be colored by incomplete information .
 Despite the hasty and incomplete nature of the chronologies and summary messages, these products did serve one important function . Despite the lack of chronologies, they did serve an important function.
 On the basis of the available evidence, they pointed up some of the problems and object lessons encountered in the Cuban Crisis .
 AFLC attempts to correct deficiencies and prepare for future contingencies . AFLC is based on historical products, plus the first-hand experience of operating and staff officials, which formed the basis for AFLC .
 The Cuban Crisis gave AFLC an opportunity to alert the Air Force to the difficulties encountered in logistical support of contingency operations . AFLC: The Cuban crisis gave us a chance to learn about the difficulties faced by the U.S.
 At that early date, the list of problems could only be looked upon as tentative . At that point, the problems were only looked at as tentative as a result .
 Experience with earlier contingencies in other parts of the world tended to support the list of Cuban Crisis problems .
 General Bradley felt that action should be taken either to provide more funds or to centrally store critical WRM items, such as fuel tanks, pylons, and munitions . General Bradley said more funds should be provided or to central store critical items, like fuel tanks .
 Central storage of some items would allow them to be positioned rapidly in areas where they were required . Central storage would allow some items to be placed rapidly in places where they are needed . The storage of items would be central storage .
 The quantities required in the most distant areas could be prepositioned . As funds became available, the quantities required could be placed in the region .
 Commander wanted a study group to investigate the problem, unless he could get assurance that funds to procure the necessary items would be made available at an early date . Commander wanted to get assurance funds would be given to procure items .
 For an explanation of Air Force doctrine and policy on limited war see Charles H Hildreth, "USAF Logistic Preparations for Limited War, 1958-1961,"" October 1962, in AFLC Historian .
 The report was compiled by the USAF Historical Liaison Office at Headquarters USAF with input from the major commands involved in the crisis . The report is based on the findings of the U.S. Air Force historians .
 The appendix included a summary of the major commands' messages on problems and lessons learned . The appendix also included a list of lessons learned from the commands .
 The newly formed Directorate of Operations at AFLC headquarters initiated one of the earliest attempts to solve Cuban Crisis support problems . AFLC was formed in response to the Cuban crisis in 1959 .
 The Command Post, headed by Lieutenant Colonel James E Sturgis, was assigned the project .
 Command Post personnel extracted 90 problems mentioned in AMA chronologies . They referred them to the appropriate headquarters components for action . Command post personnel extracted the 90 problems .
 Final reports from the directorate on the actions taken on the 90 problems could be listed in five categories . The final reports could be based on five categories of problems .
 Headquarters components did not recognize a valid command-wide problem, officials say . The problem was caused by a lack of awareness in some cases .
 Some in this category were immediately eliminated from further consideration . Others were considered only locally defensible; others were considered normal gripes from organizations that had felt pinched for resources or did not understand broader implications of a particular action .
 AFLC alone could not solve problems which could not be solved by AFLC . AFLC is not alone to solve problems such as the problems it faces in the UK .
 The USAF Ad Hoc Committee on Support of Contingency Operations took up some of these problems on an Air Force-wide basis . The committee was formed by the U.S. Air Force to address the problems .
 AFLC headquarters components considered some problems to have been at least temporarily solved during the crisis . AFLC HQs considered some of the problems to be at least temporary solved during crisis .
 The Ad Hoc Committee picked up the broader implications of some of these problems . Here again, the committee picked up on some of the issues .
 Fourth, headquarters components forwarded the problems concerning a particular commodity or system to the individual AMA's for local solution . Headquarters components forwarded problems to the AMA for local solutions .
 Headquarters AFLC attempted to find solutions for some twenty-odd problems for which they attempted to solve . The list of problems was compiled by the AFLC in order to address .
 For purposes of discussion, the number of problems in the last category can be considerably narrowed by combining many of the similar ones . For example, combining many similar ones can narrow the problems in this category .
 AFLC headquarters requested workload information from AMA's so that it could provide more guidance in future contingencies . Manpower and Organization Division at AFLC HQ requested the AMA's workload information .
 Manpower and Organization intended to chart the information received by functional areas so the common problem areas could be isolated . The project was designed to chart out the information from functional areas .
 It found this was impractical because neither the additional requirements nor the methods used to supply more manpower showed any consistency among the AMA's . The AMA found this impractical .
 Manpower and Organization concluded that specific planning for limited emergencies was unnecessary . Since AMA's had successfully met the additional workload requirements by various means, Manpower .
 The HOI contained separate instructions for an emergency action staff operating under strategic warning of general war .
 For emergencies short of strategic warning and exercises, an accelerated action staff would operate the augmented Command Post . The augmented command post would be set up in the UK .
 Action staff teams were similar in composition to the old teams, but instructions for each headquarters component involved were much more explicit . The action staff teams had similar composition to old teams .
 Staff representatives would only attempt to accomplish all the required actions when the workload for his activity was minimal . Further, a given staff representative would only try to accomplish the tasks when the task was minimal.
 Should the workload increase, actions would be accomplished in the normal operating environment . If the workload increases, they would be able to do the same as normal operations .
 Message processing and distribution would be provided from the normal operating location, but all messages would be routed through the action staff . The action staff would be responsible for the messages .
 Most of the difficulties were similar to those covered by General Bradley in his remarks before the Air Force commanders in November .
 In the ensuing weeks, the committee and the functional components at USAF, TAC, and AFLC headquarters began to tackle these difficult support problems .
 Some solutions depended upon the new non-nuclear war tactics which had not been clearly established . Many other required actions needed prerequisite changes in existing concepts, policies, and procedures at Air Force and DOD levels .
 Progress in the year following the Cuban Crisis was slow and tedious . Thus, progress in the Cuban crisis was slow, tedious .
 The Ad Hoc Committee used most of the remaining weeks in FY 1963 to define the problem areas and discuss possible solutions . The committee spent the rest of the month discussing possible solutions to the problems in the budget .
 After completion of the narrative, additional documents related to Ad Hoc Committee progress became available . New Non-Nuclear Stockage Objectives were introduced .
 See DocT. 43, 45, 47, for the latest information on progress in Air Force support of contingency operations .
 Headquarters Headquarters USAF continued responsibility for compression or acceleration schedules, including input stoppages, during limited emergencies . Headquarters continued to take responsibility for acceleration schedules .
 USAF headquarters would also develop and specify the actions to be taken in accelerating or compressing maintenance or modification prior to general war D-Day .
 These specifications would vary according to the particular circumstances, such as the circumstances of the incident .
 USAF had not yet provided specific guidance concerning discontinuance of input into maintenance facilities during emergencies . When this history was written, however, USAF hadn't yet provided guidance .
 The Cuban Crisis was the only close threat in distance to the continental U.S. in the last century . It was the clearest threat to the United States since WWII .
 It involved a considerable emergency movement of U.S. forces into Florida bases and the Caribbean area .
 The rapid movement of troops, ships, and aircraft in response to the critical situation only 90 miles from the U.S. shoreline required widespread, coordinated activities by the military services .
 These activities were complicated by the need to deter a strategic threat at the same time . These activities have been complicated by a need to defend the U.S. from a potential terrorist threat .
 In these circumstances the Air Force gained important knowledge for the support of contingency operations in the future . AFLC added more lessons to those learned in past emergencies .
 AFLC's successful support of the Cuban buildup, however, did not offer a completely typical or realistic example for all contingency planning in the future . AFLC: "The Cuban buildup is not a completely realistic example of the future"
 In the first place, the criticalness of materiel shortages and deficiencies for actual combat operations could only be projected . The U.S. military says the shortages are not only a projection, but a projection .
 The emergency supply pipeline to oversea areas was not tested to any extent . Second, the emergency supply . pipeline to . oversea . areas was also not tested .
 The Cuban experience was not an adequate test of simultaneous support for two or more widely separated trouble spots . Third, the Cuban experience is not a test for simultaneous support .
 It was not a test of logistical reaction to a threat of a less critical nature . Nor was it a reaction to the threat of another threat of the same nature, it said .
 The Cuban Crisis prompted the Air Force to strengthen its support of contingency operations by focusing attention on weaknesses which had been overlooked or ignored in the past .
 Cuban Crisis experience left room for improvement at AFLC headquarters level . AFLC's fact gathering and problem solving techniques need improvement .
 Historical Research Division compiled the only extensive record of AFLC participation from a command-wide point of view . AFLC is the only command-level point-of-view of the AFLC .
 This Cuban Crisis chronology was by no means a critical analysis of the command's operations . Yet, this Cuban crisis chronology is no means of critical analysis .
 A short deadline and limited manpower meant that only the most easily accessible records could be used . Most evidence had to be accepted at face value .
 Historical staff was directed to prepare a brief, but comprehensive, evaluation of the command performance . These limitations were even more restrictive when the historical staff was asked to prepare an evaluation .
 Historians relied almost completely on the unilateral observations of the staff and operating officials . They relied on the observations of staff and officials .
 While these people could, of course, give the most knowledgeable account of operations in their own particular field, they were not necessarily equipped to check the validity of their own observations and criticisms from the command .
 Command Post selected 90 problems from the AMA chronologies and hastily prepared evaluation messages . Command Post selects 90 problems and 90 evaluation messages for each of the problems .
 Command Post did not attempt to select ""problems" on the basis of validity, but merely as a representative sample of AMA complaints and suggestions .
 AMA officials made observations in the heat of the crisis or immediately afterwards, AMA officials said they were unrealistic from a command-wide point of view . AMA officials say they made observations that did not hold up after careful evaluation or that were unrealistic . AMA: AMA officials' observations were made in
 So-called problems that were ""more fiction than real" tended to downgrade the ones that merited further study . Unfortunately, the so-called "more fiction than real" problems tended to be "more fictional than real", says author .
 AFLC's support mission in the face of difficult obstacles worked against efforts to correct the real problems . AFLC says AFLC is proud of its efforts to help people in need of a better life .
 AFLC staff's replies to complaints about their procedures often tended to be defensive and to justify past actions rather than to openly admit the validity of a search for better alternatives in the future .
 Cuban Crisis documentation and evaluation efforts did have positive benefits . Nevertheless, the Cuban Crisis Documentation and Evaluation Efforts did not have positive effects .
 Several problems and deficiencies were uncovered which could have been more serious in a combat situation . Several problems were uncovered during the operation .
 The documentation offered evidence that similar logistics problems from past crises had not been completely solved . The documentation offers evidence that such logistics problems have not been solved .
 In many cases it backed up the contentions of the AFLC representatives to the Ad Hoc Committee . The AFLC has been criticised for its contentions in the past .
 Ash & Walter M Wilson, AFLC Ad Hoc Comm. members, to D/Plans & Progs., Hq. members. members . AFLC: "We are committed to the AFLC's vision for the future"
 SAC, etal., 1 Dec. 1962, in Special Missions Support Br. Br. , Aerospace Div. , D/S, files .
 Memo., Lt. Ash & Walter M Wilson, AFLC Ad Hoc Comm. members, to D/Plans & Progs. , 10 April 1963; Memo. to D-Plans . & Prog. members .
 TAC, 7 Feb. 1963, in Special Missions Support Br. files. 42 . TAC: "TAC" in "Special Missions Support" files .
 Working paper, prep, by Special Missions Support Br. Br., circa 23 Jan.63; Wire, DM 2-11316 to C/S, USAF, USAF,. 5 Dec.62, Docs., 11.62; . Special Mission Support Br.'s .
 Edward S Ash, Chief of War & Emergency Plans Br. Br. , Plans Div., Plans Div. , D/Plans & Prog., Hq. , plans Div. and Hq . Ash is the Chief of the War and Emergency Planning Br. and Chief of Plans
 Action item report for support of contingency operations, prep, by War & Emergency Plans Br. Br., 8 Oct.63, Doc.63 .
 Edward S Ash & Walter M Wilson, AFLC Ad Hoc Comm. members, to D/Plans k Progs., Hq. Members. Edward S . Ash and Walter M. Wilson . Wilson .
 Mark E Bradley, Jr., Comdr. , AFLC, to D/Setal., 14 March 1963, Doc.. 49. 49. Unclassified: "Gross Y Act"
 Air Defense Command and Air Force Logistics Command . Air Materiel Area Analysis Analysis . Air Force Manual Air Force Regulation . Air . Force Regulation. Air Force . Regulation Air Force Systems Command .
 C/S Consolidated Materiel Distribution Objective Command Commander Committee Comptroller Comptroller Conference Consolidation Chief of Staff Comptroller . Comptroller of the Joint Joint Force Command and Staff .
 Division D/ME Director of Maintenance Engineering D/O Director of Operations Doc. Doc. COO Director of Engineering Doc. D/Me Director of Operation Doc. Staff of Operations COO Doc.
 DSA Director of Plans and Programs D/S Director of Supply DSA Defense Supply Agency . 50 unclassified classified items . 50 classified items are classified as confidential .
 IG Installs editor Equipment History, Historical Headquarters Office Instruction Headquarters Inspector General Installations Log. Inspector General Installs. Log. Log . Log. log: Historical Headquarters .
 U.S. Air Forces in Europe is the United States Air Force in Europe . The U.N. is the most powerful air force in the world .