 The Korean Missile Crisis Why Deterrence Is Still the best option . U.S. government has failed to prevent North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons and missiles .
 civilian leaders must convince Kim that the U.S. will not attempt to overthrow his regime unless he begins a war . Civilians must convince him that the United States won't try to overthrow him unless he starts a war.
 The window of opportunity for a successful U.S. attack to stop the North Korean nuclear program has closed, experts say . North Korea has a long-range nuclear program that could be used to attack the North .
 Khrushchev was alarmed when U.S. U-2 spy plane accidentally flew into Soviet airspace during the crisis . That fear was why he was so alarmed when the U.2 plane flew in Soviet airspace .
 The same approach that prevented nuclear catastrophe during the Cold War can deter Pyongyang . North Korea is seeking to use its own nuclear weapons to deter the North Korean regime .
 The Cuban missile crisis was more dangerous than the Cuban crisis was in the 1960s . The leaders involved in the crisis are responsible for the crisis, experts say .
 The spectacle of U.S. department secretaries falling over themselves to declare their deep devotion to Trump and flatter him on live television during the administration’s first full cabinet meeting brought to mind dictatorships .
 President Kennedy signed a proclamation for the interdiction of the delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis, October 1962 .
 When Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an immediate air strike and invasion of Cuba, Kennedy insisted on the more prudent option of a naval blockade . The Joint Chiefs' recommendation was that an air strike should be followed by an invasion .
 The statement implies that the U.S. is contemplating launching a nuclear first strike . But from a North Korean perspective, the statement implies a first strike is not possible .
 The Obama administration made a commitment in 2009 to not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapons against any non-nuke-free state that was in compliance with its nonproproliferation commitments .
 North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are off . But then Secretary of Defense Robert Gates quickly added that “because North Korea . and Iran . are not . in compliance . with the nuclear non-prol
 It would be a disaster for the U.S. to start a war, but it's equally important that leaders acknowledge loudly and often that it's not a war . The United States is at risk of starting a war in Afghanistan, writes CNN.com/Heroes .
 If those in White House do not do so, military leadership in the Pentagon should more forcefully and publicly make this point . The U.S. should be more forceful and publicly .
 The current Korean missile crisis is even more dangerous than the Cuban one . Kim Jong-won: The North Korea crisis is more likely to be even worse than the one in Cuba .
 Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger told the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General George Brown, that if Nixon gave military orders, he should contact him . Nixon had become morose and possibly unstable during the final days of his presidency .
 U.S. military leaders have failed to pour cold water on the idea of a United States first strike . Yet they have not poured cold water into the idea .
 When it comes to the current conflict with North Korea, that means admitting that there are no military options that do not risk starting the most destructive war since 1945 .
 Some Trump supporters have argued that a U.S. strike to assassinate Kim is the best solution . Former Ambassador John Bolton and Trump’s evangelical adviser Robert Jeffress are among those who have suggested a strike .
 Even a limited attack by the U.S. would appear to North Korea as the beginning of an invasion . North Korea would be wary of a limited strike by the United States .
 Mattis and senior military leaders should be prepared to resist any orders that they believe reflect impetuous or irrational decision-making by the president . Mattis should resist orders from the president, he says .
 North Korea has thousands of conventional artillery pieces along the demilitarized zone that could inflict 64,000 fatalities in Seoul on the first day of a war . A study by the Nautilus Institute found that by themselves, Seoul could be hit by a single day of war .
 A major attack on South Korea could also kill many of the roughly 154,000 American civilians and 28,000 U.S. service members living there . South Korea is home to about 154,400 American civilians, including 28,500 U.K. citizens .
 South Korea increasingly relies on a strategy of preemption and decapitation . The South Korean government has a history of decapitation and preemption .
 Reducing the risk of war will require an end to U.S. threats of first-strike regime change, says Julian Zelizer . The United States should not be threatening regime change in Syria .
 There are few, if any, military targets in North Korea that the U.S. could destroy with conventional weapons in a long war . The United States could not destroy any of North Korea's military targets .
 Should the U.S. succeed in bringing North Korea back to the negotiating table, it should be prepared to offer changes to military exercises in exchange for limits on North Korean missile tests and a hotline .
 The U.S. assigned some submarine-based missiles to cover the same retaliatory targets in the Soviet Union that the Jupiter missiles had . It also arranged for a United States submarine to regularly visit a Turkish port . But to reassure Ankara, it also assigned some submissibles to cover
 U.S. submarine calls at South Korean harbors could enhance deterrence without provoking North Korea . Today, occasional United States submarine calls are needed to enhance deterrence .
 The U.S. must wait with patience and vigilance until the Kim regime collapses under the weight of its own economic and political weakness . The United States must wait patiently for the North Korean regime to collapse .