 Illinois will participate in virtual programs in July with guidance and approval from the Illinois state legislature . The plan for modified services began in early July .
 The handout covers Department of Public Health and the Village of Arlington Heights . It covers desktop computers, tablets and phones . It also covers Arlington Heights desktop computers .
 All patrons must wear a mask that covers the Accreditation Update nose and mouth during the entirety of your visit . Visit the National Senior Center .
 The Arlington Heights Senior Center has completed all of its cleaning tasks . Hand sanitizer and wipes located the documents for the National Institute of Senior Centers throughout the building .
 Vending machines and approved for accreditation near the end of January are not in service . Café is still in service but has been approved to be accreditation .
 Senior Center is operational Monday through Friday, 2008 . The Senior Center was first accredited with NCOA in 2008 .
 If you would like to learn more please do not come to the Senior Center . Do you know more about this? Please contact us at the senior center .
 Symptoms about the process or to be considered to participate in the process include cough, fever, chills, meeting with the Peer Reviewers, shortness of breath, or flu-like symptoms .
 Please contact the Senior Center Manager, Tracey Colagrossi if you have questions . The Senior Center is open at the end of the year .
 Arlington Heights Park District Office &Gift Store Hours: Northwest Community Healthcare Mon Fri: 8:30 am 2:30 pm . Escorted Transportation Service, Northwest Phone: 847.222.9227 .
 Arlington Heights Senior Center Newsletter is a not-for-profit organization that raises funds for the Arlington Heights senior center . The newsletter is a publication of Arlington Heights .
 Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc. does not endorse any of the products or services advertised in this publication . Arlington Heights senior center is located in Arlington Heights, Texas .
 For advertising rates, contact Alex Nicholas, Liturgical Publications, Inc. at 1.800.950.9952. For more information, visit www.liturgical.com .
 The 2021 Village of Arlington Heights budget will be discussed as part of this program . Arlington Heights will hold a series of public hearings on the 2021 budget .
 Foreign Policy Association VIRTUAL sent a link to the Zoom session at least one day prior . The Zoom session will take place at the end of the week .
 Saturday, 1/9, 9:30a-11:00a Sip-N-Swirl Painting Events VIRTUAL 2021 Great Decisions program dates: with Tracey Colagrossi Saturdays, 2-6, 3/6, 4/3, 4-
 Once registered, you will be sent a link to the Zoom session at least one day prior to each of the dates . The Zoom session will take place at least a day before each of these dates .
 Senior Center Manager, Tracey Colagrossi, will take you through the process of the painting program . Program funded by step-by-step, virtually through Zoom .
 You must register for the program before the date of the class by contacting the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 .
 In October of 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union came within a few minutes of nuclear war . Friday, 2/26, 1:00p-2:30p on Friday, February 26 .
 Nikita Khrushchev wanted to show weakness by backing down . Neither John Kennedy nor Textured Rose Acrylic Paint Along Nikita . Nikita wanted to back down by showing weakness by backtracking .
 Both men did not understand each other and, as a result, made poor decisions based on incorrect assumptions . Both men should have known each other better than each other, the judge said .
 Call the Senior through the process of the painting Center at 847.253.5532 and register with your name, email step-by-step virtually through Zoom. address and phone number . Tracey Colagrossi, will take you virtually through the painting process .
 You must register for the program before the date of the class by contacting the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 .
 In this intermediate-level class, students learn to express Inside the Life and Mind of Germany’s themselves properly in Spanish in a variety of situations . Students learn to use the language to express themselves properly .
 Best known as an eccentric whose love for art leisure. Need to understand the main points of clear, clear, standard input on familiar matters regularly encountered in work or . Best known for his love of art leisure .
 Can deal with most situations likely to arise while traveling and in an area where the language is spoken . Can also deal with situations that may arise in the language of the language .
 Can produce simple architecture is legendary, the young King had a connected text on topics which are familiar or of personal interest . charmed but also tragic existence. charmed and tragic existence .
 Join German Historian Anette Isaacs, M.A., as throughout the year . The Senior Center offers ongoing, 8-week long sessions all .
 Call the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 to sign up with your name and email address . Register in the program is required to be completed .
 VIRTUAL Center patrons this Valentine’s Day . Welcome to the Wonderful bought card with a fellow Senior World of Wine! VIRTual Center patrons .
 Online course blends wine knowledge your card to the Senior Center with humor to create a relaxed yet structured atmosphere . You don’t need to sign your optimizing your enjoyment, appreciation and overall wine name .
 This course is designed for all levels of wine . Your full return address should be placed on the outside of the envelope . The course will be available to all wine lovers .
 No names or addresses will be published . We begin with the fascinating journey back millions of years ago .
 This will be a strictly anonymous exchange to to the origins of wine and delve into fascinating topics of grape matter . This is an anonymous exchange .
 The exchange will be based on varietal characteristics and grape growing/production methods . The exchange is based on grape growing, grape growing and production methods .
 We reveal the simple secrets of wine tasting principles as well as food and wine pairing guidelines . We reveal how to pair wine with food or wine with wine .
 The Senior Center will hold a free drawing of 12 Starter Kits that have been purchased as part of WSET-2 of a pilot program . Sommelier Robin Tarragano will be teaching a class at the center .
 Classes will be held virtually on Wednesdays, provided with more details at the time of registration .
 For more details and to register, call the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 on or after Monday, 2/1 . For more about what’s included in the kit and its benefits, visit Senior Center .
 The Arlington Heights Senior Center will provide a list of students who have signed up to shovel snow for Arlington Heights residents age 60 and over or residents who have a disability . Upon request, the Arlington Heights senior center will provide the list .
 Students, older adults and adults with disabilities must submit a signed referral request form to the Arlington Heights Senior Center . The Arlington Heights senior center is located in Arlington Heights, Texas .
 Applications can be found online at vah.com or you may stop by the Senior Center to pick up a form . Application forms can be picked up at the senior center .
 The resident will contact the student and make all arrangements with the teen to have their snow shoveled .
 Both parties should do their own interview and/or reference check if desired before signing on with a particular client or student . Both parties need to check out their references and clients .
 Arlington Heights Nurses Club Lending Closet is closed until further notice . Arlington Heights nurses club volunteer your time .
 Volunteer opportunities are on hold due to the pandemic, but please contact Sharon Swanson at Arlington Heights Senior Center . Volunteer opportunities on hold .
 As we enter the New Year, Lending Closet offers durable medical equipment to Arlington Heights residents of all ages . Arlington Heights resident: "I'm looking forward to this year's new year."
 Volunteers staff the closet five days a week, Monday thru Friday, for a two-hour shift . Volunteers are asked to volunteer for two hours a week .
 We will new sense of hope that be looking for volunteers to help staff the Lending Closet once it reopens for business . We will be looking to help with volunteers to work for volunteers .
 Retired nurses are especially welcome, but the Senior Center will no experience is necessary . Retired nurse is especially welcome .
 Some computer knowledge is helpful soon be filled with the buzz of and light lifting . Light lifting is required for light lifting activity that we all enjoy . Some computer skills will be helpful .
 Senior citizens in your community can get to their routine medical check-ups by becoming a volunteer driver . Volunteer drivers can help senior citizens in their communities get to medical check ups .
 Volunteer opportunities are on hold due to the pandemic . Contact Debbie Bohli-Mitchell in the Catholic Charities Northwest Senior Services office if you are interested in volunteering .
 Catholic Charities, Senior Nutrition Program Drivers are needed to deliver meals to homebound residents in the surrounding area one day a week or more if you choose . Drivers need drivers who deliver meals in the area .
 Check out Drum Circle Therapy, led by Chris Lavidas of Breaking Grounds in Drumming, Inc. Check out the video from Breaking Grounds Drumming .
 Chris has created a curriculum of a number of building block classes that instruct the basics of rhythm, coordination, drum history, tone, melody, and musical creativity to name a few .
 Don't miss these interactive and informative classes that are full of energy and enthusiasm . Don’t miss the interactive and . informative classes .
 This FREE program will be held in-person with a limited capacity of 10 participants, resuming in January 2021 . The program is free and available in person .
 Please call 847.253.5532 to register in advance and specify your preference of in-person or virtual registration . The event will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Zoom link will be emailed at least one day prior for those participating virtually . Zoom link is emailed to those participating via email .
 Senior Center Musical Group plays Broadway, movie and patriotic tunes . Also known as the “Senior Band,” this group plays assorted Broadway and movie tunes .
 A successful rehabilitation program from a trusted healthcare leader in the community . A successful person-centered rehabilitation program . The program is a successful person centered around the person .
 The library’s Senior Center classes and programs continue to be offered virtually . The library's Senior Center programs and programs are available virtually .
 Arlington Heights library materials can be returned in the outside book drop to the west of the Senior Center entrance, at the main library and at any of our book drops throughout the community .
 Register online at ahml.info/attend/events or call us 847.870.3712 unless otherwise directed in program description .
 Your registration email confirmation will include a link to join the program on Zoom. Zoom. Email confirmation includes a link that allows you to join Zoom. Join Zoom.
 After registering, call Senior Services at 847.870.3712 to request a book at the library’s drive-up window . After you register, call the library's drive up window at 8:47.8712 .
 The January book is Apeirogon by Colum Lisa Jewell and for February, The Henna McCann. In January, read Then She Was Gone by Then She was Gone by The January Book is Then Was Gone . In February, read then She was gone by then She Was
 Film Discussion Circle Senior Tech Classes Tuesdays, January 5 and February 2, 2:30-3:30m. Jan. 5 and Feb. 2, January 2, February 2 . Jan. 6, February 7, February 8, Feb. 8, February 3, February 14
 Registration for tech classes opens the first of the month in Watch the films at your convenience, then join which the class is scheduled .
 January’s film is Agatha and the Truth of Library staff will assist you to join this 1-hour practice session . In February, discuss Firelight . provide tips and best practices so you can ZOOM .
 Novice and experienced computer users discuss current technology, exchange tips and offer advice for solving problems . Host a Zoom Meeting of Novice Computer Users .
 Free Friday movies are funded by Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc. Robert De Niro, Uma Thurman, Rob Riggle . The free Friday movies will be shown at Arlington Heights High School .
 Jojo Rabbit Friday, 2/12 at 10:00a or 1:00p Movies have closed captioning and are available at time of print .
 A young boy in Hitler's army finds out his mother is hiding a Jewish girl in their home . A Jewish girl was hiding in the home of his mother .
 Reduced/limited seating capacity for each showing . Directed by Taika Waititi; Fox Searchlight .
 Call 847.253.5532 to register for the McKenzie, Scarlett Johansson 10:00a or 1:00p movie time . Roman Griffin Davis, Thomasin Thomasin will be in attendance .
 Participants may arrive no more than 10 participants . Registration is limited to 10 participants. There are only a limited number of participants in this program .
 Four cards per person will be provided for the duration of the meeting . Jim Nauheimer at 847.577.1392. one-hour of bingo play .
 Bingo cards will be free and prizes will be in the form of snacks and other small items . The event will be held at 7:30 a.m. Saturday, July 31 .
 Place Investment Club reviews more than 10 minutes early . Park Registered participants may arrive no longer arrive no place no Place investment Club reviews . Park registered participants must arrive no .
 Masks must the performance of stocks be worn at all times . owned by the club and works to identify new stocks to purchase . The performance of a mask is required to be worn by the team .
 The focus is determining when to buy and when to sell these securities for maximum gain . The focus of the focus is to determine when to purchase and sell these stocks .
 People interested in the club can attend two monthly meetings before deciding to participate as club members . Club members can also attend monthly meetings .
 Those who join M2M Writers the club are required to pay monthly dues of $25.00 which are used to fund new stock investments . Club VIRTUAL is used to invest in new stock .
 Your written memories will be treasured by your family and you will enjoy the support from fellow M2M Writers Club members in a non-critical atmosphere .
 To sign up for this FREE Zoom club meeting, call the Senior Center at 847.253.5532 and register Postponed Programs at Senior Center with your name, email address and phone number .
 A senior must access the service drive from Weber Road which is west of the strip mall where the Senior Center is located . The Senior Center's service drive is located west of Weber Road .
 If you have not registered for the Catholic Charities’ meal program, we will provide an AgeOptions form to complete . If you are not registered, you will need to complete an Age Options form .
 Catholic Charities provides a daily meal Tuesday through Friday to Home Bound Seniors in Wheeling and Maine Townships . Home Delivered Meals is a free meal to those in need .
 Volunteers Needed to deliver meals and help to Catholic Charities ensure our Seniors can remain at home . Volunteers needed to help deliver meals, deliver meals to seniors .
 Each route has around 12 to 22 clients and takes no more than 2 hours to complete . Each route takes around two hours and takes around 2 hours .
 Please call 847.797.5350 and leave a message or go to www.catholic.net and click on Get Involved .
 Open Discussion Wednesday, Feb.: Open Discussion . If you are unable to meet with Rose in-person, she can be reached for registration .
 Diabetes 7 Self-Care Behaviors, Classes are led by NCH Community Nurse #1 Healthy Eating Rose Jensen, MSM, MSN, RN . Tuesday, Feb., Feb., 10:30m. to 12m.
 Diabetic Eye Disease Tuesday, May Wednesday, Feb., 10,1010toto11:30 11:30a.m. m. m .
 Both sessions are led by NCH Diabetes Services . Community Nurse Rose Jensen, MSN, RN, RN .
 You people who have be required pre-diabetes, diabetes or family to remove members your sock and of people shoe forwith thediabetes. Forwill You People who have been required to remove your sock or shoe for with diabetes. For will you people need to remove the sock and
 Registration required. Call 847.618.5575, or email mcenteno@nch.org to make your appointment . No walk-ins allowed.
 Call NCH for more information and to register at NCH Health Maureen Centeno, Senior Services Specialist and SHIP Connection, 847.618.4968 .
 Get screened for various benefit programs to see if you qualify for assistance . Check out the benefits of various programs to help you pay for food and housing .
 Medicaid and MMAI plans that allow you to receive all of your health benefits under one plan . Obtain information about Medicaid and their MMAI plan .
 Let the Park District do all the planning — you just have to register good conversation, come join us . If you are looking for company to go out to eat with and have fun, you can do the planning .
 Relax in a luxury motor coach while we do the driving . If you want to go to restaurants for the tour, check-in on the day of the tour .
 Stop by the Wood Shop December; however, if you go on at least two tours within that located in the Senior Center, see all it has to offer .
 Park District is trying to protect our Tour press; Dewalt 12” sliding compound miter miter saw; Grizzly 15” planer; Club members . Club members and will take all necessary precautions needed to belt sander; disk sander .
 Annual Wood Shop Safety Training Certification is required prior to becoming a member and purchasing punch passes for shop visits . Monday/Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday, 9:00a-12:00p . Annual wood shop Safety Training Training is required .
 What Happens in Vegas — The Fireside — March 2021 $80 good for 10 visits . $48 good for 6 visits; $14 daily use fee . Crosstown Classic/Cubs & Sox — August 2021 Face masks are required . Crosststown Classic and Cubs & Sox meet
 To make a reservation to work in the The Devil Wears Prada — Broadway in Chicago — August 2021 Wood Shop, please call the Park District Office at 847.797.5341 . Disney’s Frozen — . Broadway in . Chicago — December 2021 Center is at 8
 There are more tours to look forward to in 2021 and will be advertised in future tour schedules . There will be more tours in 2021 .
 Tour details will be in the next edition of the Visit Shop 1801 for holiday stocking stuffers . Arlington Classic Tour Schedule will be published in next edition's Visit Shop of 1801 .
 The Park District offers face masks, greeting cards and much more . Call the Park District at 847.797.5341 for membership information .
 AAC Tours and Certifications are given at 10:00 am, Tuesday – Tuesdays, 1/12-2/23 . Contracted 12:45p-1:45 p.m. Friday and 1:30p-2:30pm Friday .
 The club is closed on days the Senior Center is closed . Reservation Only is required .
 Arlington Athletic Club will be by reservation only . Due to social distancing, usage of the Pieced Machine Quilting Fee: $50 Mondays, 1/4-2/22 6:15-8:15p .
 Tai Chi Advanced Fee: $64 Fun & Fit Classes have resumed on a limited basis due to Tuesdays, 1/12-2/23 11:15a-12:15p COVID-19 and social distancing . Classes are offered on Tuesdays and Saturdays at 11
 Beginning and Intermediate will be offered in Spring 2021 . Water bottle will be required for water bottles .
 Monday Fun & Fit Aerobic 9:00-9:45a When “Downsizing’s” is “Rightsizing” During COVID Friday Fun and Fit Airstrike 9:30-1045a and 10:45 a week .
 This complimentary workshop, conducted by an area Real Estate Real Estate Interested in joining the Club but don’t want to invest in a full Broker, will give you a road map .
 This presentation will be held on Saturday, 2/27 at the Arlington Unlimited visits to the Arlington Athletic Club PLUS unlimited Lakes Golf Course, located at 1211 S New Wilke Rd. south of the Senior Center .
 Prior to purchasing membership, you will need to be certified by one of our fitness instructors by appointment only .
 In case of inclement weather, call the Sign up for Arlington Heights Park District Park District classes early . Park District programs are offered in Arlington Heights .
 Illinois Department of Human Services 1-800-252-8966 offers an emotional support resource for those 1-888-206-1327 feeling COVID-19-related stresses throughout the holiday season . The Illinois department of human services offers a support service for those feeling stressed .
 Once a resident sends a text to the hotline, they will receive a call from a counselor within 24 hours . Once a text is sent, a counselor will be on the line 24 hours later .
 All suggestions are responded to by the Senior Center Manager, Tracey Colagrossi, and the Advisory Council President, Bruce Cruz .
 This free service is offered through the Tax Counseling Service for the Elderly program . This free tax advice is offered to the elderly through the program .
 Appointments will be conducted on Wednesdays and Thursdays, beginning February 3 through April 15 . The program will run from February 3 to April 15, 2015 .
 TCE and the Arlington Heights Senior Center continues to keep patrons safe and healthy . TCE provides tax preparation details at Arlington Heights senior center .
 Beginning Monday, January 4, you can stop by the Main Office or call 847.797.5304 to schedule your appointment . Call the main office on Monday, Monday, or Tuesday, to schedule an appointment .
 Tax Preparer will complete your tax return for you . You will leave with your documents and the tax return is complete .
 You will return on another scheduled date/time to review, sign, and receive a copy of your return . You will also be able to sign and return to the store .
 With e-filing, taxpayers receive their refund in half the usual time and even faster with direct deposit . The refund process can take less than two hours .
 If you want to return to a joint return, both you and your spouse must be present or bring a signed power of attorney . This power of . attorney is not the healthcare power of. attorney, but the official financial power .
 Copies of all your 2020 W-2, 1099-INT, 10-DIV, 10 99-DIV and 10-B forms you have received for 2020 . Share your tax forms with CNN iReport.com .
 Check from your bank for possible direct deposit or direct debit information . Check out your bank's direct deposit and debit card details .
 Remember that we cannot do joint returns without both spouses present or a financial power of attorney for the absent spouse . Remember that you can't do joint tax returns without the presence of both spouses .
 Appointments will be conducted in 15-minute increments, by appointment only . Wednesdays, 1/20, 5/12, 7/14 & 9/15 are scheduled to be conducted by advance registration .
 To register for a Monday morning blood to register, please call the Senior Center Main Office at pressure screening, or 847.253.5532 . The Senior Center is offering pressure screening at pressure screens .
 Medicare cannot be billed for this service, as the Village of Arlington Heights is not an approved Be Informed, Stay Informed provider . Medicare can't be billed as a result .
 Illinois Dept. on scheduling curbside check-out and return equipment . Call 847.797.5315 for information and details .
 Once you have made your appointment for curbside check-out or ance plan . SHIP does not sell or solicit insurance and does not solicit insurance .
 This is a FREE service for Arlington Heights residents of any age . Medicare is a free service for residents of Arlington Heights .
 Arlington Heights Police Department will dispose of unwanted or expired medication . Thrive with Pride will be held at the Arlington Heights police department . Residents may properly dispose unwanted medication at the department .
 The take back program accepts prescription or over-the-counter drugs . Join Zoom at Zoom at 11am on the fourth drugs in an enclosed container or original packaging .
 Plenaries are new each month, as we will begin the new year by expired inventory . This service and hear experts present on topics of interest to the community. is not available to retailers .
 There is no need to register for these free events; just call or long in on the fourth Tuesday of the Sharps Disposal month at 11am . There is also a free long-in-the-month long-call service .
 Memory Café is meeting virtually due to the pandemic . If you are interested in meeting virtually on the Internet, Memory Café will meet on Monday .
 Arlington Heights Memory Café does have a waiting list for Jasmine Chorath at 847.338.7319 . There is room for more participants on our in-person gatherings . For those seeking online support, you may find virtual platforms .
 Caring.com is a leading . online destination for caregivers seeking information and support as they care for aging parents, spouses, and other loved ones . The Senior Center is located at 847.253.5532 .
 GOLDEN AGE OF RADIO offers thousands of original articles, helpful tools, advice from more than 50 leading experts . They also offer a community of caregivers, and a comprehensive directory of caregiving services .
 Join us to reminisce about the Golden Age of Radio Alzheimer's/Dementia Caregiver when families gathered around the radio and mysteries . Support Group IN-PERSON & VIRTUAL radio plays, quiz shows, westerns, soap operas and more filled the airwaves
 Discuss popular radio shows that went on to become you to meet others . Meet others who face similar television shows, including Gunsmoke, Lassie and challenges in caring for a loved one .
 Call the Senior Center at Services, Arlington Heights Memorial Library, 847.253.5532 to reserve a spot at an Park District, and the Village of Arlington Heights Senior Center in-person or virtual session .
 The Saturday Korean American Parkinson’s Support Group meetings at the Senior Center are postponed until further notice . The Saturday meetings are scheduled for the Saturday morning .
 Cars are becoming more technologically advanced every day and show no sign of slowing down . For information regarding online classes, go to aarpdriversafety.org. For more information, visit aarp.org .
 This means there's more safety technology in today’s cars than ever before . This means that there’t be a shortage of technology in the world of cars .
 Many drivers aren’t familiar with how to use the technology to keep them Illinois Secretary of State Information safe . Many drivers are unfamiliar with using the new technology .
 AARP Driver Safety offers an interactive Zoom workshop, led by a trained AARP volunteer, to include an overview of vehicle driver’s licenses and ID cards . The deadline for Real ID has been postponed to October 2021 .
 Driver Services Registration for this program will be conducted directly through facilities . The closure of this program was extended until January 5, 2021 . At time of print, the closure of the closure was extended .
 Your generosity and contributions were overwhelming and so very much appreciated . Your generosity was overwhelming and . so very appreciated .
 Join the ETS family as a volunteer driver taking older adults to their doctors’ appointments . Join the volunteer driver to take them to their doctor appointments .
 Our volunteers pick up our passengers, take them to their appointments, wait for them, and bring them back home . Volunteers pick up their passengers and take them home .
 Our online scheduling software makes it easy to select rides that fit your schedule . Our online schedule software is easy to schedule rides .
 Simply logon to our scheduling software and see what rides might work for you . Just log on to our schedule software to schedule rides for you.
 "We have implemented additional guidelines for both our passengers and volunteers," says the airline .
 Additional guidelines were developed using the recommendations of the CDC and IDPH . The additional guidelines include required face masks, screening questions, etc. The additional face masks are required .
 Give us a call at 847.222.9227 or email us info@etsnw.org . We look forward to hearing from you .
 Glueckert Funeral Home representative will meet with you at a convenient time and location for your free Funeral Pre-arrangement consultation . When you are ready, a representative will be meeting with you .
 If paying by check, make payable to Arlington Heights Senior Center, Inc. Make your money by check by check .
 We will not release your name, address, telephone number or any other information that you provide us without the explicit consent . We do not release any of these information .
 Through an innovative “one-stop” approach that places a myriad of programs, services, amenities, and amenities together, the city will offer a variety of programs and services .
 The Senior Center provides meaningful, timely and cost-effective services . It provides meaningful and timely services .
 Arlington Heights Senior Center serves as a community focal point for older adults, caregivers, and students . The Arlington Heights senior center serves as the community center for older people and caregivers .
 Arlington Heights Senior Center is greater than the sum of its parts . Our Guiding Principles: The whole of the Arlington Heights senior center is greater . The center's motto is that the whole of its community is greater together than ever before .
 The Village of Arlington Heights Senior Center does not discriminate in admission to information, referral and assistance . The Center is located in Arlington Heights, Arlington Heights . It is located near Arlington Heights High School .
 For information call 1-800-252-8966 (Voice & professions as well as in the field of aging) in the U.S. Call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-877-273-8255 .