 "It is a story with a limited cast and a clear plot line spread over a few days," says the author . "It's a story that is spread over several days, but it's a lot of fun to play," she says of the film .
 President John F Kennedy announced the discovery of Soviet nuclear missile bases on Cuba on 22 October . President Kennedy demanded that they be removed from Cuba .
 The tension eased a little on 25 October when Soviet ships presumed to be carrying lethal missiles turned away from Cuba rather than trying to break the U.S. naval blockade .
 The crisis effectively ended on Sunday 28 October, with the news that the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, had agreed to withdraw the missiles in return for a U.S. promise not to invade .
 During those days, a catastrophic nuclear war seemed a real possibility . During that time, the threat of a nuclear war was a real threat to the U.S.
 At the time, the confrontation appeared stark, with little room for nuance . The confrontation was a stark contrast to the reality show .
 Khrushchev sent nuclear missiles to Cuba at a time when he was worried about a possible U.S. invasion to topple Fidel Castro's regime . Over time, more detail was added to the main plot, such as the origins of the decision the previous spring .
 The Kennedy administration debated whether to strike Soviet missile bases in October . The decision was made on whether to use an air strike or a blockade .
 The garrison on Cuba was larger than the Americans had assumed and was armed with short-range nuclear weapons, which were likely to have been used in an invasion .
 The four Soviet submarines that made it to the Caribbean each carried a nuclear torpedo, one of which came close to being fired . In addition, it transpired that the four . Soviet submarines each . carried a . nuclear torpedo . One of the Soviet submarines was fired .
 The accumulating detail added to the sense of just how close the world got to the brink of disaster . It was the first time the world had been hit by an earthquake .
 It is still, therefore, the go-to crisis whenever lessons are sought on how to manage a dangerous situation . The crisis is still the go to crisis whenever it is sought for lessons .
 It provides examples of how decisions taken well away from national capitals, shaped by uncertainty and anxiety, might trigger a dangerous escalation . It also highlights the importance of imaginative diplomacy, especially when you are trying to find a way to help your adversary to back down .
 No account of the crisis has yet matched One Minute to Midnight by the journalist Michael Dobbs, published in 2008 .
 Theodore Voorhees Jr in The Silent Guns of Two Octobers suggests that the risks of war have been exaggerated . Martin J Sherwin in Gambling with Armageddon argues the opposite . Martin Sherwin argues that war risks are exaggerated .
 Serhii Plokhy is with those who find little reassuring in the episode . As the title of his book indicates, he says he is with the people who find nothing reassuring in it .
 It's not hard to imagine mistakes that thankfully were not made, notably early resort to military action by the U.S. It was not a mistake that thankfully was not made .
 Global peace depends far too much on calm decision-making and displays of good sense by a relatively small number of people with control over the world’s nuclear arsenals . Yet he is right to note that .
 Plokhy provides a sharp and critical account of the decisions taken in Moscow, Washington and Havana . He provides a critical look at Russia's relations with the U.S. and Cuba .
 New material obtained from Ukrainian archives . He offers fascinating new material relating to the Soviet side .
 He does not quite catch Kennedy’s tendency to keep his options open for as long as possible or the way in which he explored these options with advisers .
 He assumes, for example, that the president was more attached to the possibility of air strikes than was the case, he says . He says he assumes that the situation was different .
 From the start, he was in favour of air strikes only if they were limited . He steadily lost interest in this option as it became clear that the United States Air Force could not come up with a plan that did not involve massive air raids that would probably have needed to be backed up
 Kennedy offered to trade American Jupiter missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy was determined to avoid war with the Soviets, Plokhy says .
 American missiles had arrived in Turkey the previous year, but the U.S. administration had quickly decided that they were both vulnerable to a Soviet strike and unnecessary, since the American long-range missile programme was gathering pace . The United States administration decided that the missiles were unnecessary .
 Kennedy was persuaded that it would damage NATO if he publicly appeared to jeopardise an ally’s security to resolve the crisis . Khrushchev had demanded an explicit trade, but Kennedy was convinced it would be damaging NATO .
 He was prepared to put the missiles back into the diplomatic mix if that was the only way he could get a deal . But he was always prepared to . put the . missiles back in the . diplomatic mix .
 He told his brother Robert to meet with the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, and let him know that the Jupiter missiles would eventually be removed from Turkey . Robert's brother Robert met with Dobrynins to discuss the removal of the missiles .
 As this was not a formal promise, it was of no political value to Khrushchev . It was not the reason that the crisis was resolved, and it was not part of the solution .
 Kennedy declared that if the Soviets removed the missiles, the U.S. would undertake not to invade Cuba . The urgency with which Robert spoke to Dobrynin of the risks of allowing the crisis to continue much longer .
 Khrushchev acted almost immediately by accepting Kennedy’s proposal . This was the main message he picked up from Dobrynin's report and upon which he acted immediately . Kennedy's proposal was accepted almost immediately .
 Where the book really comes alive is in the descriptions of Soviet decision-making and the amateurishness of Khrushchev’s approach, the book says .
 There was the initial thrill of taking such a bold step, but the adventure began to go badly wrong . It was the first time I had taken such a big step in my life .
 No serious consideration had been given to the question of whether the missile deployments could be kept secret, officials said .
 Khrushchev added to the risk by deciding short-range ‘tactical’ missiles should also be dispatched . The first deployment of Soviet air defence systems to Cuba had been discovered .
 There is some fascinating detail on the disciplinary issues faced on the Soviet ships travelling to Cuba . Conscripts complained about fighting for a country about which they did not care, while suffering from seasickness .
 The conditions faced by Soviet submariners were even worse, especially when the U.S. Navy used the explosions from practice depth charges to encourage them to rise to the surface .
 Khrushchev was still after Western concessions in Berlin, notwithstanding the construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 to stop the flow of refugees escaping communism . The Wall was built in 1961 after the construction to stop refugees escaping communist communism .
 There had been confrontations since then over attempts to prevent U.S. and British personnel going into East Berlin .
 I suspect that by attempting to create a new nuclear balance, he hoped to gain a wider political advantage, including in Berlin . I suspect, however, that by . attempting to . create a . new nuclear . balance, I suspect . that by creating a new . nuclear balance he hoped