 Winston Churchill famously declared an ‘iron curtain’ had descended and the world had been divided between two ideologies . Winston Churchill declared that an “iron curtain had descended’s descended”
 An ideological battle between democracy and communism ensued while the world was captivated and terrified by the new nuclear age . The world was gripped by the rise of the nuclear age in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Fidel Castro overthrew dictator Fulgencio Batista and declared Cuba a revolutionary socialist nation . Cuba is located a mere 90 miles from U.S. soil .
 Kennedy did not begin consulting with world leaders until a few days into the crisis . Diefenbaker initially doubted intelligence that he was provided asking for more photographs of the missile sites in Cuba .
 Diefenbaker was supportive of U.S. action during the crisis, but did not give them the unequivocal support Kennedy had expected . Kennedy had been expected to win the support of the United States .
 Diefenbaker recommended that independent U.N. inspectors should go into Cuba and survey the nuclear sites . Much to Kennedy’s annoyance, he said, “independent United Nations inspectors should ... survey the sites .
 Diefenbaker refused to put Canadian troops on alert, and deliberated for several days over raising the military awareness level to DEFCON 3 as Kennedy had requested . Kennedy had asked for a higher level of military awareness to be raised .
 Relations between Diefenbaker and U.S. President were particularly uneasy . Personal animosity may have influenced the delay during the crisis .
 Following a meeting with Kennedy in May 1961, the Prime Minister discovered a paper left behind by an American advisor . The paper was discovered by Mr. Kennedy in 1961 .
 The infamous ‘Rostow Memo’ outlined several desired results that the U.S. hoped to “push” Canada toward during the meeting . The infamous Memo outlined several goals that the United States hoped to push Canada toward .
 Diefenbaker was livid, as this incident reaffirmed his nagging belief that the United States wished to dominate Canada . The incident was the result of a U.S. invasion of Canada .
 Diefenbaker refused to return the memo even though diplomatic decorum required him to do so . He refused to give the memo back to the U.S.
 Diefenbaker did agree to put Canadian troops on alert . All NATO members supported a proposed blockade and agreed to aid the U.S. if an attack occurred .
 Diefenbaker acted only after the crisis’ climax had passed . However, due to his reluctance to respond to the situation, he did not act immediately .
 The Canadian military had taken informal steps to put itself on alert . Also, under the guidance of the Department of Defence, the Canadian military has taken informal measures .
 Diefenbaker believed Kennedy’s ‘arrogance’ had endangered North America and could have resulted in nuclear war . Ultimately, he believed that Kennedy's “arrogence” had endangered America .
 As these two hegemonic superpowers struggled for ideological dominance, the world lived in fear of nuclear annihilation . The world lived with the fear of a nuclear war between the two superpowers .
 International alliances were challenged, great leaders arose and were broken, and life-threatening decisions were made during thirteen uneasy days in October .
 The Crisis was the crux of nuclear terror and continues to be referenced as nuclear questions are once again at the forefront of international debates over North Korea, Israel, Iran, and the Indian subcontinent today .
 I called Finlayson after receiving the attached and informed him that it meant that there was some kind of a condition of mind in British Columbia that was forever bellyaching .
 President Kennedy and his spokesmen in the leading nation of the Free World in the face of Russian aggression has challenged them on this and asked them to desist . President Kennedy has challenged the Russian aggression .
 The threat of the cold war is being extended to take in the whole world . The threat has been extended to the whole of the world .
 Pearson waited for two days and then made a decision sympathetic to the U.S. decision . Pearson waited two days before making the decision .
 We should have done this and should do this, and should make this clear. We should make it clear. It should be clear, and we should have made it clear .
 E Davie Fulton to John Diefenbaker: "The Right Hon. Justice and Attorney General of Canada" Fulton was the attorney general of Canada in 1960 . Pound Pound . Pound. Pound .
 Canadians as a whole feel as does the Government that the U.S. has taken the necessary action . Our position is that the United States has taken necessary action. We are happy that Canadians feel that the situation has been resolved .
 We now have Soviet Russia reaching out across the Atlantic to challenge the right of free men to live on this Continent . We have a Soviet Russia challenging the right to live in Europe .
 Khrushchev can end his threat by simply discontinuing the shipment of nuclear weapons to Cuba . The launching pads and such nuclear weapons as are in place should be removed from Cuba .
 We have notified the USSR that we will not have her flying her aircraft over Canada . We have also notified the Soviet Union that it will not be allowed to fly over Canada over the border .
 Czechoslovakia and Poland have been warned their aircraft will be searched to prevent nuclear deliveries . Czechs and Poland's planes will also be searched if they land, officials say .
 We have taken necessary measures of organization and for Government should there be dire consequences if the USSR act in an aggressive manner. The USSR acted in a 'aggressive manner' in the 1980s .
 This is a question of the USSR having challenged the right of people in the Americas to live their own lives . This is the case of the U.S. challenging the right to live its own lives, says the BBC's John Defterios .
 I would be grateful if you could arrange for this to be given to your Prime Minister . I would like to have a copy of this article published in the UK .
 Confidential Message from the Rt. R. Dier, Esq., PM’s Office, Ottawa . Confidential message from Ottawa Confidential .
 The Right Hon. Harold MacMillan, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, to the Right Hon., to be Harold Macmillan, to be named . The Queen consolaries of Scotland and Northern Ireland have been awarded the Order of Honour .
 John Diefenbaker, Prime Minister of Canada 30th October, 1962 . Thank you for your message of yesterday's date about Cuba .
 I know you share our relief that American firmness has induced Khrushchev to undertake under United Nations verification the dismantling of missile bases in Cuba . I hope you share your relief that U.S. firmness induced the dismantling .
 If we can surmount the immediate problem I hope we can look forward to progress on wider issues such as disarmament, I say .
 Any forward step would clearly have to be based on verification under U.N. auspices . But any forward step must be based upon verification under United Nations auspices, it says .
 The proof of Russian duplicity furnished by events in Cuba makes it to my mind inevitable that verification and inspection by teams in whom the free world can have confidence will be essential before we can accept any further Sino-Soviet undertakings .
 It is still far from clear what the Russian motives may have been in taking this dangerous and provocative step in Cuba . But at least I hope they have learnt that the free world will respond to threats that disturb the peace .
 We shall, of course, continue to keep in touch with you and welcome any thoughts you may have as developments unfold .
 I have acquainted myself with myself with your reply to U Thant to the effect that steps will be taken to exclude contact between our ships and thus avoid irremedable fateful consequences . I have known myself with much satisfaction with your replies to your reply .
 This reasonable step on your part strengthens my that you are showing concern to safeguard peace, and I note this with satisfaction. This strengthens me that you're showing concern for peace,’s your concern, I note .
 I have already said that our people and government and I personally, as chairman of the council of ministers, are concerned solely that our countries should develop and occupy a worthy place among people of the world in economic competition and culture .
 This is the most noble and necessary field for competition, and victors and vanquished will only from it . This means peace and increased commodities for the life and enjoyment of man, says President Obama .
 In your statement, you supported the opinion that the main aim was to come to an agreement and take measures to prevent contact between our ships . Such a contact may as a result of such a contact strike the fire of a military conflict after which all talks would be superfluous, because other
 "The main thing must be done is to normalize and stabilize the state of peace among states and people," he says .
 I understand your concern for the security of the United States, Mr President, because this is the first duty of a president, Mr Obama said . Mr Obama: "I understand your . concern for your . security, Mr . President. Mr President."
 Putin: "We are worried about the same questions, and I bear the same obligations as Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers. However, we are worried ... but we are also worried about same questions"
 You have been worried concerning the fact that we have helped Cuba with weapons with the aim of strengthening its defensive capacity – yes, precisely its “defensive capacity” – because no matter what weapons it possesses, Cuba cannot equal you. Cuba cannot .
 "These are different quantities, all the more so if one takes into consideration the modern means of extermination," he said .
 Cuba is to enable Cuba to live in peace and develop in the way its people desire, says President Obama . "No one can deny the humaneness of our motives," he says .
 You say that it worries you because it is a distance of 90 miles by sea from the U.S. coast .
 You have placed destructive rocket weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey, literally at our elbow, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan says . Turkey is "literally at the elbow" of the Turkish Republic .
 U.N. Acting Secretary General U. Thant has agreed to meet with representatives of the two sides, he says .
 "We consider that he is able to cope with this responsible mission if, of course, each side which is drawn into this conflict shows good will," he says .
 I think that it would be possible to end the conflict quickly and normalize the situation, and then people would breathe more easily, considering that the statesmen who are vested with responsibility, have good sense, an awareness of their responsibility, and an awareness .
 We agree to remove from Cuba those means which you regard as offensive means . Cuba agrees to remove those that you regard offensive means from Cuba . Cuba will not be allowed to use offensive means in Cuba .
 We agree to carry this out and declare this pledge in the United Nations in the U.N. We will pledge to carry out the pledge in U.S.
 Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the United States on its part, considering the uneasiness and anxiety of the Soviet state, will remove its analogous means from Turkey . The U.S. will remove the analogous means .
 Let us reach agreement as to the span of time needed for your and us to achieve this. Let's hope we can reach an agreement as long as possible. Let’s hope that we can’t wait until we reach this agreement .
 After this, persons enjoying the confidence of the U.N. Security Council might check on-the-spot fulfillment of the pledges assumed . The pledges assumed will be checked on the spot .
 Of course, the authorization of the governments of Cuba and Turkey are necessary for entry into those countries of these plenipotentiaries and for inspection of fulfillment of the pledge assumed by either side . The authorization is necessary, the government of Cuba says .
 It would evidently be better if these plenipotentiaries would have the trust of the security council and your trust and mine—of the United States and the Soviet Union – as well as of Turkey and Cuba – would be better .
 I think it will not be difficult to pick such people who would enjoy the trust and respect of all parties concerned . I think such people would be a good choice for the public to choose .
 Turkey and Cuba pledge to give satisfaction to the hopes of the peoples of Cuba and Turkey .
 The Soviet government made a promise to respect the inviolability of the frontiers and sovereignty of Turkey, not to interfere in its internal affairs . We will make a statement within the framework of the security council to the effect that the Soviet government .
 The United States government will make a similar statement within the framework of the security council in respect to Cuba . The U.S. government will also make a statement in this regard .
 It will declare that the United States will respect the inviolability of the frontiers of Cuba and its sovereignty . It will also restrain those who might contemplate perpetrating aggression against Cuba, both from the territory of the U.S. and from neighboring states .
 Let us agree to some period of time, but not to delay – two or three weeks; not more than a month . Let's agree to a period of three weeks, not a month. Let’s agree to two, three weeks or more than one month. Not more
 The means situated in Cuba which you have stated are perturbing you are in the hands of Soviet officers. You are in Cuba, Cuba, says the Cuban government .
 These means are situated in Cuba at the request of the Cuban government and are only for defensive purposes . The Cuban government is only using the means to defend itself .
 If there is no invasion of Cuba or attack on the Soviet Union or any other of our allies, then of course these means are not and will not be a threat to anyone, for they are not there for the purposes of attack . Therefore if there is . no invasion . of Cuba
 If you also choose your men and give them the corresponding instructions, then this questions can be solved quickly . If you choose your man and give him the instructions, you will be able to solve the problem quickly .
 "The whole world now expects sensible action from us. Because the whole world is now perturbed," she says . She says .
 "The greatest joy for all peoples would be announcement of our agreement on the radical liquidation of the conflict that has arisen," says President Obama .
 I ascribe great importance to this agreement insofar as it could serve as a good beginning . It would, in particular, make it easier to reach agreement on banning of tests of nuclear weapons, he says .
 The question of tests could be solved in parallel, without connection one with the other, because they are different issues . The tests will be carried out without the need to be connected to each other, he says .
 Agreement has been reached on the discontinuation of nuclear tests and that consequently the atmosphere will no longer be polluted . However, it is important that agreement be reached on both these issues to present the people a good gift .
 All this could possibly serve as a good impetus toward seeking mutually acceptable agreements also on other controversial issues on which we are exchanging views . All this is a good way for us to try and find a mutually acceptable agreement on controversial issues .
 These issues have not so far been solved, but they are awaiting urgent solution which would clear the international atmosphere . These issues are not yet solved, as they are still awaiting an urgent solution .
 These proposals of the Soviet government have been sent to President Kennedy and a copy of them is attached for you . A copy of the proposals has been attached to you .
 The Leader of the Opposition called me a few moments ago and suggested that it might be appropriate if something were said at this time with regard to the speech just delivered on television by the President of the United States. Mr Speaker, the Leader .
 The president pointed out that on the island of Cuba preparations were being made for the construction of bases for the launching of offensive weapons in the form of I.R.B.M.'s . This constitutes a threat to most of the cities of North America .
 The reason that I agreed to the suggestion of the Leader of the Opposition was to ask Canadians as well as free men everywhere in the world not to panic at this time . The reason for the suggestion is that Canadians and free men worldwide should not panic, he says .
 It is a time for the banishment of those things that sometimes separate us . It's a time to banish the things that separate us. It's time for us to be united. It is time for peace, not to be separated, says David Cameron .
 It is a time when each of us must endeavour to do his part to assure the preservation of peace not only in this hemisphere but everywhere in the world . Above all, it's a time for us to do our part to ensure peace in our hemisphere .
 The existence of these bases or launching pads is not defensive but offensive, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 The determination of Canadians will be that the U.N. should be charged at the earliest possible moment with this serious problem . Canadians will want the United Nations to be charged with the problem .
 The president has stated that the matter will be brought before the security council at once . "What people all over the world want tonight and will want is a full and complete understanding of what is taking place in Cuba," says President Kennedy .
 There has been little time to give consideration to positive action that might be taken . Naturally, there is little time .
 The U.S.R. should be given the opportunity to inspect Cuba, the author says . A group of nations, perhaps the eight nations comprising the unaligned members of the 18 nation disarmament committee, could make an on-site inspection in Cuba .
 This is the only suggestion I have at this moment; but it would provide an objective answer to what is going on in Cuba . It would be the only solution to the situation in Cuba, he says .
 As late as a week ago, the U.S.R. contended that its activities in Cuba were entirely of a defensive nature . As late last week, it said that the hundreds, if not thousands, of citizens of the United States were in Cuba for defensive purposes .
 As to the presence of these offensive weapons, the only sure way that the world can secure the facts would be through an independent inspection of the weapons . The only way to verify the facts is to inspect the weapons in the U.S.
 I should like to hear the views of the Leader of the Opposition on this, and the leaders of the other parties, for in times like these the divisions between us always diminish . I would like to talk to the leader of the opposition and other parties .
 Any suggestion that can be made that will bring about an alleviation or a diminution of the obvious tensions that must grip men and women all over the world tonight, will be helpful .
 Our duty, as I see it, is not to fan the flames of fear, but to do our part to bring about relief from tensions, the great tensions, of the hour . Our duty is to not fan of fear but to help relieve the tension, the hour, says Mr
 Canada has taken a strong stand throughout the years on behalf of peace . Canada knows the meaning of war. It has taken strong stand against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 His prayer this evening is that those who have the responsibility of statesmanship will always have the need for doing everything that can be done to assure peace, he says .
 Statement by Diefenbaker: "Right HONOURABLE JOHN G DIEFENBAKER, P.C., Q.C.C.," M.P., 1962 .
 There is an early prospect that the threat to the Western Hemisphere from long-range Soviet missiles in Cuba will be removed from Cuba . Mankind will breathe more hopefully now that there is a prospect that this will not be the case .
 This prospect has resulted from the high degree of unity, understanding and cooperation among the Western allies . This prospect is due to the high level of unity among Western allies, the U.S. has said .
 Canada was the first nation to stop overflights of Soviet aircraft so as to prevent war material being carried to Cuba . Cuba and Czech planes are entitled under international agreement to use Canadian airport facilities .
 The introduction of missiles into the Western Hemisphere has brought the world too close to disaster for anyone to indulge -in either self congratulations or complacency - at this time .
 I know there will be universal relief that in the last two days the outlook for the peaceful solution of the Cuban problem has greatly improved but there is a continuing need for negotiation on this and other potential sources of threats to world peace .
 The United Nations deserves special mention for the worthy and constructive role it has played in this crisis . The U.N. has played a vital role in the fight against the Syrian refugee crisis .
 It has provided a forum in which the issues could-be discussed, and the good offices of the Acting Secretary-General brought into effective action . It has been a forum for the issues of the issues discussed .
 In the days ahead the U.N. will have further heavy responsibilities in verification of the carrying out of the undertakings which have been given by Chairman Khrushchev .
 Some days ago I expressed the hope that out of this critical situation good might ultimately come . This is not the case of President Barack Obama's administration .
 I believe in the negotiations which will follow the immediate settlement of the Cuban crisis there lie broad possibilities for progress in the settlement of other issues between East and West . I believe that in the . negotiations which . will . follow the . immediate settlement, the negotiations will lead to progress in other
 If the settlement is fully accepted it will be the first time agreed measures of disarmament will be carried out under international inspection .
 The Soviet have demanded that international agreement for disarmament should be free from inspection – a course which would be dangerous in the utmost to the free world . This gives hope for the future in the general field of disarmament for up to the present .
 Mr Speaker: I should like to make a short statement in regard to the Cuban situation . Mr Speaker says he will make a statement about the situation in Cuba . The Cuban situation has been described as a 'serious matter'
 I do not intend to recapitulate the events of the last few days, all of which are known to hon. hon. David Cameron . I will not discuss the events in this article .
 President Kennedy said Monday night that Russian action in Cuba threatens this continent and Central and South America . President Kennedy’s statement on Monday night .
 The Soviet Union by its action has reached out across the Atlantic to challenge the right of free men to live in peace in this hemisphere . Indeed, the Soviet Union .
 Canadians are in general agreement that these offensive weapons, located so contiguously to our continent, are a direct and immediate menace to Canada . I think Canadians in general agree .
 They are a serious menace to the deterrent strategic strength of the whole western alliance on which our security is founded . Furthermore, they are also a serious threat to the security of the entire western alliance, the UK says .
 The result is that a threat is posed not only to this continent but to the NATO alliance as a whole, the author says . NATO's security depends to such an extent upon the strategic strength of the United States, he says .
 The United States government, as I have said, informed us of the facts of the situation and of the course of action proposed to be taken some few hours before President Kennedy made his announcement . The U.S. government informed us about the situation, I said .
 The Canadian government and Canadian forces should take measures to deal with whatever eventualities would arise from this action . The government commenced immediately to consider measures .
 I am asking for the support of the house as a whole in this connection . We intend to support the United States and our other allies in this situation . So that the attitude of the government will be clearly understood .
 It has been necessary and will always remain necessary to weigh the risks both of action and inaction in such circumstances. It has always been necessary, it has always remained .
 Canada has stood by allies in two world wars, in NATO alliance and in Korea . Canada has done so in the NATO alliance, Korea and demonstrating the fact that Canadians stand by allies and their undertakings .
 "On the other hand, we shall not fail to fail to do everything possible to seek solutions to these problems without war," he said . "We shall try to find a solution without war"
 I think I should summarize some of the principal actions which have been taken by the government to date to deal with the question . The government has responded to the question with a series of actions to date .
 The first was to exercise a control over Soviet bloc aircraft bound for Cuba . The first, which was referred to by the Secretary of State for External Affairs, was exercise control of Soviet bloc .
 Canadian air space and Canadian air transport facilities were not being used to carry arms to the Soviet bases in Cuba, the PM said .
 All Canadian military forces have taken necessary precautionary measures to improve their readiness to meet any serious developments . Second, the Canadian military said, all Canadian forces are prepared to meet potential threats .
 The Canadian component of the NORAD forces has been placed upon the same level of readiness as the United States forces under NORAD operational control . The Canadian forces have been placed on the same readiness level as the US forces .
 Defence minister: 'We have deferred any further movement of dependants of armed service personnel overseas. Furthermore, as was stated by the Minister of National Defence, we have defused any further movements of dependents of armed services personnel overseas .
 We have held up the authorization of any long leave for armed services personnel . We have also held up any authorization for long leave .
 The government today approved the measures which the forces would have to take in the event that the present crisis led to a more serious situation .
 Our civilian departments have been instructed as a matter of urgency to bring up to date the measures which they would need to take in any emergency . Civilian departments have also been instructed to bring .
 The ministers and key civilian officials have been asked to remain available during this period of crisis .
 On other occasions I have informed the house of preparations for carrying on government should the worst occur. I have also informed the House of preparation for carrying out government if the worst occurs.
 These preparations cover not only the public service but also provincial governments and municipalities which we have been financing and assisting with information, advice .
 I do not think I should go any further into detail in dealing with the measures which we have taken or would be prepared to take should circumstances require us to do so . I do think I would not go further in detail about the measures, I said .
 I wish the house and Canadian people to know that the government has taken such precautions as are necessary at this stage to co-operate with our allies, and to be prepared for contingencies that might arise .
 The government is seeking to find means by which the dangerous, threatening situation can be settled without recourse to arms . As I said a moment ago, the government is looking to find a solution .
 The free world cannot afford to permit its essential security to be endangered by offensive weapons mounted on bases on bases adjacent to North America . On the other hand, we recognize the fact that the free world .
 As the Secretary of State for External Affairs said last evening during the course of his interview on the television facilities of the nation, we shall continue to do everything we can to avert the dangers to which we are exposed .
 As far as the last twenty four hours are concerned, the main facts are well known to members of the house . The main facts of the last 24 hours are known, according to the BBC .
 One Soviet tanker intercepted by U.S. naval ship allowed to proceed on its way since it had been established that the cargo was petroleum .
 I think we may take encouragement from the restraint being exercised at the moment. I think it may be a good sign that the restraint is being exercised in the world of sport .
 It would be dangerously premature to assume that the critical phase of the current situation has passed. However, it would be dangerous to assume it has passed, says CNN.com .
 There are two pressing needs to be met, namely not only to avoid conflict but to find a peaceful solution to this new Soviet challenge . There is a need to find peace, not conflict, but to avoid it all .
 I think members of the house are in agreement that the greatest hope of finding such a solution lies in the U.N. The United Nations is the key to finding a solution .
 The acting secretary general is to be commended for the speed with which he has acted . His proposal for a standstill is designed to gain the time needed while the search goes forward for a solution .
 His offer of his personal good offices is in the best tradition of his predecessors in that office, says Mr. Obama . Obama's offer of personal good office is in "best tradition" of predecessors .
 President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev will have received their replies . Perhaps by that time the replies of President Kennedy . Perhaps the replies will have been received by the replies .
 There is a debate going on throughout the world regarding the legality of the quarantine measures which the United States has imposed . The U.S. has imposed the quarantines in the face of a global debate .
 Legalistic arguments, whatever they may be, cannot erase the fact that the Soviet Union has posed a new and immediate threat to the security of the U.S. and Canada .
 The U.S. bases abroad have been installed only in response to the threatening pressures from the Soviet union, the author says . The bases have never been concealed from the public .
 The west has refrained in recent years from any move to upset the world balance . The west, however, has refraining from any attempt to upset world balance, it has said .
 There are countries in all parts of the world in which nuclear weapons could have been installed by the west . The west could have installed nuclear weapons in many countries, including Russia .
 "We in Canada have shown responsibility in this connection in order to avoid the proliferation of these dangerous weapons throughout the world," the minister says . Canada has shown responsibility to avoid proliferation of dangerous weapons .
 To compare western activities with the provocative, clandestine arming of Cuba is to ignore the calculated restraint which has characterized western policy . Sir, to compare the western activities . with the . provocative clandestine arming . of Cuba .
 In this light, the call for the dismantling of these new, threatening facilities in Cuba is not unreasonable . In the light of the situation in Cuba, the government should dismantle the facilities .
 It is for the Soviet Union and Cuba to restore that balance, writes David Frum . The Soviet Union itself has disturbed the balance, he says .
 The fact that we find ourselves in this dire situation may well have some salutary effect . It may well be a good thing for the world, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Surely it is not too much to hope that some good will come out of the present dangerous situation .
 If these facilities were dismantled this would represent a first practical step on the road to disarmament . If some such suggestion as I made a few days ago were coupled with international inspection of the process then we might well find ourselves taking the first steps away from the dangerous abyss that we have faced
 October 26, 1962 Soviet Intentions and Reactions in the Cuban Situation . Information available to us gives no grounds for putting in question American intelligence about the buildup of Soviet missile sites in Cuba .
 This paper will attempt to analyze the possible Soviet intentions in setting up MRBM and IRBM sites in Cuba . It will also analyze the reaction to the American action in imposing a quarantine and calling for the dismantlement of offensive weapons sites .
 This would have presented the U.S.A. and the world in general with a fait accompli which would have raised tensions but would in the end be accepted, as American foreign bases are accepted . This would be accepted as the American foreign base is accepted .
 There are, in broad terms, two possible reasons for the Soviet action, each with variants . There are also possible reasons, such as a lack of military support in the Soviet Union .
 The U.S.R. seems to have yielded to the temptation of taking a short-cut towards reducing the imbalance . U.N.R.'s U.K. has been accused of trying to take a 'short-cut'
 The net effect of the installation of . medium and intermediate -range . strike capacity up close to the U.S.A. is to increase the Soviet nuclear strike capability against North America . North American early warning network .
 The U.S.A. can now inflict approximately double the damage it could inflict before, but still has superiority in strategic striking power over the U.N.R. It can inflict about double that it could have done before .
 The Cuban bases have added considerably to the credibility of Soviet ability to launch a nuclear attack on U.S. targets . Nevertheless, the Cuban bases are still considered a major threat to the United States .
 The Soviet purpose may have been a combination of the several strategic and political variants . These two general reasons are not mutually exclusive, and the Soviet purpose might have been different .
 The Soviet Union may have expected, at one extreme, a new U.S. armed attack on Cuba or at least a total blockade . At the other extreme they may have hoped that the United States would either raise the matter in private discussion with the Soviet leaders or refer it to the
 Armed attack or total blockade would have incurred heavy opprobrium for the U.S.A.A., regardless of the degree of provocation for the action . Armed attack, total blockade or any other provocation, would have caused heavy opposition to the United States .
 A quarantine designed to prevent only offensive military equipment reaching Cuba is per se less objectionable than a total blockade . The demand for dismantling of bases already prepared can be fitted into the fairly widespread desire to avoid further proliferation of nuclear weapons sites .
 The Soviet reaction to President Kennedy’s announcement has, on the whole and given the extent of the challenge to Soviet prestige, demonstrated comparative moderation and an evident desire to buy time rather than precipitate a crisis immediately .
 The Soviet Union has said that it will not allow its ships to be subject to American search . A number of Soviet ships en route to Cuba have been turned back while one has been intercepted and allowed to proceed .
 The Soviet delegate has predictably called for a ""cease and desist"" order on the American quarantine action . But the U.S. has avoided any such belligerent statement as a Soviet intention to shoot its way through the American naval cordon .
 It has emphasized the “piratical” nature of the quarantine . It has harped on the illegal nature of this interference with the freedom of the seas .
 The Soviet Union has maintained that equipment delivered to the Cubans is of a defensive nature . It has insisted that it will not take the initiative in a nuclear conflict . But it has not explicitly denied that MRBM and IRBM sites are being installed .
 The Soviet Union has used the tu quoque argument of United States bases surrounding the U.S.R., but has not attempted to link the Berlin situation with the Cuban crisis in any way, despite what it could have considered a provocation .
 Khrushchev has expressed willingness to consider a meeting at the highest level to attempt to resolve the crisis . The Soviet Union will avoid reckless action, thereby attempting to give the impression that he is moderate and reasonable in contrast with Kennedy .
 Khrushchev has agreed to U.S.A. proposal for a temporary halt to the quarantine and a temporary . halt to Soviet shipments to Cuba, but presumably in the knowledge that the U.K. would reject it . Agreement did not prevent the continued construction of the missile bases
 He has agreed to preliminary talks among U Thant, Stevenson and Zorin . Kennedy has also agreed, as has Kennedy, to discuss preliminary talks .
 From these first Soviet reactions, it would appear that the Soviet Union is anxious to avoid a further heightening of tensions . The Soviet Union wants at least to look at the possibility of a compromise solution, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It has been singularly imprecise in stating what it is going to do in response to the American challenge . The U.S. government has not stated what it will do in a statement .
 The strategic reason is not sufficient in itself to explain the Soviet action, for the short-cut of establishing MRBM and IRBM sites in Cuba, while it reduces the imbalance in strategic striking force, still leaves the balance still strongly in the American favour .
 The major political consideration was probably to improve the Soviet Union's bargaining capacity in future talks with the U.S.A., particularly with respect to Berlin but also perhaps, in the disarmament context, perhaps . The Soviet Union was probably seeking to improve its bargaining capacity .
 The Soviet Union has acted daringly and provocatively in setting up missile-launching sites in Cuba . But in reaction to a vigorous U.S. response it has displayed comparative moderation .
 No shipment of arms, ammunition, military and related equipment will be or has been licensed for export from Canada to Cuba for more than a year . Material of a clearly strategic nature will not be allowed to be shipped to Cuba .
 This course is based on the Government’s general policy of refraining from exporting such goods or commodities to areas of tension anywhere in the world .
 A tight control is exercised on the export of goods such as aircraft engines which many in certain circumstances have strategic significance . The export of aircraft engines is also tightly regulated .
 Individual export permits are required in each case and, as applications are received, the circumstances determine whether the export of the goods concerned has a strategic significance . If not a permit is issued, a permit will be issued .
 There are no limitations on Canadian goods of a non-strategic nature, there are no limits on such trade with Cuba . As to Canadian goods, there will be no restrictions on Cuba trade, the government says .
 No other country, including NATO allies of the U.S., has imposed a similar trade embargo to that of the United States . NATO allies, such as the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Belgium, Norway and other member nations, have not taken any action .
 For Canada to restrict exports of non-strategic Canadian goods to Cuba in conformity with the U.S. embargo would be to impose a stricter control on trade with Cuba than we have with the countries of the Sino-Soviet bloc . Canada's trade embargo with Cuba would be a
 Cuba has been a traditional market for certain Canadian food products – notably fish and potatoes – and the United States itself is continuing to ship food and drug products to Cuba .
 Embargoes and trade controls are powerful and sometimes double-edged weapons . Embarges and trade restrictions are powerful but not always always a good thing .
 If we use them towards Cuba we may be under pressure to use them elsewhere . Unnecessary damage will be done to Canadian trade, present or prospective .
 As a country which lives by international trade, Canada cannot lightly resort to the weapons of a trade war . Canada's economy relies heavily on international trade and is dependent on international business .
 There is no basis for fears that such goods can be trans-shipped from Canada to Cuba, thus evading the provisions of the United States embargo . Goods of U.S. origin can be exported to Canada without control, the government says .
 Under existing regulations, no commodity of U.S. origin may be re-exported from Canada to Cuba without an individual export permit . No permit will be issued for re-export of United States origin goods to Cuba .
 Apart from commercial and economic considerations there are, of course, important political factors to be taken into account .
 The operation of military and strategic material controls is clear evidence that the Canadian Government considers it to be a sensitive area . The Canadian Government is by no means complacent about the situation in the Caribbean, the author says .
 Government's view is that to maintain mutually beneficial economic relations with Cuba may help and contribute to the restoration of traditional relationships between Cuba and the Western world . We do not minimize American concern, but it is the Government’s view that maintaining mutually beneficial trade ties with Cuba will help and
 Canada respects the right of every country to determine its own policy towards Cuba . "We naturally expect others to respect our right to do likewise. We respect the right to determine our own policy," Canada says .
 U.S. authorities have explained that the “arbitrary, illegal and discriminatory” economic measures taken by the Cuban Government against United States citizens and United States interests made their embargo necessary .
 Canada could not justify an embargo or measures similar to those taken in the U.S. on this basis, for the treatment accorded Canadians and Canadian interests in Cuba has not been of a similar nature, says the government .
 There is no evidence at the present time that there is likely to be any dramatic or sustained increase in the volume of such trade, even in items of Canadian origin in which trade with Cuba is permissible .
 An advance copy of the operative portion of the text of the Proclamation was transmitted to Under Secretary Robertson by the Embassy .
 The U.S. ordered to interdict the delivery of offensive weapons and associated materiel to Cuba in 1962 .
 Surface-to-surface missiles, bomber aircraft, bombs, rockets and guided missiles; warheads for any of the above weapons; mechanical or electronic equipment to support or operate the above items; and any other classes of materiel hereafter designated .
 The Secretary of Defense shall take appropriate measures to prevent the delivery of prohibited material to Cuba, employing the land, sea and air forces of the United States in cooperation with other forces .
 The Secretary of Defense may make such regulations and issue such directives as he deems necessary to ensure the effectiveness of this order, including the designation within a reasonable distance of Cuba .
 In carrying out this order, force shall not be used except in case of failure or refusal to comply with Secretary of Defense issued hereunder, after reasonable efforts .
 The Seal of the United States of America to be affixed . In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal to be .