 The connection between the internal and external struggle towards revisionism was energised by Mao’s ability to exploit the opportunities offered by the Cuban crisis . Mao launched by Mao in the first half of 1962 to eradicate the critics of the Great Leap Forward .
 The absence of references to the Cuban crisis in the official publications suggests that it is still one of the most delicate pages in the history of China's foreign policy .
 A recent photographic exhibition in Beijing on Che Guevara seems to corroborate this conclusion . The lack of references to this important historical event in Beijing seems to disprove that conclusion .
 The delicate political nature of the issue under consideration could be one of the reasons for the lack of reliable historical literature in Chinese on the subject .
 The few available studies on the issue – published only in recent years – do not provide adequate critical analysis and are mostly based on public sources . The few . available studies . published only . recent years, published only recently, do not . provide adequate analysis .
 A study published in 2007 by Cheng Yinghong relied on autobiographical accounts of Chinese diplomats and envoys of the Xinhua News Agency to Cuba recently published in Chinese .
 The nature of the Chinese sources used, however, inevitably led Cheng to overlook the profound influence that the internal political dynamics in the country had on its foreign policy in those years . Cheng: "China's internal politics had profound influence"
 One of the first Chinese historians to shed light on the importance of this aspect was Niu Jun in a working paper published in 2005 by the Cold War International History Project .
 Niu's work has provided Western historians with a fundamental tool for understanding the evolution of Maoist foreign policy at that stage . Niu’s work has helped Western historians understand the evolution in China's foreign policy, he says .
 The interpretive keys provided by Niu have proven to be particularly useful in allowing some historians of Sino-Soviet relations to better contextualise the findings .
 Archive of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs restricted the number of documents available to the public . A few weeks after the research conducted for this article, the archive of this article was restricted . This has affected the possibility to expand this and many other ongoing research .
 Cold War History 75 is in the archives of the countries of the former socialist bloc, including China . Cold War history 75 is published in the Cold War archives .
 This research, conducted, especially in Luthi’s case, also in the central and provincial archives of the PRC, has addressed the issue of Sino-Cuban relations . This research is focused on the documents available on the subject . It has been conducted from the
 Neither of them has analysed papers on SinoCuban relations found in MOFA archives in Beijing .
 The key to interpretation offered by the authors is limited only to the history of diplomatic relations . However, the authors do not mention the important insights provided by Niu Jun on the origins of Maoist foreign policy .
 This article attempts to gain greater insight by broadening the scope of analysis of the sources and using the interpretive keys provided by Niu Jun. This article is therefore in line with that of Hershberg and Radchenko, and attempts .
 Fardella the sudden withdrawal of Soviet experts in the summer of 1960 . The sudden withdrawal was the result of the Soviet withdrawal of experts from the Soviet Union in 1960 .
 Party leaders started to share the opinion that there was an urgent need for a drastic revision of the country’s economic policy in 1962 . As shown by Chinese sources, starting from the 7,000 Cadres Conference in January 1962, a number of party leaders shared the opinion .
 Criticism of the economic development model promoted by Chairman Mao would obviously have political repercussions . Chairman Mao's economic policy would obviously be politically sensitive to the criticism .
 Mao tried to prevent the debate on economic policy from undermining the centrality of class struggle and the building of socialism in China . Mao tried from the beginning to defend himself and prevent the . debate .
 In August 1962, Mao suddenly decided to change the agenda by imposing a discussion on class struggle . Mao changed the agenda of a meeting on the economic policy of the Central Committee in August 1962 .
 By associating the detractors of his economic policy with the symbol of revisionism, the Great Helmsman established an important link between the domestic front and the foreign front . The 'Great Helmsmen' established a link between his economic and foreign policy .
 According to this theory, there was a vast ‘intermediate zone’ consisting of non-Western oppressed nations, including China, that stood between the opposing forces of American imperialism and Soviet socialism . This theory was based on the theory of a vast 'interimmediate zone' of
 Mao believed control over this area was crucial to the U.S. plan to encircle the socialist bloc . Mao believed that control over the area was vital to the United States plan to .
 Maoist anti-imperialism and support for communist movements of national liberation in Asia were hence instrumental to defending the socialist camp and at the same time to creating the conditions for China’s new leading role .
 Mao’s belief that European countries rejected the hegemonic role of the superpowers led him to revise his previous theoretical assumptions . Recent frictions between the two countries on the policy of peaceful coexistence, the alleged collusion between the USSR and the United States against China, led him
 The bipolar hegemony of the superpowers loosened the bond between Maoist anti-imperialism and the Soviet front . By weakening the cohesion of the two blocs, a space for Beijing's influence opened right before Mao’s eyes, stretching from Asia to Caribbean .
 The concept of ‘revisionism’ appeared for the first time in an essay on the differences between the leaders of China and the Soviet Union published in the Renmin Ribao on 6 September 1963 .
 The slogan later appeared in a letter from Mao published in the same newspaper on 14 July 1964 . Mao later wrote a letter to the Communist Party leader .
 On both occasions, there never was a clear definition of the concept, making it become a mere instrument of political struggle to identify and wipe out opponents within the party .
 China was set on presenting itself as the centre of the global revolution . China was therefore set to present itself as a centre of global revolution and the only true vanguard of national liberation movements .
 If Khrushchev gave up the interests of the revolution in favour a bipolar condominium based on a compromise with imperialists, the opponents of the Great Leap within the CCP became the ‘associates’ of Soviet revisionism . They kept Maoist China from taking the lead
 In 1959, in the months immediately following Castro’s victory in the Cuban revolution, the Chinese were very cautious and their propaganda machine did not criticise Moscow's position .
 China wished to keep a diplomatic channel open with Taiwan, which at the time was still recognised by the Cuban government . As suggested by Soviet diplomats in China, the reason for this was probably that .
 New evidence from the Russian Archives’, in New East-Bloc Evidence on the Cold War in the Third World, Cold War International History Project, was published in Bulletin 9– 9, Winter 1996/1997 . New evidence was published by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
 China started to actively court the Cubans in order to tap their influence on other revolutionary movements in Latin America and spread Chinese propaganda throughout the region . In September 1960, relations between Castro’s new regime and Beijing in September 1960 began .
 The risk that Cuba could fall prey to Chinese propaganda led the Soviets to boost their engagement with Cuba . The risk of falling prey to China propaganda led to increased engagement with the Soviets .
 Khrushchev saw the understanding between the Chinese and Cubans as a dangerous challenge to Moscow’s role and urged it to compete with Beijing in courting Cuban leaders . The understanding between China and Cuba was seen as a 'dangerous challenge' to Moscow's role .
 Chinese documents reveal promise to send Baltic fleet in case of US attack . Soviet promise was revealed by Chinese documents .
 The Chinese interpreted the move as yet another Soviet attempt to control and monopolise the Cuban revolution . The Chinese were already aware of the presence of missiles in Cuba before the crisis in October 27 .
 Chinese embassy in Havana constantly stressed Khrushchev's increasing difficulties with the Cubans . Crisis broke out after the famous speech delivered by President Kennedy on 22 October .
 Khrushchev could not help but support the Cubans, according to the Chinese embassy . However, he was terrified by the risk of an escalation with the United States .
 The U.S. leadership, aware that Moscow was not ready to engage in a war over Cuba, continued to exert pressure to force the Soviets into accepting a compromise and abandoning the Cubans . The United States continued to pressure Moscow to accept a compromise .
 Khrushchev’s decision to withdraw the missiles seemed to confirm the Chinese insights . The decision was made to withdraw missiles from the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Khrushchev sought to use the threat of US imperialism to kill the ‘tiger’, that is, to destroy the Fidelist revolutionary bloc and pave the way for the triumph of revisionism on the island .
 Growing tensions between the Cubans and Soviets opened the way to China’s action . The growing tensions between Cuba and the Soviet Union led to the action .
 Cuban leaders' frustration with Moscow seems to result in growing support for Beijing’s position, diplomats say . As noted by Chinese diplomats in Cuba, between November and December, the frustration of Cuban leaders with Moscow seemed to be growing .
 From 22– 28 October, the Chinese had been very cold towards Moscow, as the Soviets did not fail to fail to note with dismay . The Chinese had a very cold relationship with Moscow .
 Che Guevara met with Shen Jian in the days following the meeting between Che Guesara and Shen Jian . In the days after the meeting, this analysis was confirmed to be confirmed .
 Che shared his disappointment at the Soviet betrayal with Shen and apologised for having been too naive in the past and having believed the promises made by Moscow .
 The U.S. does not have the courage to inspect Soviet ships because they are afraid, he said . He said that the United States is afraid of inspecting Soviet ships .
 Zhong Su Guanxi Cold War History 81 support, expressed in Pravda on 25 October, in favour of Chinese positions in ongoing border conflict with India .
 According to a current opinion among scholars and Chinese diplomats, the Soviet statements were the result of Khrushchev’s need at that stage to secure Beijing’�s support in the most delicate moment of the Cuban crisis .
 Once the agreement was reached with Washington, the Soviet position on the SinoIndian conflict would become more balanced and neutral, as demonstrated by the editorial in Pravda .
 After the agreement reached on 28 October – and perhaps even following the change of Soviet positions on the border conflict with India – the Chinese propaganda machine became openly vehement in their criticism towards the Soviet decisions on Cuba .
 Chinese newspapers accused Khrushchev of ‘adventurism’ for sending missiles to Cuba . Millions of Chinese took to the streets in cities across China to show solidarity with the Cuban revolution .
 The fierce tones of the propaganda machine were balanced though by the approach taken by Chinese diplomacy . The fierce tone of propaganda machine was balanced though .
 Beijing feared that harsh criticism against Moscow’s position in Cuba could be seen abroad as a cynical Chinese effort to use the Cuban crisis as a way to score points against Moscow . The Foreign Ministry in Beijing feared the harsh criticism could be a cynical move .
 A series of documents drawn up by Chinese diplomats in early November shed light on this aspect of the situation . The documents were drawn up in China's response to the U.S. State Department .
 Qiao Guanhua, China’s deputy foreign minister, submitted a detailed plan to minister Chen Yi and prime minister Zhou Enlai on 1 November 1962, aimed at supporting the Cuban cause . After a meeting with the Propaganda Department, the Liaison Department, Xinhua agency and
 Plan included the suggestion that the party’s Central Committee send a letter to the Soviets openly criticising Khrushchev's policy and urging Moscow to support their Cuban comrades in their fight against imperialism .
 Khrushchev turned his back on the Chinese and betrayed them, Zhang says . Once tension in the Caribbean subsided, the Chinese turned their backs on him, Zhang claims .
 Ambassador Shen would have had to return immediately to Cuba to deliver the letter criticising Khrushchev personally to Castro . Chen Yi would have shared the letter’s content with the Cuban representative in Beijing .
 Zhou Enlai and Chen Yi called for caution and suggested taking time to discuss with Shen on the best way to deal with the crisis . Chen Yi: Take time to talk to Shen about how to handle the situation .
 Chen Yi replied that much had already been done and that there was no need to continue criticising Moscow . In particular, Chen Yi said that there had been no need for criticism of Moscow .
 Chinese foreign minister lectured the Soviet diplomats about the inadmissibility of any ‘wishy-washiness’ in relations with the imperialist aggressors . On 7 November, during a speech delivered at the Soviet embassy in Beijing on the forty-fifth anniversary of the October Revolution
 The caution called for by Chen Yi and Shen Jian belonged more to the sphere of diplomatic tactics rather than strategy . The caution was more to be taken to diplomatic tactics than strategy, says Chen Yi .
 Chinese were trying to capitalise on Cuban frustration towards Moscow . It was evident that the Chinese were capitalising on Cuba's anger at Moscow .
 The meeting on 1 December 1962 between the Chinese ambassador to Cuba, Shen Jian, and Che Guevara is quintessential . In this regard, the meeting was quintessential. The meeting took place in December 1962 .
 Che Guevara appeared to be confident about the 'total' protection that the Soviets would grant Cuba in the event of a U.S. attack in 1962 .
 Shen suggested that the Cuban leader follow the Chinese model and rely on his own strength . Shen drew a parallel between the damage caused by the Cuban revolution and that inflicted on China by the withdrawal of Soviet experts in 1960, he said .
 Shen stressed to the Cuban leader that there was no way of trusting Moscow . Shen stressed that there were no way to trust Moscow .
 The Soviet Union seemed naturally inclined to be harsh with true Marxist-Leninists and accommodating with imperialists and the enemies of the revolution . The Soviets seemed to be sympathetic to imperialists, enemies of revolution .
 By neutralizing the threat of escalation, the U.S. reaffirmed their bipolar leadership and tamed at the same time ‘the tiger’ of Chinese radicalism .
 This element emerges clearly enough from the talks between the U.S. and the Soviets during the crisis . This element emerged clearly enough enough to be seen in the talks .
 Chinese maximalism was a thorn in the side of Khrushchev’s Cuban policy, a goad that forced him to expose himself further with Castro to prevent the spread of Maoist sympathies among his fellow Cubans . Harriman, in particular, had sensed that Chinese
 Americans often used Beijing as a bugbear, as a symbol of a form of radicalism that could destabilise world peace . During talks with the Soviets, in their arguments for bipolar dialogue, the U.S. often used the Chinese city as bugbear .
 McCloy said he was very concerned about the Sino-Indian war . The event seemed to be reaching large proportions, he said . McCloy: "I'm very concerned" about the event .
 The clashes might have escalated further and caused severe damage in the future; so he continued . Footnote 39 continued dooni diplomatiche cinesi nce Minister Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara, Havana, 13 October 1962 .
 It’s never too early to share some thoughts about it also to avoid harsh reactions as a result of events that are likely to threaten peace in the world .
 He said it was an issue that worried them and that perhaps it could have been discussed sooner or later . He said the issue was a concern and that it was a matter of concern .
 Similar situations indicated the need to solve the Cuban problem as quickly as possible so they could then devote themselves to other common problems, he said .
 Chinese courtship of the Cuban leadership did not seem to bear any fruit in the meantime . While Chinese radical antagonism helped to strengthen bipolar dialogue, Chinese courtships of Cuban leadership failed to bear fruit .
 Cuban president Roa seemed less inclined to yield to their blandishments . While Che Guevara had appeared ideologically closer to the Chinese position, Roa appeared less inclined .
 Roa promised Shen that he would study the issue in depth . Roa was elusive, took no position and promised to take no position . Shen said Roa would study issue further .
 Kuznetsov specifies that he is speaking for himself and not on behalf of his government . He says he is not speaking for the government .
 Zhou Enlai suggested not to ask for clarification on the Cuban position on this issue . The document was approved by Zhou En-lai, the ministry suggested .
 China's ambassador to visit Beijing in November would have been different . Probably the instructions received later by ambassador Shen Jian – who was visiting Beijing – would be different .
 On 18 November, the Chinese would launch the final offensive against the Indians and the next day they declared a unilateral ceasefire . It should be noted that on November 18, the Indian forces would launch their final offensive .
 Shen’s words in his meeting with Roa on 30 November could be used in diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 The Cubans continued not to reveal anything of their conversations with the Soviets even in the most critical moments . As noticed by Beijing’s diplomats as well, the Cubans proved to be friendly and grateful for the solidarity expressed by the Chinese .
 Fidel Castro himself was very critical of China’s position on Cuba . As reported by the Soviet and Polish ambassadors, in some conversations between late October and mid-November of 1962, Fidel Castro was critical of the Chinese position .
 Fidel believed that if the Chinese had really wanted to help the Cuban cause, rather than exacerbate the situation on the border with India, they could have created a diversion in Quemoy and Matsu in order to complicate the United States strategic position .
 The thesis of a shift in the Cuban position towards Beijing, supported by Cheng Yinghong, is not entirely convincing . From this point of view, the thesis of this shift in Cuba’s stance towards Beijing is not quite convincing .
 China’s courtship of the Cubans aroused much sympathy in Cuba but yielded few concrete results . Based on the documents analysed, the documents were analysed by the Chinese government .
 China did not have the ability to provide any direct military or technological support to Cuba during the crisis . China has not been able to provide direct military and technological support for Cuba .
 Even if the heart of some Cuban leaders was beating for Beijing, their stomach inevitably tied them to Moscow . Cuban leaders were always loyal to Moscow, but their stomachs were tied to the Kremlin .
 Instead of interpreting Cuban intransigence as the result of Chinese influence, it could perhaps be argued that the leadership in Havana, aware of Soviet sensitivity towards Beijing’s competition and of the structural limits of Chinese solidarity, tried to raise the price for Moscow's attempts .
 Only Cuban documents may shed additional light on these aspects regarding Havana’s leadership . However, only Cuban documents could shed additional information .
 In August 1958, Mao justified his decision to bomb the islands as an attempt to indirectly help the anti-imperialist forces who had just risen to power in Baghdad – pushing the Americans to concentrate their forces elsewhere .
 The resolute Chinese response to India’s ‘forward policy’,50 the subsequent withdrawal of troops across the border and the solidarity expressed to the Cuban comrades . Khrushchev's surrender to United States pressure, to the withdrawal of the missiles at the expense of the Cub
 It is interesting to note that this success was achieved even at the expense of the Cuban cause . Castro himself seemed to point out that this was achieved, as Castro himself pointed out,52 .
 Beijing’s solidarity with Cuba clearly responded more to the logic of realpolitik rather than that of genuine proletarian internationalism . Beijing's solidarity with the Cuba response was more than genuine internationalist internationalism, according to the Chinese Communist Party .
 While the Warsaw Pact reacted immediately to Kennedy’s famous speech on 22 October by putting its forces on alert, the Chinese hesitated for days and moved only in response to the announcement of the withdrawal of the missiles .
 The Chinese seized every opportunity to exploit the apparent acquiescence shown by the Soviets towards Washington to their advantage .
 Beijing and its diplomats in Cuba vented their finest rhetoric in an effort to demonstrate their solidarity with the Cuban people and push the country to firmly resist the aggression of U.S. imperialism . Beijing vented its finest rhetoric to demonstrate solidarity .
 'empty' solidarity was limited to classical mass demonstrations in major cities . However, it was ‘empty’ solidarity, which was basically limited to mass demonstrations .
 Polish ambassador to Cuba said Castro was deeply upset by the late and uncertain reaction of the Chinese to the break-out of the crisis .
 87 Chinese cities and some theatrical blood donation drives organised by the CCP’s propaganda machine . Cold War History 87 cities .
 Mao's China did not actively participate in Cuba’s defence, but – as the Soviets and Cubans pointed out several times – it did not even make the effort to divert United States attention away from the Caribbean with an offensive, for example .
 Beijing decided to attack India only after being reassured by the U.S. that the United States would not support a simultaneous attack by Chiang Kai Shek on the mainland . Beijing decided instead of attacking India and it did so only after the Americans said they would not be backing a simultaneous
 This marked a major rift on issues concerning the very ideological foundations of the socialist bloc . The rift is seen as one of the most significant gaps between Russia and Ukraine .
 If the U.S. remains involved in Cuba, the situation around the world will become more tense especially in Vietnam, Taiwan, South Korea, Laos, and West Germany . If the United States continues to engage in Cuba it will be more tense in the world .
 Fardella led to the creation of pro-Maoist splinter groups in pro-Soviet communist parties . The groups were created by the Communist Party of Soviet Russia in the 1960s .