 All Cubans share an African genetic and/or cultural heritage . Literally, the phrase means, who doesn't have Congo blood has Carabalm blood has .
 The declaration by Castro, made at the height of the Missile Crisis in October 1962 “Cuba no es el Congo” identified an intrinsic frame of reference that posited Cuban international identity not only outside the bounds of US hemispheric and global domination, but also beyond the edges
 The Missile Crisis was, to use Laclau’s term, a dislocatory experience for the Revolutionary leadership . My goal for this paper is to explore the extent to which the Missile Crisis .
 The events of October 1962 were instrumental in the development of Cuba’s international identity along self-consciously racial lines, even though this ran counter to traditionally-held myths of a colour-blind society . I shall argue that the events of that day were instrumental .
 The story of the Missile Crisis is probably very familiar to most of you . I will not take up too much time by going into details of the crisis .
 The sequence of events that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war has been told and re-told by scholars of the United States . Each version of events has a slightly different re-telling of the events that led to war .
 The 49th Parallel Conference Special Edition, Summer 2006 version similarly cast Cuba as ‘at best a pawn of the Soviet Union, at worst a raging mute offstage’; in any case marginal to the real action between the two superpowers .
 Cuban writers have focused on how the crisis influenced the development of revolutionary ideology . Cuban writers, however, have focused upon how it influenced the revolutionary revolution .
 Laclau and Mouffe have theorized that ‘social antagonisms occur because social agents are unable to attain their identities, and because they construct an “enemy” who is deemed responsible for this “failure’’ By analyzing the Missile Crisis with reference
 The Cuban leadership really didn't want the nuclear weapons; what they sought was a show of solidarity with the USSR in order to deter U.S. aggression . Cuban leadership didn’t want nuclear weapons, the Cuban leader said .
 If it had been only a matter only of our own defense, we would not have accepted the deployment of the missiles. If it were a matter of only our own defence, we wouldn't have accepted it. We would not accept it.
 The Venezuelan government was very zealous in protecting the image of the revolution in Latin America . But not because we were afraid of the dangers that might follow the deployment of the missiles here, rather, it was because this would damage the image .
 Cuban leaders did not want secrecy about the decision to accept missiles . But once the decision had been made, they did want secrecy . Cuban leaders wanted secrecy .
 Castro believed that a show of solidarity with the international socialist camp would best serve the island’s security interests . Having been cast adrift politically and economically within the Americas, Castro believed .
 Cuba’s international identity as a leader in the fight against imperialism had saved it from overt military intervention by the U.S. Up until the missile crisis, Cuba had been spared overt intervention .
 Castro demonstrates the consciousness he has of the continuing existence of the rule of violence, says Castro . Castro demonstrates that he has a consciousness of the continued existence of violence . Castro: "What Castro demonstrates is the consciousness ... he has ... of the fact that violence exists"
 This more than anything enraged the Cubans, who had always claimed supremacy in terms of morality and dignity . The Cuban government has always claimed that it had always been superior to the U.S.
 "No one can come under that banner or any other banner to inspect our country," says President Obama . No one will be allowed to inspect the country, he says .
 "We know what we are doing, and we know how we must defend our integrity and our sovereignty," says President Obama . "We must defend ourselves and our integrity," says Obama .
 Khrushchev’s October 28 letter to Kennedy ordered the removal of missiles from Cuba . That is our definitive answer to the illusions and to the proposals for carrying out inspections in our territory"".
 Nobody in Cuba knew about secret negotiations between Khrushchev and Kennedy . The Cubans had assumed that talks were at an impasse . The secret negotiations were secret .
 U.S. state officials routinely describe Third World leaders as immature, irrational, or overly emotional . Such language is akin to that used by United States state officials when discussing Third . World leaders .
 Interpellation is a ‘speculary’ or mirror-like process, in which a subject can only recognize itself in an external image that is fixed and absolute . It is this fixed image which can in turn confer an identity on the subject .
 For our purposes, we can connect this with Laclau and Mouffe’s previously mentioned writings on the construction of the enemy . The construction of an enemy is the work of Mouffe and Lacau .
 The result was a ‘peeling away’ or ‘shedding’ of a particular ‘false consciousness’ held by the leadership . Cuba’s geographical proximity and close cultural ties with the U.S. led by the Cuban leadership .
 Antonio Maceo was a highly regarded black military leader in the Cuban War of Independence against Spanish rule . Maceo led the Cuban army in the war of independence against Spanish rulers . Maceos was a member of the Cuban military during the Cuban Revolution .
 His name invoked in this statement by Guevara acts on the national consciousness in the same manner as the phrase with which I started this paper . Signifying a common African slave ancestry – previously shackled, but now liberated from bondage – is a common ancestor .
 In the absence of a significant native Indian population, U.S. hegemonic relations with Cuba were rooted in the cultivation of the European/Spanish and negation of the African racial and cultural roots . Cuba was largely dominated by the European influence of Spain and Spain .
 This idealistic ‘new man’ was to be an unselfish, self-sacrificing, frugal, and socialized, and egalitarian human being, armed and ready to assist revolutionary groups throughout Latin America .
 The Organization for Solidarity with the Peoples of Africa, Asia, and Latin America was launched in the wake of the Tricontinental Conference, held in Havana in January 1966 . Cuba had already provided military assistance to Algeria, and formed close ties to Congo-Brazzaville
 Che Guevara met with leaders of the main nationalist groups from the Portuguese colonies in 1964 . Within a year Cuba had begun providing weapons and military advisers to the MPLA in Angola, the PAIGC in Guinea-Cape Verde, and FRELIMO of Moz
 Cuba's African policy from the 1960s had far greater success than its efforts in Latin America . Cuba’s African policy was far more successful in Africa than its Latin American efforts .
 In his diaries, Guevara noted his inability to communicate with the Bolivian Indians in any meaningful way . By September 1964, all Latin American countries except Mexico had broken relations with Cuba .
 His frustration at their inscrutability, and enduring belief that they would betray him, contrasted sharply with his experiences in Congo-Brazzaville in 1966, where he was readily embraced as a leader within the revolutionary forces .
 It is a matter of debate whether Guevara might have been more successful in Bolivia if Martí’s efforts to define Cuban identity according to mestizaje, a combination of the Spanish and the Indian, had been more success .
 The problem with Martí’s rhetorical invocation of the Indian in the process of national self-identification is that it eliminates the role of the African . Martí: ‘The problem of course with . the . invocation of . the Indian is that the . role of .
 The axiom that there are no races in Cuba belongs to the ‘history of the problematic silencing of race as a significant ideological category for the revolution’ However, the growing significance of Africa as a fertile site for the expression of Cuban internationalism, made it possible for Cub
 Cuban leadership could formulate foreign policy based upon an international identity that is essentially Caribbean . Articulation of the 'Congo' within discourses on security after the Missile Crisis would ultimately allow the Cuban leadership to formulate a foreign policy .
 It yielded and still yields a world where identities are in a state of perennial flux . Identity is constantly being revised in new encounters and improvised to confront new challenges .
 It is precisely this process that keeps the culture in motion and prevents its identity from ever crystallizing into a reified, recognizable entity . The process is what keeps culture's identity in motion .