 The study documents the Pentagon's resistance to, and resentment of, President Kennedy’s foreign policy, especially on Cuba and Vietnam . It documents the military's resentment of Kennedy's foreign policy .
 He avoided nuclear holocaust during the Cuban missile crisis . He negotiated a partial nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union with the U.S.
 President Obama took office with a muscular promise that the U.S. would “pay any price, bear any burden” in the battle for freedom . He took office in 2009 with a promise to pay any price or burden .
 Kennedy was “far more interesting intellectually and far less appealing personally” than his family and friends wanted the world to know, Naftali says . Kennedy was a ‘more interesting intellectual and less appealing person’ than his friends wanted, he says .
 Obama targeted critics of the deal who supported the disastrous invasion of Iraq in 2003 . The polemical fire in Obama’s address targeted the many critics of Iraq .
 The setting invoked JFK’s ‘strategy of peace’ speech, delivered on the same campus in June 1963 . JFK delivered the speech on the campus in the same location in June 2013 .
 Obama's Iran nuclear deal to JFK’s Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty took up much of the speech . The analogy of the nuclear deal with JFK's limited nuclear test ban treaty took up a lot of the talk .
 His bold but deft diplomacy spared the world a war that might have gone nuclear . Obama's bold and deft diplomacy saved the world from a nuclear war .
 President Kennedy's offense in the judgment of today’s right-wing is that he resolved the Cuban missile crisis in secret collaboration with communists . President Kennedy is accused of working with communists in secret . Kennedy was president of the United States during the Cold War .
 At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials . Study sheds new light on thinking of U.S. military leaders at height of Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 As President Kennedy searched for a solution that did not involve a war that might have gone nuclear, the Pentagon was itching to escalate . President Kennedy was searching for a way to avoid a nuclear war .
 Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials at height of missile crisis . At height of Cuban missile crisis, Pentagon proposes assassination of officials .
 After the funeral, Washington’s response firms up rexbradford . President Kennedy's body was laid to rest in Arlington cemetery on Monday .
 A host of foreign dignitaries took part, including British Prime Minister Home, French President Charles de Gaulle, and many others .
 The federal government’s response to the assassination was taking shape . Meanwhile, the federal government's response to that assassination was under way .
 In Syria, lessons of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, Michael Dobbs writes . Dobbs notes similarities between President Obama's predicament in Syria and President Kennedy’s dilemma in Cuba . After the funeral, Washington's response firms up .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War, writes; . In Syria, lessons of the Cuban missile crisis are learned from the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 We're looking for experts in all aspects of the JFK story to respond in writing to reader’s questions . We’re looking to experts to respond to readers' questions .
 JFK Facts is a daily feature of JFK Facts on CNN iReport . Follow us on Twitter @JFKF and @CNN.com .