 Defeat looked inevitable until the USA influenced the UN to send hundreds of thousands of troops to protect the south . U.S. influenced UN decision to send troops to the south to protect its southern neighbour .
 Khrushchev was not happy with the reforms that Imre Nagy was putting down and tried to make him reason . However, when he didn't stop implementing capitalist ideas, he sent in the tanks . The tanks sent in when Nagy didn't comply with his plans .
 In November Spontaneous revolutions occured in Hungary and there was viscious fighting which lasted for 4 days . In November there were 4 days of fighting in Hungary .
 The spy plane was shot down by a soviet missile on May 1st 1960 . The pilot, Gary Powers, was taken for questioning and the plane was recovered by the sovies .
 The USA tried to cover it up however they didn't know that the pilot had admitted spying . The pilot admitted spying to the U.S. and the pilot admitted it .
 Khrushchev announced he had the pilot and plane with the pictures and asked for a full U.S. apology but Eisenhower didn't give one . On the 7th of May, he announced that he had a full United States apology .
 Khrushchev described the United States as someone impossible to deal with . This led to a breakdown of talks at the Paris summit and the cold war was getting colder .
 Barbed wire mesh armed with machine gunners was put around West Berlin and gradually grew into a huge wall keeping East Berliners out of West Berlin . Gary Powers was sentenced to 10 years in prison but was swapped after 1 year for another top spy .
 East Berlin was built to stop East Germans escaping communism through West Berlin . East Germans had done so up to 1961 to escape from the communist regime .
 Castro turned to the USSR and asked for alliance in turn for trade . This led to Castro turning to the Soviet Union for trade in Cuba . Castro asked the USSR to join the Cuban revolution in Cuba in 1959 .
 This was a massive failure as they were quickly defeated and received little support . This was the first time they had a chance to be able to win support for their cause .
 Kennedy convinced that Cuba was now a Soviet Satellite State . This led to Castro publically declaring himself a marxist . Castro now totally relied on the USSR for support .
 His reforms included more democratic cencepts such as free trade with the West, easing of state control and censorship and allowing the capitalist ideas of competition .
 Brezhnev, the new leader of the Soviet Union was not happy with these reforms . Dubcek promised not to leave the Warsaw Pact, he felt that it could threaten the prosperity of the other soviet nations and encourage the growth of capitalism .
 Home-made petrol bombs were made by students called molotov cocktails . However there was some light-weight resistance mainly in the form of homemade petrol bombs .
 Underground radio and TV were kept going to inform the outside of events . Underground radio, TV and TV kept going in order to keep the outside informed of events. Underground radio kept going .
 Dubcek was replaced with Gustav Husak who reversed all the reforms . Husak was replaced in the spring by Dubceke himself .
 Brezhnev created the 'Brezhneva Doctrine' which declared that a threat to one socialist country was a risk to all of them . This led to the creation of the doctrine, which led to a state-sanctioned state of terror .
 He indicated that force would be used to keep the satellite states under Soviet control if needed . 23 of 40 Reasons for Detente are listed .
 Both the Soviet Union and the USA were worried about the conflict in the middle East . Oil was the focus of the conflict between the USSR and USA .
 Oil supplies from that area were vital for both countries . The suez canal was important for sea routes and oil supplies .
 Communist and non-communist countries had become involved in the conflict between arabs and israelis . Communist countries had been involved in conflict between Arab and Israeli .
 Both Nixon and Brezhnev were keen to improve relations so that they could increase trade . SALT 1 Strategic Arms Limitation Talks limited the number of ICBM's .
 35 countries signed agreement including USSR and USA marking the high point in Detente . Helsinki August 1975, Helsinki August August 1975 .
 The West recognisis the frontiers of Eastern Europe and Soviet influence . The Soviets agreed to buy United States grain and to export oil to the West . All countries agreed to try and improve human rights .
 Since 1955, the Soviet Union had been giving aid and amendents, the USA tried to compete but never gave more than one third of the USSR's aid . 1979, the communist president, Amin, took over with many large muslim groups opposed to him. 1979, Amin took over
 The president was killed and the old president, Barak Karmal took over again with soviet help . The old president was overthrown and Barak took control of the country .
 China said they would support the islamic guerilla group, the mujaheddin to try and regain control of the country . China said that they would be supporting the guerillas .
 Carter also reacted by boycotting the moscow olympic games, stopping trade with the Soviet Union to starve them economically . Carter also sent 1800 marines to protect the oil routes in the middle east .
 The mujaheddin were well equipped thanks to China and the USA so they took control of the country . They used guerilla warfare tactics to fight the Soviet troops .
 The 125,000 Soviet troops could not defeat the rebels and suffered increasing casualties . In 1982 the massive attack on the Panjahir valley failed which proved the point that this was, like the war in vietnam for the Americans was unwinnable .
 Mikhail Gorbachev started talks with the USA in 1987 which ended 1n 1988 at geneva with Reagen . The new leader of the soviet union was elected in 1985 and started talks in 1987 .
 Over 3 million afghans fled to Pakistan or Iran and 1 million civilians died . 1 million people were killed in Afghanistan .
 Reagan increased the U.S. spending on weapons from $178 billion to $367 billion in 1980s . Reagan spent $367billion on weapons in the 1980s and '80s .
 Reagan spent more and more money on trying to develop more sophisticated weapons such as the cruise missile, the neutron bomb and the MX missile . Reagan spent the most of the money on developing the weapons .
 The aim was to prevent any long range soviet missiles from reaching the USA by making a huge lazer shield in space . There were huge protest movements in poland caused by high food prices and fuel shortages .
 People were allowed to buy and sell for profit for the first time in 60 years . Gorbachev allowed freedom of speech . Political Prisoners were to be released .
 In 1989, Gorbachev' popularity in the world was at an all time high, in october he was awarded the noble peace prize . In December he and George Bush met to discuss the end of the cold war .
 The communist countries of Eastern Europe had become more and more with the control from Moscow during the 1980's . Eastern Europe's communist countries became more and . more with . the control of Moscow during . the 1980s . The communist . countries had more than a decade of Soviet control .
 March 1989, Gorbachev told the communist leaders of Eastern Europe that the Red Arm would no longer be able to defend them . Free elections were held after the increasing pressure from the people in Demonstrations, this was the first time since 1939 .
 In November 1989 the communist leader, Todor Zhikov, since 1954, resigned under increasing pressure . Free elections were held the next year in April 1990 .
 In 1990 Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia declared themselves independent of the Soviet Union and held there own free elections in which non-communist governments were set up . People were unhappy at the slow effect that Gorbachevs reforms were having .