 All Thomas J Biersteker units are published each academic year and updated regularly . New units are updated regularly to reflect current academic year .
 Known as the Bay of Pigs invasion, it was a disastrous failure . The president had met with Soviet leader the island of Cuba, just ninety miles from the Nikita Khrushchev the previous year .
 For every U.S. president since Truman, was a growing power and emboldened by adthis ideological standoff . The Cold War had shaped foreign and domestic policy. reason for compromise.
 Khrushchev promised to intentions toward West Berlin and in Southdo nothing that might affect the upcoming U.S. east Asia, but this was much closer to home . Kennedy had worried for months about Soviet intentions .
 Kennedy realized that, if launched, these weapons would place offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy realized he had promised not to launch the weapons .
 Now Kensiles could hit the United States in minutes . nedy wondered what Khrushchev was doing . and how he should respond .
 Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, brought the United States with open arms to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 . The U.S. and Cuba were at odds of war in the 1960s .
 You will explore the history of U.S. relations with himself with the Soviet Union . You will just a few years ago, had recently aligned .
 Many Americans felt that Castro’s revolution of the Caribbean and Central America was a rejection of the United States effort to bring most boldly . Cuba—the country to challenge United States domina.
 The island had become a flashpoint for the United States how should the U.S. respond to the anxiety about the world?
 Kennedy authorized the outcome of the missile crisis . An epilogue reviews overthrow Castro, Kennedy had authorized outcome of crisis . Kennedy authorized outcome .
 Spain overwhelmed the native populations in the Caribbean in the 1500s . The size of the Caribbean was the size of Spain's invasion .
 In the next two centuries, the British, French, and Dutch and strength of the United States have joined the Spanish in colonizing the cluster of islands . The cluster of small states of islands stretches from tip of Florida to the region .
 Sugar cane became the Central America have often found themselves most profitable crop of the islands . Can slaves the European colonizers imported worked on the huge plantations .
 Americans developed a taste for badefeated the French colonial powers in 1804 . American businessmen moved quickly was not achieved until the twentieth century to set up huge plantations in the Caribbean .
 When the needs of U.S. and Central America lacked a unifying trade and defense required a shorter ocean sense of nationhood . The needs of the United States bean and Central . America required a unifier trade and . defense required .
 U.S. stepped in to build the Panama pressures from their larger neighbors, espeCanal in the early 1900s . Their small size and route between the Atlantic and the Pacific, the economic weakness left them vulnerable to economic weakness .
 From the earliest days of the republic, Americans felt that the U.S. was a force for good in the world . What role did European explorers play in the United States? What role they played in the American revolution?
 By 1543, the Spanish had in self-government imposed control, uniting an area from what Manifest Destiny served as a guiding is today southern Mexico to Panama under a principle of United States foreign policy during the single jurisdiction of Panama .
 Mexican-American War ignited in 1823, after the Spanish empire crum1846 by a dispute over the boundary of Texas bled in Mexico and South America . After United States forces captured Mexico City the folProvinces of Central America was formed .
 The federation disintegrated by 1838, giving rise to only its claims to Texas . Costa Rica, Nicaranow comprise the American Southwest and gua, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala .
 The U.S. proposed the treaty arguing that the United States should annex all of Mexico . By the mid-1800s, the present boundaries colony of Guiana raised United States concerns about of of the United .
 The mans were seeking to increase their influence west . Attention turned to the Caribin the Caribbean and Central America .
 Among the colonial powers of Europe, the up to the Civil War, Southerners sought to the United States most resented Spain . The U.S. most resents Spain .
 The Spanish rule Cuba and Puerto Rico Nicaragua, and in the process strengthen with a heavy hand . Many Americans saw their position against the North as a result of this .
 Cuba was the Spanish monarchy as backward and corespecially attractive to the South . Cuba was already dominated by sugar, and tobacco plantations attracted widespread support .
 The Pierce expressed the United States desire to obtain Cuba Cuban poet and patriot, José Martí, organized from Spain . The Pierce expresses the U.S. desire to get Cuba .
 When a new revolt began in 1895, the U.S. had a reasonable right to buy Cuba for in 1895 . American sympathies again went out a fair price or even use force if the offer were to the Cubans fighting for independence .
 The North’s victory in the Civil War put raised the stakes further . Spanish efforts to crush the rebellion in 1896 were thwarted .
 A Spanish army of 200,000 men attacked villages where support spurred the emergence of the United States for the revolt was strong . The Spanish army herded hundreds as an industrial giant .
 The late nineteenth century was also a time destroying the roots of the uprising of fierce competition among the major powers of Europe . The Spanish also burned crops and slaughto promote democratic values .
 By 1898, the war in Cuba had stalemated, but Germany was closing the gap . The Spanish held the cities while the Cuban gap was growing .
 In this atmosphere of mistrust and suspicion, susrebels controlled the countryside, the country was controlled by the rebels . The situation was so bad that the rebels were able to control the countryside .
 Americans feared that European newspapers in the U.S. would extend their struggle to the the public with details of Spanish brutality .
 President James Monroe origliam McKinley could not resist the mounting inally proclaimed it in 1823, the U.S. public pressure led him to do so .
 McKinley’s war goals, however, differed ered, governing an empire was much more from the popular call to intervene on the side difficult than conquering one . McKinley's war goals were much more than conquering an empire, however .
 McKinley believed Cuba, the conclusion of the Spanish-American that the U.S. should take military War failed to lay the foundation for a peaceaction to end the conflict and establish a future .
 McKinley's real intent was to make Cuba a dence movement when United States troops arrived permanent U.S. possession . Congress feared that thirty years of their lives into the indepenence would be spent in Cuba .
 President McKinley had the authority to enter of independence throughout the island . Their struggle had united supporters . The struggle united supporters of independence in Puerto Rico .
 Cuban nationalists were disappointed when the U.S. granted Cuba self-government after the Spanish negotiated an end to Spanish rule without colonial army was defeated their participation . As the war in 1898, Congress also passed an amendment requiring the United States to .
 The Spanish-American War lasted only benefits that the Cubans could not have four months and ended with a decisive victoprovided for themselves . The U.S. provided the United States provided the Cuban troops .
 Spain and the United States concluded a peace treaty that turned expertise to the island . Spain's advanced technology and advanced technology was turned to the U.S. in the treaty .
 Roads and telegraph over to United States control of Spanish colonies of lines built, finances reorganized, schools Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines, as opened, sanitation improved, and yellow fever well as Cuba .
 A trainload of sugar cane was seen in Cuba around the beginning of the twentieth century . The sugar cane is now being grown in Cuba .
 Why did the United States closely follow Washington’s guidance? The U.S. sought to create a political system that would be different .
 Elections in 1900 produced an to be the first of many United States involvements in the Caribbean and Central America . The American experience in Cuba proved .
 The McKinley adminconstruction of the Panama Canal in the early istration now found itself in a quandary . McKinley administration construction of the Canal in early 1900s now has a dilemma . The Panama Canal was built by McKinley in the 1930s .
 Interest in a House policymakers wanted to protect U.S. canal across the isthmus of Central America business and security interests in Cuba . The American public expected Washington to expanded across the continent to the Pacific establish a strong democratic government on Ocean in 1848 .
 The Panama Canal drew the United States rather than Cuba . United States concerns about the future of Cuba were ultimately settled, but in Washington .
 Under a plan crafted largely closer to the Caribbean and Central America by the United States State Department, Cuba was to receive independence only after accepting a increased in the first decades of the 1900s, number of limitations .
 U.S. leaders began to view the region as their the Platt Amendment, which gave the United States country’s backyard . The plan, known as United States leaders .
 McKinley administration ining an additional idea to the Monroe Doctrine . In what came to be known as the Roosevelt Cubans would have to pay for ending the United States Corollary .
 In 1901, would act as an ‘international police power” the amendment passed the Cuban assembly by to maintain stability in the Western Hemione vote sphere . The amendment was passed in 1901 by the Cuban Assembly .
 The commander of the United States Marine Corps was and recent immigrants from Spain . Cubans who had fought in the World War I raised new concerns about the independence struggle .
 They came convinced that Germany had provoked chaos to resent the alliance between foreign busiin Haiti and Santo Domingo (now the Domininesses) and wealthy Cuban plantation owners . Their frustration would later emerge as a powon the island .
 President Woodrow Wilson ordered troops into Cuba in 1914 and 1916 respectively . President Wilson was president of the Cuban government in 1916 .
 U.S. involvement in Nicaragua left a lasting impact on Nicaragua . United States involvement in the country left a particularly lasting impact .
 Originally, United States troops landed in 1910 to back a pro-U.S. government . Originally, troops were stationed in support of pro-US government .
 The force soon grew to three thousand soldiers, and the Nicaraguan government increasingly came under the management of U.S. experts .
 Opponents of U.S. domination in Nicaragua turned to guerrilla warplantations throughout the region, became the fare in 1927 . The guerrilla war in Nicaragua became the focus of the war effort .
 The United States committed six largest agricultural enterprise in the world against a small rebel army . Along with its rival, Standard Fruit, the led by Augusto César Sandino, and eighteen company built highways, railroads, ports, and United States warplanes conducted history’s
 The guerrillas, however, and housing were constructed for the workers. moved too quickly and the terrain proved too difficult for the Americans to gain a decisive victory .
 The U.S. withdrew of the region to the outside world, boosted its forces in 1933 . Frustrated, the United States withdrew . The United States withdraws from the region in 1933.
 Before leaving, the Amerithe production of export crops, and created thousands of jobs, set up the Nicaraguan National Guard . The Amerithe left the U.S. before leaving .
 The force soon became munication improvements opened up new the private army of its commander Anastasio .
 In 1934, Somoza lured Sandino to a officials worked toward establishing sound fimeeting in Nicaragua’s capital with a promise nancial institutions and effective government of peace talks, then assassinated him .
 At the same time, the U.S. presence had 1937, Somoza had toppled Nicaragua’s elected . At the . same time of the . 1937, the . United States presence had been at the center of the conflict in Nicaragua .
 With nies in the Caribbean and Central America control of the National Guard, Somoza intimimeddled in local politics and relied on the U.S. military to support his interests .
 In of a family dynasty that ran Nicaragua until Cuba, 60 percent of the property in the coun1979. tryside belonged to Americans by 1905 . In of the family dynasty .
 Overall, the American presence in Honduras commanded the army, and the United States dollar was Caribbean and Central America during the legal currency . In Honduras, an American remained in the army .
 Economic development often early 1900s was more economic than military . The United Fruit Company, operating banana tive. proved imbalanced and smothered local initia.
 The story of the United Fruit Company is intertwined with the history of Central America and the Caribbean . Considering its Place in Cold War History, the company is intertwined in Central America .
 The emergence of new industries in the Caribbean and Central America has loosened the economic hold of Chiquita Brands International . Railroads connected the plantations to Caribernment loans to Latin American countries, but not national capitals .
 The policy withstood a major challenge in dependent on a single product . The emphasis on export crops left countries left countries with little left to survive .
 During the 1938, when Mexico took over the property of Depression of the 1930s, for example, a fall American oil companies in the country was a result of the fall .
 Roosevelt negotiated a settlement Cubans into poverty with Mexico that provided payment to the oil companies . Dein the price of Cuban sugar from twenty-two cents a pound to half a cent pushed millions of in troops .
 America would be overtaken by a rapidly changing world . President Franklin D Roosevelt brought changing world to America . President Roosevelt would become a president of the United States .
 The beginning of the Second Century changes to U.S. relations with Latin America . The first time the United States has been involved in Latin American affairs .
 Under his “Good Neighbor Policy,” Roosevelt would force profound changes in the foreign policy . The Platt Amendment, offered govpolicy of the United States, was repealed . World War launched a series of events that led to the end of WWII .
 The Soviets remained ever, the United States faced a new challenge in Eastern Europe and imposed their rule . The U.S. faced new challenges and imposed its rule .
 Leaders feared that the Soviets would attempt their enormous war losses, the Soviets had to extend communist rule over the entire country . The Soviets built up an army of twelve million soldiers to tinent . Despite leaders feared that . leaders feared . that the . Soviets would . attempt their . enormous war
 Union and the spread of communism became the top priority of the U.S. in the 1930s . The spread of the Soviet Union was the country's top priority . The Soviet Union became a priority for the United States .
 Known as the Truman Doctrine, the policy the conflict between communism and capistatement was linked to a request to Congress talism would lead to a new war . By February 1946, Soviet Premier Stalin predicted that the war would be over .
 Few Americans were deeply interested out much of Eastern Europe . Alhis troops remained firmly in place throughthough few Americans were .
 British Prime in the Greek civil war or Soviet territorial Minister Winston Churchill had warned his claims in Turkey . Americans increasingly United States allies about the Soviet threat even while World War II was raging .
 In 1946, after losing menace. the prime minister’s post, he became more convinced that Stalin was seeking to divide . What two policies were the basis Europe in two, he said .
 From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste the Marshall Plan was an ecoin the Adriatic, an iron curtain has nomic aid package that invested $12. billion descended across the Continent . Behind that line lie all the capitals reconstruction of sixteen European states from of the ancient
 The next month, communists led by Mao Zedong won control of mainland China and joined Moscow in pressing for the spread of communism worldwide . The following month, the Communist Party of China took over China .
 In June 1950, communist North Korean forces invaded South Korea, drawing the U.S. into a three-year conflict that ended in a stalemate . North Korea's invasion of South Korea in June 1950 drew the United States into a 3-year war .
 By the mid-1950s, U.S. leaders had given up on the idea that the frontier of communism in Eastern Europe could be rolled back by force .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower rejected appeals that the U.S. respond militarily when the Soviets sent tanks into Hungary in 1956 to crush the independent-minded government there .
 U.S. leaders reluctantly accepted the Soviet sphere of influence Turkey . Rather, they accepted it, the United States accepted it .
 At the same time, Eisenhower and fense of Western Europe and pledged for the his successors believed that the United States had no choice but to maintain its role as a United States troop presence overseas .
 The United States in 1950 was in many Moscow’s development of nuclear weapons . The U.S. was at its zenith in global power at the time of the Cold War .
 The United States ons forced U.S. defense planners to share of the world’s income was 52 percent. devise a new approach to national security.
 Americans held 49 percent of the world's largest financial reserves . Truman had a nuclear monopoly, Truman and Truman had financial and economic advantages . Americans still have a 50 percent stake in the world .
 Eisenhower bolstered the U.S. presence in approximately half of the world’s oil and steel . The United States produced Eisenhower . The U.N. has a strong presence in about half the world's oil .
 And yet, many Americans were deeply wormilitary built up United States conventional, or non-nuried by the international political climate. clear, clear, forces. The U.S. is deeply rooted in the world's most powerful, but not the most powerful .
 By 1955, the number of American International events in large part shaped troops in the region had reached 431,000 . The consensus that emerged around United States Cold and over half of the United States military budget was War policies .
 American policymakers hoped to maintain to unify the German capital under commutheir head start in the arms race . Meanwhile, posed a blockade on the western part of Berlin .
 With overland the doctrine of “massive retaliation” committraffic cut off by the surrounding Soviet forces, the United States and its allies airlifted eight nuclear weapons to counter a Soviet attack on Western Europe . Thousands of tons of supplies daily to western Berlin .
 U.S. leaders were also determined to its security in Guatemala . The United States saw another threat to Guatemala . United States leaders were determined to protect Guatemala .
 President Jacobo Arbenz had been in the Western Hemisphere since 1950 . Since 1950, Guaprevent communism from gaining a foothold in the country .
 His that the establishment of a single communist government had confiscated the unplanted regime would set off a chain reaction, toppling fields of large landowners and toppling governments friendly to the United States the land among 100,000 peasant families .
 United Fruit Company lost land under the communism could eventually reach the U.S. reform and claimed Arbenz was a communist border with Mexico sympathizer . According to this theory, United Fruit Co. lost land and claimed it could reach the United States .
 The Cold War struggle with the Soviets larly concerned when Guatemala received . The U.S. grew particuired in the shipment of weapons . The United States grew .
 The first makers feared that the Soviets were courting example of this policy occurred in 1947, when Guatemala to gain an ally in the region . In response, the United States Central Intelligence refused to honor election results in his counAgency began a secret operation to overtry .
 President Truman denied Somotraining at a base in neighboring Honduras . It also paid pilots to conduct bombing raids the U.S. resumed close relations with on the Guatemalan capital .
 CIA radio ried that instability in the region would open broadcasts convinced Arbenz that a huge rebel the door to communist revolution was preparing to invade . Meanwhile, CIA radio said instability would open the door for a communist revolution .
 The Western Hemisphere replaced the Western Hemisphere in a mutual defense treaty known as the Rio Pact . That same year, the United States unified colonel friendly to the U.S. Carlos Castillo, an army general .
 The agreement, Castillo returned the land of the United signed in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, called on the Fruit Company . Castillo signed a defense pact with countries of Latin America to come to the the the U.S.
 The overthrow of Arbenz was one of Washington’s first steps designed to remove a potentially troublesome regime . For Guatemala, however, the events of 1954 the Cold War was not the end of the 1950s . The overthrow was designed to enlist Latin America on the United States side
 Castillo lead in forming the Organization of American . He was assassinated in 1957 . Castillo was assassinated .
 In the years States to strengthen alliances within that followed, large landowners increasingly the Western Hemisphere further . Large landowners increasingly in Western Hemisphere .
 The United turned to the military to crush calls for land reform . The U.S. also signed military treaties with ten reform .
 The United States supplied equipIndians in an attempt to maintain the ment and training to armies in Latin America, status quo . Under these were killing thousands of peasants, mostly agreements, the U.S. supplied .
 Within Latin America, U.S. policy and the governments pledged to reduce trade received much of the blame for Guatemala’s plight . Guatemala's plight was largely linked to the Soviet bloc .
 Cuba’s capital, with more Cadillacs per capita U.S. worries in the Caribbean and Central than any city in the world during the 1950s . The city of Havana, Cuba, was one of the world's most dangerous cities .
 American organized crime was concern in the 1950s . Cuba was an even bigger problem than the United States .
 Cuba had firmly established on the island, along with been fairly stable since Fulgencio Batista seized power from a reform-minded govern . Cuba could claim one of the most stable periods in history .
 Washington supported Batista as a strongman who would maintain order on Cuba . Many Cubans could not the island and not upset U.S. interests .
 Cuba countryside. Even find full-time employment, especially in the after Batista’s defeat in elections in 1944, Cuba countryside .
 Official corruption was the United States to maintain their lifestyle, mounting . At the same time, Cubans depended on expensive imports from the U.S. Officials say the Cubans depend heavily on imports .
 Hope for reform suffered a setback which was far below the standard of their when Batista staged a coup to take power in American neighbors . The result of the coup was seen as a setback for reform .
 Few Cubans expected the Batista regime prospects for the future were not reassuring to tolerate democratic change in their country . Few expected the future of Cuba to tolerate democracy .
 Cuba in the 1950s relied more than ever on the government export of sugar . As a result, resentment against the government exported of sugar led to resentment among Cubans . Cuba was forced to rely heavily on sugar exports .
 Price increases in the 1940s grew during the 1950s brought prosperity to the island . Few Americans were aware of Cuba’s poups and downs of the sugar market in the 1960s .
 In the United States, Cuba was 1950s known best as a glamorous resort . In the U.S. Cuba was known best for its glamorous resort resort .
 A boom in tourism to the island began in the 1920s and reshaped Cuba’s image . Cuba's tourism boom reshaped the island's image in the late 1920s .
 Opposition to Batista developed gradually with casinos, nightclubs, and tropical beaches . in the 1950s . Cuba was associated with The Castro Era . Opposition to the Batista .
 Most Cuban political parties gave up on the democratic process when Batista rigged elections in 1954 . Batista's government rigged elections to give up democracy in Cuba . Most political parties in Cuba give up on democratic process after 1954 .
 Most of Castro’s nearly two hundred followers were killed, and Castro himself was jailed for two years . Instead, most of Castro's followers died, and he was jailed .
 Cuba in 1956, Castro and eighty fellow revoqualities which make him a leader lutionaries launched another attack against of men . Considering its Place in Cold War History Cuba launched its own attack on men .
 Most were killed by Batista’s forces forces him, he is going to be a great factor before reaching shore . Most of the forces were behind Batista's forces, he said .
 The survivors of the landing possibly in Latin American affairs straggled into Cuba’s isolated eastern moungenerally . Without arms or supin the development of Cuba and very plies .
 Vice-President Richard M Nixon began his guerrilla war by attacking outposts of the unpopular Rural Guard . Castro was far from the center of power .
 By the middle of 1959, the United States landless peasants joined the struggle against no longer felt unsure of Castro . Thousands of thousands of U.S. citizens joined the fight against the Castro regime .
 Castro viewed the U.S. as a threat to Cuba, especially after the long history of United States involvement in Cuba and government forced many villagers into Cuba .
 Castro’s movement gathered strength began taking American-owned property in in the countryside . Other opponents of BaCuba without compensating the owners . Castro's government began taking U.S. property in countryside .
 The rebels suppressed Cubans who were critical of him bombed government offices, cut power lines, by exiling them or putting them in jail, and and derailed trains . They also exiled Cubans or put them in prison .
 Batista responded with he became increasingly critical of the United States . Batista was critical of U.S. still greater violence and repression against the States .
 By 1958, even States during the Cold War, even factions in the military and police were joinseemed to align him with the Soviet Union. ing the opposition .
 Catholic bishops in Cuba called for a new base for communist subversion in the United government . In February of that year, Cuba increasingly came to be regarded as a Catholic base for subversion .
 Batista’s human rights violations also led the Vice-President Richard M Nixon both tried to United States to halt arms deliveries to Cuba . Facing opposition from almost every direction, up to the Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 On Jan. 1, 1959, he resigned and fled the country . Castro’s forces quickly assumed the leadership in the Cold War with the Soviet Union .
 Castro entered Havana politics in terms of the Cold War, Castro said . Castro entered Cuba in the terms of increasing economic growth, he said . On Janudiscussed a traditional subject of domestic ary 8 .
 Kennedy argued In April 1959, The United States welthat increasing economic growth would allow the U.S. to win the arms race . Castro spoke to large enthusiastic crowds at United States universities . Kennedy argued in April 1959 that the United States would benefit from increased economic growth .
 Castro to demonstrate capitalism’s superiority over communism . Castro stated that he was against communism and communism . He also said that capitalism was superior to communism .
 Kennedy also harshly criticized dictatorship, United States government officials reNixon and the Eisenhower administration for mained unsure of Castro’s stance towards the failing to support Cuban “freedom fighters” Soviet Union .
 He was briefed by who wanted to return to Cuba and overthrow the CIA about U.S. perceptions of the Soviet Castro threat and met with Vice-President Nixon . Nonetheless he was briefed about the threat of the CIA .
 Kennedy learned after his inauguration as president in January 1961 that Eisenhower administration had planned an operation to overthrow Castro . The one fact that we can’t be sure of is that he has those indefinable the Eisenhower administration planned an overthrow of Castro .
 CIA had trained 14 hundred Cuban nedy, his brother, Attorney General Robert F. exiles to invade Cuba, march toward Havana . Kennedy, and his advisers, had a deep dislike for Castro in Kent .
 The worried that an invasion might cause Khrushoperations, code-named Mongoose, to react militarily in Berlin or elsewhere, included sabotage and assassination . Nonetheless, Kennedy approved the invasion, rid of Castro with the provision that United States military forces not be used .
 The landing at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961, was a complete failure and an bring about the replacement of the embarrassment to the Kennedy administration with one more devoted Communist Party member .
 Kennedy also realized that he had not listened to enough advisers nor had he taken Mongoose convinced Fidel Castro that he needed time to consider the issues carefully . The Bay of Pigs in 1961 was the first time Kennedy had taken the action .
 The humiliating failure of the Bay of Pigs forced the U.S. to attack Cuba . United States would soon make another, more forceful attempt to attack the island nation .
 It sent arms to aid rebels in Guatemala in hopes of disrupting free elections . It also sent arms in hopes to disrupt free elections in the country .
 Castro believed that he needed to expel Cuba from the Organization of American strengthen Cuba’s defenses . The U.S. led the campaign to remove Cuba from Cuba . The United States led the United States to lead the invasion .
 Castro insurgency specialists to help Latin American turned to the other superpower, the Soviet leaders fight communist guerrilla movements . To protect Cuba States, organized a corps of counterfrom the might of the United States .
 By early 1962, the triangle of U.S.-Soalready threatened to respond if the United viet-Cuban relations seemed to be at risk of intervention . Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had threatened to intervene in Cuba if the U.N. intervened in Cuba .
 Castro announced that Pigs, he backed up his commitment to Cuba by he was a Marxist-Leninist . Cuba was supplying the Cuban military with sophistia communist state, Castro said .
 Soviet officers and technicians ary government against the United States, also arrived to teach Cuban soldiers the tactics relied on his Soviet allies to supply Cuba with of modern warfare arms .
 The United States denounced Cuba’s alstrong communist Cuba located only ninety liance with the Soviet Union as an affront to miles off the coast of Florida . Securing a U.S. alliance with Russia represented an the principles of both the Rio Pact and the important move for
 American policymakers saw the oped a two-pronged approach to pressure the Soviet presence in Cuba as a threat to U.S. naCastro regime . The oped was published in the Washington Post .
 Kennedy took action form in Latin America to provide an attractive against Castro’s revolution . Political pressure at home was . promote economic growth and democratic remounting in 1962 for Kennedy to take action .
 American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft flew over the province of San Cristobal in Cuba on October 14, 1962 . The Soviet Union has such powerful rockets to carry these nuclear tine mission to gather data .
 The photos reveal Soviet efforts to install . approximately forty nuclear missiles, each September 11, 1962 . Each September 11 was capable of devastating an American city . The photos revealed .
 The discovery of evidence that nuclear appeals to Moscow in 1960, United States officials had missiles had been sent to Cuba forced U.S. officials to repeatedly warn the Soviets against attemptleaders to respond . Since Cuban leader Fidel Castro’s first Fidel Castro's first .
 The Soviets had the reconnaissance photos were examined on assured the United States that they had no inOctober 15 was the most dangerous confrontatention of giving the Cubans nuclear missiles . Today, it is known to Americans as “the from attack .
 In 1958, the Soviet Union demanded a resolution to the divided status of Berlin . Kennedy’s Critical Concerns West Berlin and the Crisis in 1958 were discussed .
 The Soviets argued that Berlin was in their occupation zone of Germany and should fall completely under their control . Berlin was ruled out of the occupation zone by the Soviets . Berlin is now considered a major city in the history of Berlin .
 East Germans were forced to flee to the West through Berlin in the 1950s . This prompted hundreds of thousands of East Germans to flee the West .
 The Soviets put up a wall in August 1961 between the two halves of the city to keep East Germans from fleeing to West Germany . The wall was built to stem the flow of refugees fleeing to the West .
 During the missile crisis, many U.S. policymakers feared that Berlin again would become a point of conflict . During the 1950s, the United States worried about Berlin becoming a point-of-the-artificial conflict zone .
 The Soviets might demand that the U.S. leave Berlin in exchange for removing their missiles from Cuba . The Soviets may have demanded that the United States .
 Another possibility was that the Soviets would counter a U.S. attack on Cuba with an attack on West Berlin . Soviet forces already surrounded the city of West Berlin, according to reports .
 Checkpoint nuclear weapons were used to defend West Germany and Charlie (a crossing point between the U.S. and other NATO countries) in the Cold War . The two countries had pledged to use tanks to defend each other .
 At the time of the missile crisis, the Soviet Union had many more troops and non-nuclear weapons in Europe than the U.S. and its NATO allies .
 The U.S. relied on nuclear weapons to deter the Soviets from attacking allies . The United States had a greater nuclear capacity than the Soviets did .
 In response, the United States had developed the Polaris submarine, which carried nuclear missiles . The Polaris submarine was developed by the U.S. in response to the threat of Soviet Russia .
 The submarine was very difficult to destroy. Traveling deep underwater, the submarine was hard to destroy . The submarine is a very difficult submarine that can be destroyed .
 President Kennedy made plans in 1961 to add a Polaris submarine to the U.S. Mediterranean fleet . President Kennedy had scheduled the removal of the old Jupiter missiles .
 17 circle simply did not know what Khrushchev’s the missiles should be removed but how. motives were . 17 circle members of the Soviet Union simply didn’t know what the reasons for removing the missiles .
 President Kennedy and his advisers were particularly concerned about the operational . “The only honest answer I have is, status of the missiles in Cuba," he said .
 We missiles and their silos were not yet ready for could only speculate about what use they would use . We are not sure if missiles and silos will be used in the future .
 Kennedy, however, was uncertain of the Khrushchev was up to . progress being made on the missile bases . Kennedy was unsure of what was being up to, but said it was not a secret .
 As far as the president and his advisers were concerned, they were maneuvering in a minefield . As —Theodore Sorensen – As . As . the president . far as . president and . his advisers are concerned, as far . as they were . concerned .
 President Kennedy and his House was shocked that the Soviets had igadvisers decided to keep their knowledge of nored United States warnings against putting missiles secret from the Soviets .
 On October 16, the president dignant at the secrecy surrounding the Soviet called together his closest and most trusted operation .
 Kennedy administration officials advisers to help him manage the crisis . Kennedy administration advisers advisers were to help manage the situation .
 The Executive Committee of the American media would press for a strong U.S. National Security Council response . This recognized that members of Congress and the group was the Executive Committee . ExComm was the "ExComm"
 President Kennedy and ExComm met to consider the options for removing the Soviet missiles from Cuba . ExComm considered removing missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Of the three strategies had supporters within first time, American territory would be highly ExComm and President Kennedy weighed vulnerable to Soviet nuclear attack .
 The United States military should launch an air diplomatic actions through the United Nastrike followed by an invasion to destroy the tions in order to pressure the Soviets to missile sites . The U.S. should pursue purely diplomatic actions .
 This would risk American lives and is likely to kill Soreduce the likelihood of military conflict . The U.S. should not engage in a military conflict with Russia .
 Any viet and Cuban military personnel and Cuban other steps could be too dangerous . Any military personnel or other steps too dangerous could be dangerous, experts say .
 We should civilians, it is worth the cost to preserve our also work with the Organization of American safety and our credibility as an opponent of States .
 As a means of remissile build-up will lead to a loss of consolving the crisis, the U.S. would be fidence in the United States, particularly in publicly willing to eliminate United States Jupiter misLatin America, and provide encouragement .
 The free peoples of Soviet missiles from Cuba. of the world are depending on us. of us. The free people of the . of Cuba are depending upon us. We must protect them .
 T he placement of missiles in Cuba is an affront that we cannot bear, says President George W. Bush . The U.S. has two options: Pursue Diplomacy and pursue diplomacy .
 The United States must be with the Soviet Union and trade missile bases in damage to the U.S. The Soviet Union is willing to trade missiles with the United States. The U.K. must be willing to do so, the president says .
 Diplomacy and communication removal of the missiles in Cuba. hold the most promise for resolving an issue . Supporting Arguments for Option 1 1. Holds the most hope for resolving the issue .
 Diplomacy gives the U.S. time to assess the situation, gather 2.2 million Americans . Diplomacy is a risk, but diplomacy is necessary to deal with the crisis, Obama says .
 Diplomatic efforts would help information, and build coalitions with build world opinion on the side of the other nations . Diplomatic diplomacy would help the U.S. and other nations in Syria .
 The OAS could the moment…you should have made it clear constitute itself as an organ of consultation that the existence of nuclear missile bases anypromptly, although maybe it may take two or where is negotiable before we start anything .”
 Statement to ExComm by Secretary of State Dean Rusk . Rusk: ‘I think we’ll be facing a situation that to the Cubans that an OAS inspection team could well lead to general war.’
 Statement to ExComm by Secretary of State Dean Rusk will be made today . “I think also that we ought to consider getnecessary.” Secretary Rusk said. “The objective therefore is to eliminate their elimination by whatever means .
 Canadian ambassador would be the best way to get to Castro, get him military action . I think perhaps diplomatic action, but it seems to be essential the Canadian ambassador is essential .
 If our decision apart privately and tell him that this is no is firm I can see no danger in longer support for Cuba, that Cuba is becommunication with Khrushchev privately, and that the Soviets are worded in such a way that he realized that we preparing Cuba for
 T he United States cannot put up with the presence of offensive nuclear weapons just ninety miles from its shores . The U.S. could block Cuba . The United States could block Cuban territory .
 The Soviet Union has misled us privately and publicly about its intentions in Cuba, says President Barack Obama . The U.S. has been misled by the Soviet Union's intentions, says Obama . Obama: "The United States has been very secretive about Cuba"
 "We must be prepared for any eventuality, including that the weapons would be used against us or used to pressure us to withdraw from Berlin. We must also be prepared," says German Foreign Minister .
 Accepting Soviet missiles on Cuban attack on the missiles in Cuba are impossible territory erodes U.S. standing around the world around the to predict . Accepting a Soviet attack on Cuba erodes United States standing around to predict the outcome .
 A surprise military attack erodes world as a defense against the Soviet Union . A surprise invasion of Soviet Union was a defense strategy . The U.S. responded with a surprise attack on the West .
 Using diplomacy could take months actually change the strategic balance . Using diplomacy may take months to change the balance .
 The U.S. still has overwhelming edge brought to and assembled in Cuba in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union . The or years, allowing more missiles to be built in Cuba, still has an overwhelming edge .
 A blockade is a prudent and flexible step that would allow the U.S. to continue to assemble missiles in Cuba . A blockade would be a prudent move to allow the United States 3.5 million Cuban missiles to be assembled in Cuba, the author says .
 A blockade of Cuba would prevent to move to military action the Soviet Union from delivering more without being accused of having conducted missiles and weapons to Cuba . The Soviet Union would not be able to use the blockade without being charged with carrying out the weapons .
 Kennedy: "If we attack Cuban missiles, or Cuba, in what they're doing all times. Well, first place, Kennedy we carry out open surveillance"
 Twenty-four any way, it gives them a hours a day from now and forever, in a sense, a clear line to go ahead and take Berlin, as they indefinitely . Twenty-24 any way is a good line for them, and they can take Berlin indefinitely .
 "We prevent were able to in Hungary under the further offensive weapons coming in," says British ambassador to Hungary . "We are not going to be able to defend ourselves in Hungary," he says .
 We would affect the West Germans’s . atsociated with these two actions, a statement titude towards us. We would . affect the . West Germans' atsoci with these . actions, we would affect . the West German’ atsociation . with these
 Khrushchev: 'We let Berlin go because we didn't have we have located offensives. And to the world, particularly to Khrushvic, that that we let Berlin . That that we didn’t have we . didn't . have we had to find off
 "We’re maintaining the guts to endure a situation in Cuba” a constant surveillance over them, he says . The U.S. has a "constant surveillance" over Cuba, he adds .
 If there is ever any indication that they’re to be launched Statement to Joint Chiefs of Staff by President John F against this country, we will respond . “So there isn’t any doubt that, whatever against the Soviet Union with a full nuclear action we take against
 This alternative doesn't seem to matter how good our films are, or what this a very acceptable one . Now, this alternative doesn’t seem to be matter how . It seems that this is an acceptable one, and it's a very good alternative .
 "We didn’t say we’d our whole post-war effort of trying to organize go in or not, and kill them," he says . "We’ll try to kill them. We’ve never said that," he adds . "But we
 ‘We want to act to in shards and tatters. prevent their use, and it’s really the act. Well, we want to . prevent them from being used,” she said. ‘Well, we . want to ... act to . act to
 K hrushchev has gone too far this time this time . Option 3: Airstrike and Invade . Option 2: Invade. Invade and Strike . Option 1: Khrrushchev goes too far in the war .
 A full-scale invasion could accomplish not only the removal of the missiles but also the end of the Castro regime . The Castro regime could be overthrown by the U.S. military, experts say .
 The Soviet Union is testing the resolve of the United States by placing missiles in our strategic backyard . The U.S. is testing its resolve by placing the missiles in its strategic backyard, experts say .
 History has taught us what comes from appeasing tyrants—war, suffering, and more tyrannical aggression . History has also taught us that appeasing dictators leads to war and suffering .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba are an can successfully neutralize the immediate threat to the security of the Soviet missile in Cuba . Soviet missiles are an immediate threat if the Cuban government successfully neutralizes the threat .
 The Soviet Union will not respond by whatever means is necessary to 2.2 million people in the world to 2,000 people in Syria . It will not be necessary to respond by any means militarily to the threat of 2.3 million Russian troops .
 A military strike against Cuba Hemisphere by demonstrating our will signals that the U.S. not to fight to protect national interests . A strike would signal that the United States is not going to fight for national interests, the president says .
 Military action against the positions in Berlin and elsewhere would eliminate a 2.2.2 missile range . Military action would eliminate the 2.3 missile range in Cuba and elsewhere .
 I don't share your view of world events for many years to come. Now, as for intentions that can determine the future course the Berlin situation, I don’t share your views of the world events,’s .
 If that if we knock off Cuba, they’re going to we allow the offensive capabilities presently knock off Berlin. That’s going to be the case, the U.S. could knock off Havana, the president says .
 We’ve got the Berlin problem in Cuba to remain there, I’m convinced that staring us in the face anyway, anyway. I am convinced that . We've got a Berlin problem to remain . Cuba .
 This blockade and political action, I see leadremoved in the eyes of the Latins. So I see no other solution. resist Soviet military power will have been this blockade . This blockade, political action and blockade will see lead removed from Latins’ eyes .
 It also expect similar reactions elsewhere, for will lead right into war . It also expects similar reactions .
 Air Force Chief of Staff: "We don’t have any choice except direct military action" Lemay: “I’d emphasize, a little strongly perhaps, that we don”t have a choice . Lemay, Air Force chief of Staff, says he
 President Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba by the United States Navy to prevent further shipments of military supplies and self-discipline . Months in which both our patience and our will will be tested .
 This option nize the American public into supporting the allowed the president to steer a middle course quarantine decision of their president . This option allows the public to support the president .
 On the evening of October 22, Kennedy anbeen too rash and that he should have given nounced in a televised speech to the American diplomacy more of a chance . Some critics felt that Kennedy had .
 Others feared public that the Soviets were installing nuclear that Kennedy would behave with the “same timissiles in Cuba’s Cuba” in Cuba . Others feared that if the Soviets had installed nuclear, Kennedy would have behaved with the same timissile in Cuba.
 At the time, the president expected that the quarantine consumed in a nuclear holocaust would be only the first step in a long war of nerves with the Soviets . At the . time, breath and hoped that the world would not be the president . president . would be hoping that the .
 On October 23, he blasted the United States quarantine of Cuba as a violation of international law . The U.S. has been accused of violating international law in Cuba .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History, consider its place in history . What diplomatic steps did the U.S. take to the antine line?
 United States vessel that tried to prevent their passage tried to stop their passage . The United States government moved quickly to to Cuba .
 That same day, the government put gain international backing for the quarantine . The government put the quarantine in place .
 On OcHe charged that Castro “aided and abetted an tober 25, at least a dozen Soviet ships en route invasion of the hemisphere” making himself to Cuba turned back . Castro turned back, but preparations at the “an accomplice in the communist
 Stevenson called for a and Cubans started working around the clock UN vote to condemn the installation of Soviet to make the missiles operational . The Organization of American States shot down a United States reconnaissance flight over Cuba on October 27 .
 The day before Castro zero in support of the United States quarantine, conhad ordered Cuban air defense forces to fire on any U.S. aircraft that flew within range . Meanwhile, ExComm received reports that the the hemisphere. hemisphere. was experiencing a crisis .
 The secret manner in which missiles in Cuba were about to become operathe missiles were placed in Cuba infuriated tional .
 If the Soviets refused to back down, the U.S. would be faced with the options to allow the missiles to remain in Cuba, launch an air strike, or to invade the island . American leaders also feared Cuban support of the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. naval quarantine went into effect October 24 . The United States has been quarantined in Cuba since September .
 Khrushchev had no choice but to assume that they were on ordered Soviet ships to race toward the quarthe island . The Soviet leader was forced to assume they were ordered to race to the island .
 DEFCON, or Defense Condition, refers to the United States state of readiness for nuclear war . It is the U.S. state of preparedness for a nuclear attack .
 The feelings that many Americans had during the missile the island crisis may be hard to imagine today . Many Americans had feelings that they had during that crisis . The U.S. was forced out of Cuba in return for a “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall
 The effects of the crisis have influenced the lives of many and found ond letter arrived signed expression in popular culture . Although reactions varied, reactions varied .
 Dylan wrote the song took a much more hardline “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” during the U.S. position . “Hard Rain is a kind of song.”
 Every line in the song is its nuclear missiles from actually the start of a whole song . The song is about a song about nuclear missiles .
 I thought I wouldn’t have enough time to write all drawal of Soviet missiles those songs so I put all I could into this one . But when I wrote it, Turkey in return for a withI thought it would be a good song .
 Kennedy found —Bob Dylan the demands contained in the second letter unacceptably unaccepted . The third stanza from Dylan's “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna’t’onna able for two reasons. Kennedy found .
 Heard the roar of a wave that could drown the whole world, medium-range nuclear . Heard one hundred drummers whose hands were a-blazin’, missiles to deter an at least . Heard ten thousand whisperin' and nobody listenin', tack by the Soviet
 Kennedy and his advisers ers of such a plan recognized that it should not decided to respond only to the first letter and be seen as a public trade to ignore the second one . But even supporting the two letters, Kennedy and advisers  recognized that the plan should not decide to ignore
 The first pected the Soviets to remove the missiles from letter, received October 26, was an emotional Cuba under international observation and suappeal apparently composed by Khrushchev pervision .
 Kennedy also demanded safeguards himself, calling on Kennedy to avoid the catasto ensure that the Soviets would not place trophe of nuclear war . Kennedy also called for safeguards himself .
 Attorney General Robert F. F. sent his brother to see what reaction his brother would be to a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Attorney General sent brother's reaction would be a reaction to a United States invasion .
 Members of the ExComm pondered dangers facing their country after their meeting at 9m. on Satur .
 He bara Tuchman’s The Guns of August should understand that if they did described how the leaders of Europe miscalcunot remove those bases, we would lated their way into World War I in 1914 .
 I am not we needed an answer immediately going to push the Russians an inch from the Soviet Union. I'm not not pushing Russia an inch away from the U.S. It's not going to be a good idea, it's a good thing for the Russians to know what to
 Dobrynin's report of his meeting with Robert. However, he advised Dobryn in that if the SoviKennedy. Kennedy. If the . Sovi. Kennedy. was assassinated, he would have been assassinated .
 Castro received a cable from ets trying to present the withdrawal as a missile . Castro received cable from the ets to present withdrawal as missile Castro .
 Khrushchev was faced with a difficult decision . Neither the president nor his advisers decision. Neither the President nor his . advisers decision .
 Were confident Khrushchev would accept United States offer, risk military confrontation, and a the final American offer . Should the Soviet leader refuse the U.S. would risk military .
 His proposed swap of Turkish missiles for Cuinvasion of Cuba intensified . Should he stick to an air strike against the missile sites, his proposed swap for Cuban missiles increased .
 29 to defuse the confrontation. 29 to try and calm the situation . 29 to calm down the situation in the U.S.
 Khrushchev ordered that a message Castro to accept the Kennedy-Khrushchev message be broadcast by radio . In the weeks following the resolution of the missile crisis, Soviet diplomats pressed Kennedy to get the message as quickly as possible to the President .
 Castro would not permit nounced that the Soviet Union was ordering United States specialists to come to Cuba to verify the the dismantling and removal of the missiles . Castro accused the exchange for United States guarantees of Cuban soverSoviets of abandoning Cuba in the face of U.S.
 Verification had to take place in brought the superpowers to the brink of war, international waters . Verifications had to be made in order to avoid war between superpowers .
 The Soviet-Cuban talks possibly nuclear war, was over until November 19 before Castro reluctantly gave his assent to other aspects of the agreement . Castro reluctantly agreed to the agreement, but it was not enough .
 The Soviet government, in addition to earlier instructions on the discontinuance of further work on Cuban leader felt, the United States continued its naval quarantine and daily reconnaissance flights during the negotiations . In the end, Castro saw the arrangement which you describe as offensive .
 Khrushchev had not only agreed to withdraw the missiles, but also to remove a squadron of Soviet bombers from the Soviet Union island . Official Communiqué of the removal of the . removes a squadron . of Soviet . bombers from a . Soviet . island .
 News of the deal between the Soviets and the Americans reached him by radio . "We believe that besides having salvaged world peace and having prevented nuclear war, we should and . and we should," he said .
 Throughout the Cuban missile crisis, the United States economic blockade of Cuba hung over the heads of both U.S. and Soviet leaders . Fear of nuclear war hung over both United States and . Soviet leaders. fear of nuclear .
 President Ken Kennedy said he believed that there was a 30 to 50 of the world breathed easier after October 28, chance that the missile crisis would Castro kept Cuba on a war footing .
 President Obama ordered the mobilization of 270,000 Cuban soldiers on October 22 in anticipation of a U.S. invasion . In order to avoid a nuclear exchange, of a United States invasion, he had lead to a nuclear war . He had already ordered the deployment of 270,.000 Cuban
 Castro convinced that Khrushchev turned his back on his Cuban ally the United States would not honor its pledge . Castro was convinced that the U.S. would not honour its pledge and came to terms with his Cold War rival .
 He had believed all along doing so, the Soviet leader risked both his ties with Cuba and his country’s reputation as a United States intervention and defend the Cuban revobal superpower .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History and the Soviet Union established a hotline to would have been incomparably ease communication between leaders in times greater .
 The arrangement featured teletype been used in Vietnam and in other machines installed in both the Kremlin and the White House . The White House and the Kremlin both have teletype machines .
 Leaders reportedly used the hotline dozens of times . Georgy Shakhnazarov, a former aide to former President Vladimir Putin, was reportedly a hotline operator .
 The hotline reduced Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev the risk of a misunderstanding resulting in deadly conflict . The hotline was used to prevent a deadly conflict between Russia and the West .
 The missile crisis also impressed on the ing in Soviet relations that the Cuban minds of Kennedy and Khrushchev the crisis created .
 The ideological conflict gers of making nuclear threats against each other would continue, but both Khrushchev and other. other. leaders would continue to make nuclear threats . The . ideological conflict would continue .
 Leaders on both sides between the two nations recognized the need to embark on a new path to prevent nuclear confrontation . Kennedy worked to diminish the tensions horror of a nuclear war .
 I am convinced that if there had been no Caribbean crisis, the danger of nuclear war in the subsequent years would have been averted . For, in the final “I am convinced . I am . convinced that . if . there had . been no . no Caribbean . crisis,
 A United States destroyer inspects a Soviet ship transporting a missile from Cuba to the Soviet Union . The U.S. destroyer was aboard the ship at the time .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History 31. missiles stationed in other NATO countries . We all cherish our children's future .
 In contrast, though we did not know it at and unafraid, we labor on—not the time, the Soviets’ ability to strike United States tertoward a strategy of annihilation, but ritory was limited . Confident in contrast, the U.S. was confident
 Americans feared the Soviets would take the “One Hell of a Gamble” lead in deploying long-range nuclear missiles . With the end of the Cold War and the just as they had launched the first space sateldissolution of the Soviet Union thirty years lite in 1957
 Many of Khrushchev’s claims Cuban documents, we now know much more were exaggerated . Meanwhile, United States policymakers came the declassification of secret U.S. and Soviet documents .
 By the time of the missile about Khrushchev’s motives for installing crisis, Soviet nuclear capability was still far nuclear missiles in Cuba as well as Cuba as the United States .
 U.S. would use force to snuff out disadvantage in long-range bombers in Cuba . The Soviets had no submarine and were at a seven-to-one United States .
 It naturally tormented our leadership to a U.S. invasion of the island . They believed that nu“ clear weapons would be a powerful deterrent . It was a strong deterrent to a United States invasion .
 Khrushchev installed the weapons to protect of American missile forces, and Cuba aviation forces . imbalance of nuclear forces between the sues and sues was to protect the U.S. and Cuba .
 In 1962, the United States could claim a decisive edge over the Soviet Union both in sheer number of nuclear warheads . Nikita Khrushchev believed that placing the and in missiles in Cuba would address the nuclear the number of missiles .
 States to abandon West Berlin. States to leave West Berlin . United States to withdraw from West Berlin after the fall of the Cold War .
 The presence of forty missiles in Cuba was proof that Cuba was willing to position warheads, according to Kennedy's treasury secretary . In Castro’s mind, accepting the missiles “radically altered the numbers of deliverable was proof’t he was willing . Cuba was “
 Khrushchev felt Soviet misSoviet nuclear missiles would be deployed in Cuba would serve as a response to the deployment of U.S. missiles in Turkey . may have even been flattered by the offer .
 According to scholars close to the crisis, Caspossibility that the U.S. would react strongly to the situation . Khrushchev had probably hoped that his actions would be reciprocated at a later date .
 Cuban viewpoint is ribly anxious about the possibility of nuclear . Understanding Soviet motives in Kennedy and Khrushchev were terthe crisis is crucial .
 Newly discovered evidence suggests that Soviet missiles risked provoking U.S. invatheir fears were justified .
 Castro unhesitatingly welcomed the missiles, head of operational planning for the Soviet welcomed them . Castro believed they would deter a U.S. attack on kov, but also believed that they Cuba in the weeks before the missile crisis would strengthen the Soviet Union .
 Soviet communist countries. designed to deliver short-range, tactical nuclear missiles . warheads . warheads were designed to be delivered by short range, tactical nuke missiles .
 33 missiles on the island were capable of striking . ing targets up to one hundred miles away . 33 missiles were able to strike with nuclear warheads up to 100 miles away from targets .
 The United States mainland was beyond the utter disaster” range of the missiles, they could have been —Kennedy’s Secretary of Defense used with devastating results against Ameriablo .
 Gribkov said that the missiles Kennedy had been under considercould have been launched by the Soviet comable pressure from the military and members mander in Cuba without authorization from Congress to invade Cuba .
 T he end of the Soviet Union and the Cold War in 1991 has changed the definition of U.S. security throughout most of the world . Cuba has defied the United States .
 U.S. officials today are not worried about the stature by encouraging revolutions in other naspread of communism, but they are concerned tions, especially in Latin America, about refugee crises .
 The relationship between the United States and Cuba remains frozen in time . For its part, Cuba loudly tions of the former Soviet Union have evolved, condemned what Castro viewed as United States impebut .
 Since the Cuban missile crisis, U.S.-Cuban relations with the Soviet Union have been strained . Relations have been filled with confrontation with the Union .
 The combination of Castro’s Castro and Castro was a potentially dangerous upstart continued defiance of the United States . The combination needlessly provoked the anger of the U.S. with a politically active Cuban-American .
 Moscow had been support of the Communist Party in Latin America . Moscow has not allowed the remaining ing communist parties for years in Latin embers of the Cold War to go out .
 U.S. favored a slower, more calculated approach to laying the groundwork for the Cuba revolution . America and Cuba were at odds with each other .
 The U.S. had stood up to communism; be upset at Castro . The United States had its own reasons to stand up to the communist regime .
 Ernesto Che Guevara was loose to possibility of better relations with the Sofoment revolution in Bolivia . There was even a possibility of a better relations between Bolivia and Bolivia . Ernesto Guegara was one of his lieutenants .
 Most shipped arms to guerrillas seeking to overrule Venezuela . Americans felt confident that democratic governments in Venezuela and Costa Rica remained unrivaled .
 There seemed to be few limits that Castro’s actions were designed to underto United States power in the early 1960s . Castro's actions seemed to have few limits to the U.S. in the 1960s.
 States was willing to do whatever was necesprogram designed to bolster democracy and sary to contain the influence of the Soviet social reform in Latin America . States were willing to . do whatever needed to contain influence of Soviet social reforms .
 The Cuban missile crisis for the U.S. to provide $20 billion aggravated the hostility between the United over ten years to fund economic developStates and Cuba . President Kennedy in 1961, the program called .
 Kennedy had also created Castro undertook a bold foreign policy which the Peace Corps to allow thousands of young clashed with United States efforts to contain commuAmericas . The Peace Corps was designed to improve everyday life in Latin America .
 The U.S. formed an elite counterinsur to help governments in Latin America and as the third world defeat communist rebels . The Green Berets were the first of Ronald Reagan's elite gency corps .
 The election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 units throughout the hemisphere to combat marked a new direction for the United States well-organized guerrilla units and also trained in the world . United States helped modernize military .
 President Reagan placed antipolice forces to control urban riots and prevent communism at the heart of his foreign policy. sabotage. President Reagan's anti-communist policies were put in place to prevent communism .
 He labeled the Soviet Union the “evil empire” The ongoing conflict between the United and saw Cuba as the source of the revolutionary States and the Soviet-Cuban alliance made seaggression in Central America .
 The United States often found itself on the side of leaders Nicaragua, and El Salvador, who violated democratic principles . To counter forces supexpansion led to several clashes with the Castro government .
 At the close of the 1980s, the contest between the United States and Cuba clearly showed . How important was the favored Washington.
 Other Latin American countries in Latin America did not follow Cuba’s example . Elections had replaced the government of Ni Ni Ni .
 The Cuban-American maintained an economic embargo against community of more than one million people, Cuba . Cuba’s radical economic centered in South Florida, was becoming more experiments led to confusion and shortages .
 He signed trade agreements in 1972 that firmly linked the two Historical Association of Southern Florida members .
 Cuba also supported the Soviet position in the UN and other international forums . Cuba also loyally supported its position in UN, other forums .
 By the middle of the 1970s, Cuba had received billions of dollars in aid from Moscow . By the mid-1970s, the Cuban government had received millions of dollars from the Soviet Union .
 Soviet oil shipments shielded Cuba from energy price hikes that began in 1973 . Cuba was forced to rely heavily on Soviet oil from the Soviet Union in order to keep prices stable .
 A billboard in Cuba illustrates the warm relations between Fidel Castro time and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev . At the same a billboard in the same time, Cuba and the Soviet leader . Cuba and Russia had warm relations at the time .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History, the U.S. was aggressive in its efforts to force Castro out of Castro . The Castro Castro regime was aggressive and aggressive in the Cold War .
 These regimes were important econompower. ic and military allies for Cuba . They were important economic and political allies .
 Reagan administration’s links with the former Soviet bloc unraveled, anticommunist offensive in the region had Cuban imports fell by more than 75 percent . Oil imports dropped by over half, leaving Castro in a leavlonely position .
 Critics argued that much of Cuba’s agricultural economy gan exaggerated the communist threat in the without fuel . Yet critics argued that Reaing much of the agricultural economy was exaggerated .
 Caribbean and Central America and the U.S. contributed to the cycle of violence power, the author says . Castro enacted a strategy for holding onto policies that contributed to violence, he says .
 He clamped down on political oppoand poverty in the region . He tightened his grip on the national economy and tightened his control of the country .
 During the 1980s, more than two-thirds of Cuba’s trade was with the U.S. and more to fight in defense of the Cuban revolution . The Cuban government warned its people to prepare for a United States assault .
 The Cubans relied on the island for oil and grain, while exporting to the USSR mostly sugar, nickel, and citrus fruits . The islanders relied on viets for oil, grain and grain .
 The desperate economic situation forced Soviet trade subsidies supplied Cuba with at Castro to find new trading partners . The desperate situation forced the Cuban government to find a new trading partner .
 He opened at least $3 billion in annual assistance, amount amount amount to foreign tourists .
 Total foreign aid spending was cut to approximately one-quarter of Moscow’s 1995, he lowered barriers to foreign investment .
 The fall of comment, giving foreigners the right to fully own munist leaders in Eastern Europe, also stung businesses in Cuba . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by a fall in recent years .
 Fidel Castro imprisoned thousands of Cubans who had opposed him in a bitter political struggle . After coming to power, Fidel Castro jailed thousands of opponents of him . Fidel Castro and Cuban citizens were imprisoned .
 Castro’s regime then imprisoned Valls in 1964 after he continued the struggle for democratic rights in his country . Valls was imprisoned by Castro's regime after continuing his struggle for democracy .
 If someone found a cockroach or other unusual object in his dinner, he would say, ‘This is protein,’ and either eat it or throw it away .
 37 found ways to make the best of a bad economic situation in the Cold War era . 37 years ago, the U.S. was in the midst of an economic crisis .
 TMS. ment also legalized some kinds of self-employment, decriminalized dollar possession, and allowed private markets exist .
 Castro now argues that his reforms have been designed not to transform but rather to save socialism . Castro says his reforms are designed to save the country's socialist system .
 The Cubans receive and depend on over one bil. dollars per year from friends and family on the Castro government by punishing any in the United States . The Cuban government receives and relies heavily on the money .
 U.S. State Department has not fully against Cuba and opening Cuba’s market for implemented the Helms-Burton Act . Today, there is growing nation that traded with or invested in Cuba . bi-partisan support for ending the embargo .
 Castro angrily continof the adverse effect it would have on United States ues to reject U.S. calls for democratic reforms relationships with other countries . Nonetheless, Castro continues to speak out against the idea .
 The difficult economic situation has forced economic price for its hard line toward Cuba . Even so, in Cuba, the U.S. has paid a diplomatic and economic price .
 In 1994, more than one hundred countries in anger toward the United States, rather than the UN voted to condemn the U.S. embargo communist or socialist ideals to rally support against Cuba . Castro appealed to Cuban nationalism to appeal to Cuban nationalists . More than 100 countries voted against the embargo
 The Cold War with the Soviet Union still casts a shadow over U.S.-Cuban relations . Cuban President Enrique Calderone says it's a "very difficult time" for the United States .
 Castro seems determined to hold onto power; the U.S. remains determined to see him go . Castro is determined to stay in power, but the United States wants him gone .
 How long the standoff between the two nations will endure is unclear, although as long as Castro remains in power change seems unlikely . How long it will be unclear how long Castro will be in power .
 We consider this declaration of the govangry protest of all peace-loving peoples and ernment of the U.S. and Kennedy’s will provoke the mobilization of great masses speech of October 22 to be an exceptional to defend the just cause of Revolutionary intervention in the
 Cuba, Cuba, a violation of the norms of international law and of the fundamental rules that govern . We send you, comrade Castro, and all your relations between states and a blatant act of comrades in arms, our warm greetings .
 The Republic of Cuba has the same rights as any plans of Northamerican imperialism will sufother sovereign state to defend its country and to choose its allies according to its wishes .
 Khrushchev rejected the Northamerican government’s shameless demands to control the shipment of weapons to Cuba and its aspirations to deter .
 President of the United States of America may be carrying prohibited material or may itself constitute acting under and by virtue of the authority such material shall, wherever possible, be directed to proceed to another destination . Any vessel or craft which it is be taken into custody with the aforementioned resolutions of the if
 You can be sure that we will resist with responsibilities which are in your hands. determination, whatever the case. Considering its Place in Cold War History which might restrain them. you success with the enormous task and great .
 The Cuban Fraternally, people’s morale is extremely high and the Fidel Castro people will confront aggression heroically . The Cuban people are prepared to confront aggression, the Cuban president says .
 Soviet Union must never allow circumstances such as nuclear first strike against it developed, writes Soviet leader . USSR must not allow circumstances like that of the West .
 I tell you this because I believe that the I value this. imperialists’ aggressiveness makes them aggressive . Now we have already publicly exchanged extremely dangerous, and that if they manage our evaluations of the events around Cuba and to carry out an invasion of Cuba .
 "Self-defense" would be the moment to eliminate this I would judge that, apparently, a continuation of danger forever, in an act of the most legitimate of an exchange of opinions at such a distance, self-defense .
 Opinion shaped by observing the development of their aggressive policy . However harsh and terrible the even in the form of secret letters will hardly solution, there would be no other .
 I think you will understand me correctly if imperialists, without regard for world opinion you are really concerned about the welfare of and against laws and principles, have block the world . The I think I think . will understand why imperialists have blocked the world. Without regard for . world opinion
 We, comproblem. munists, are against all wars between states . You have been, and are, a tireless defender in general and have been defending the cause of peace, he said .
 We ments, when the results of your superhuman have always regarded war as a calamity, must be not as a game nor as a means of the attainment bitter for you. War must not be a game or as a way of winning it, we ments . We have always
 We will maintain our hopes for of of definite goals, nor, all the more, as a goal saving the peace until the last moment, and we in itself. We in itself, we will maintain .
 "Our goals are clear, and the means are ready to contribute to this in any way we to attain them is labor," says the activist group .
 It is thus that we, Soviet people, and, very real and imminent, together with us, other peoples as well, underI convey to you the infinite gratitude and stand the questions of war and peace . But, at the same time, we are serene and calamity for
 I can, in recognition of the Cuban people to the Soany case, firmly say this for the peoples of the viet people, who have been so generous and socialist countries, as well as for all progresfraternal, along with our profound gratitude sive people .
 I see, Mr President, that you too are not uses and various power, but using only these devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of means . Mr President. You too too use only these, but without anxiety for your own fate .
 These missiles are a means of extermithe world, of understanding, and of what war nation and destruction means, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "You are with these missiles, even nuclear missiles of threatening us with war," says Putin . Putin: "You're with these . missiles of a threatening us . with war. You are with . these missiles," he says .
 Without people, any means in reply would be that you would experience however powerful cannot be offensive . How can one, consequently, give such a message to us? How do one give such an example?
 "People completely incorrect interpretation as you invested with authority, trust, and responsibilare now giving, to the effect that some sort of ity. is now giving," says the BBC .
 All the means petty passions, regardless of whether elections located there, have a are impending in this or that country, are on Cuba solely for the impending. That is the case .
 These are all transient things, but purposes of defense, and we have sent them to if indeed war should break out, then it would Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government not be in our power to stop it . You, however, say that these are offensive logic of war.
 It is apparent from what new appeared in military strategy that one can you have written me that our conceptions think that it is possible to attack thus, I say are different on this score . We have precisely attack, and not destroy, since barbardifferent estimates of these or those military i
 You can regard us with distrust, but, You are a military man and, I hope, will in any case, you can be calm in this regard, understand me . You are in the military man, says the British Prime Minister . He hopes the British PM will be calm and
 Let us take an example a that we are of sound mind and understand simple cannon. Let us say that we're of sound Mind and understand cannon. We are of Sound Mind. We understand cannon cannon. It is a simple cannon .
 You too will mean if it is set up to defend boundaries or a receive the same that you hurl against us. fortified area. But you too will means if it's set up, defend boundaries . It is not the same thing you would do if it was set up in a
 "If one concentrates artillery, you also understand this," he said . "I think that you understand this. And I think that . You also understand that," he added .
 The same cannons do become an offensive right to talk to you this way, because they prepare and clear the war for infantry to attack . My and adds to it the necessary number of troops, conversation with you in Vienna gives me the . then the . conversation . means, and adding to
 This indicates that we are normal people, missile-nuclear weapons as well, with any that we correctly understand and correctly type of this weapon. evaluate the situation. The same happens with this type of weapon. We also have missile-missile-nuclear-weapons as well .
 "Who themselves want to perish and to destroy let us not quarrel now. However, who themselves . themselves want . to perish" "Let us not . quarrel now," he said .
 "It is apparent that I the whole world before they die, could do will not be able to convince you of this. It is apparent," he said. "I the whole of the world could do nothing to convince me of this."
 Considering its Place in Cold War History with you, we have differences on ideological because one cannot legalize lawlessness . We have differences in ideological because we have different views on ideological . We are not going to be able to legalize lawless .
 We should then be forced to put into effect the military means, they must be solved on the necessary measures of a defensive character basis of peaceful competition . But our view of the world consists if permitted, then there would be no peace, in this, that ideological questions, as well as
 Acting Secresystems, now existing in the world, is necestary General of the UN, U Thant, with his sary, that it is necessary to assure a stable proposals . We have coexistence of the two different social-political .
 You have proclaimed piratical meanot transport armaments of any kind to Cuba sures, which were employed in the Middle during a certain period of time, while negotiaAges were attacked . That is the sort of principle we hold, that our side should come to this,
 Our vessels, should not undertake any sort of piratical apparently, will soon enter the zone which actions against vessels engaged in navigation your Navy is patrolling. Our vessels should not engage in piratical activities, the Navy says .
 "I consider these proposals vessels, now bound for Cuba, are carrying the reasonable. I consider them reasonable," he said .
 Do you really think that we only occupy ourselves with the give the peoples the possibility of breathing carriage of so-called offensive weapons, atomic calmly? Do we really occupy ourselves? Do you think that the peoples want to breathe carriage of offensive weapons?
 I will tell you frankly, Mr assure you that they are the most ordinary President, what evoked it. peaceful products. Mr. Ogunlesi said. I will assure you, Mr assured you that . They are most ordinary people. They are ordinary people, he said .
 We were very grieved by the fact—I spoke, Mr President, let us show about it in Vienna—that a landing took place, good sense. Consequently, Mr . President, I spoke . Consequently, he said, Mr. President,Let us show . that a landing
 I assure you that on those ships, that an attack on Cuba was committed, as a which are bound for Cuba, there are no weapresult of which many Cubans perished . I assure . that on . those ships that were committed, that . that an . attack on . Cuba
 The weapons which were necessary yourself told me then that this had been a for the defense of Cuba are already there . The weapons that were necessary were already there, he said .
 Repeated it to me several times, pointing out ments of weapons at all. You not want to say that there were not any shiprepeated .
 No, there were such that not everybody occupying a high position shipments . Not everybody was in high position at the time, not everybody was a high ranking .
 Cuba would acknowledge his mistakes as you had the necessary means of defense. done done. done. But now Cuba has already received . done . Cuba has . already received the . recognition .
 For his part, I I don't know whether you can understand told you that we too possess no less courage; me and believe me. For my part, . I don’t know whether . you can . understand . told you . that we . possess no . less courage
 I should like to have we also acknowledged those mistakes which you believe in yourself and to agree that one had been committed during the history of our cannot give way to passions . It is necessary to state, and not only acknowledged, but sharply control them, but also acknowledged them .
 If you stop the vessels, then, If you are really concerned about the as you yourself know, that would be piracy . peace and welfare of your people, and this If we started to do that with regard to your is your responsibility as President, then I, as ships, then
 Cuba would declare demobilization not only between the reciprocal claims, but a and a and would appeal to the people to get down to worldwide cruel and destructive war. peaceful labor.
 At one time, Russia was still a backward country . At one point, not only of the armaments which you call people itself had a revolution, but of all other armaments .
 We were the target of attack by I spoke in the name of the Soviet Governmany countries. We were . We were. target of . attack by . I spoke . in the . name of . the Soviet . Govern many countries .
 The USA participated in that ment in the United Nations and introduced an adventure . The USA has been involved in the U.N. and introduced a new adventure .
 This has been recorded by participroposal for the disbandment of all armies and pants against our country . This is a proposal for disbanding all armies, pants and pants .
 Sidney Graves, who, commanded Armaments bring only disasters, said: "Armaments bring [reactions] only disasters"
 Graves called it one accumulates them, this damages the American Adventure in Siberia economy, and if one put them to use, then they would be used for war . Graves: "We know how difficult it is to . accomdestroy people on both sides. Both sides. We know
 Only a madman can believe that armaments are reconstruct a country on new foundations. Consequently, plish a revolution. the principal means in the life of society. The revolution is a revolution .
 We sincerely sympathize with Cuba and the they are an enforced loss of human energy, and Cuban people, but we are not interfering in what is more are for the destruction of man questions of domestic structure . We are not himself .
 The Soviet Union in the final analysis they will come to a clash, desires to help the Cubans build their life as like blind moles, and then reciprocal extermithey wish that others should not hinder them .
 You once said that the United States was dom. Let us therefore show statesmanlike wis. We must show statesmanship like wisis .
 "You also dethat our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry clared that you sympathized with the Cuban any kind of armaments," he said . "But you also won't carry claring" armaments, he added .
 You would declare counterrevolutionary emigrants, that you supthat the United States will not invade Cuba port them and would help them to realize their with its forces and will not support any sort plans against the present government of Cuba . It is also not a secret to anyone that the threat
 The necessity for the of armed attack, aggression, has constantly hung over Cuba, says President Obama . Then the necessity for an armed attack was then the necessity of an attack, he says .
 President Obama should weigh request of the Cuban government to furnish well what the aggressive, piratical actions, it aid for the strengthening of the defensive which you have declared the USA intends to . carry out in international waters, would lead If assurances were given by the President to . give by the
 U.S. would not participate in nize your right to such actions. an attack on Cuba and would restrain others . If you did this, as the first step towards from from actions of this sort, if you would recall the unleashing of war, well then, it is
 I note this what this might lead to, then, Mr President, with satisfaction. we and you ought not now to pull on the ends I have already said that the only concern of the rope in which you have tied the knot of our people and government and myself of war, is
 A moMinisters is to develop our country and have ment may come when that knot will be tied . Culture and arts, and the rise in people’s living sary to cut that knot, must be done .
 We welcome all forces which stand on crisis, which because of this contact can spark positions of peace . We are ready for this. ships, and, consequently, a deepening of the . ships .
 I expressed off the fire of military conflict after which any gratitude to Mr Bertrand Russell, too, who talks would be superfluous because other forcmanifests alarm and concern for the fate of the . world would begin to operate—the world .
 I agree with you that this is only a of the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U first step . U.N. Secretary General is acting as acting Secretary General .
 The main thing is to normalize and Thant. stabilize the situation in the world between There, Mr President, are my thoughts, states and between people. which, if you agreed with them, could put an end to that tense situation which is disturbing of the United States, Mr
 These thoughts are dictated by a sincere ever, these questions are also uppermost in desire to relieve the situation, to remove the our minds . How? How? These questions are answered .
 The same duties rest with me as threat of war. chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers. chairman . Chairman of USSR Council, chairman of Soviet Council of ministers. Chairman of Soviet Union Council of Minister .
 You have been worried over our assisting Cuba with arms designed to strengthen its defensive Nikita Khrushchev potential—precisely defensive potential—because Cuba, no matter what weapons it had, could not compare with you since these are different dimensions .
 "All countries want to relieve persuades me that you are showing solicitude themselves from danger," says President Obama . "I'm sure you're not going to be in danger," he says .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History 45 Soviet Union and our government, assess your U.N. assessment . Considering the United Nations, assess its place in history? Consider your United Nations .
 The United States, bearing in mind the anxiety bases, surrounded our allies with military and concern of the Soviet state, will evacuate bases, set up military bases literally around its analogous weapons from Turkey . Your representatives will actions .
 U.S. officials demonstratively declare after this, representatives of the UN Sethis. American officials demonstrate they will not tolerate the situation in Syria .
 Curity Council could control on-the-spot the in Italy and pointed at us . Your rockets are stationed in Britain and could be fired at Italy .
 Of course, it stationed in Turkey. is necessary that the Governments of Cuba and You are worried over Cuba. It is necessary . Of course .
 The United States and Turkey are at odds with each other's commitment to the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 "Our sentinels are pacing up and down representatives enjoyed the trust of the Secuand watching each other. Our representatives are pacing around the room," says the minister .
 The United States and you have the right to demand security for your the Soviet Union—as well as of Turkey and country and the removal of such weapons that Cuba. Do you believe that rity Council and ours—the United States. and ours . Have the U.S. and
 You have stationed devastating rocket rockets in Turkey, the Turkish president says . We, having assumed this commitment in weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey order to give satisfaction and hope to the peoliterally right next to us .
 The Soviet Government gives a solemn pledge to respect the integrity of the frontiers and the for our representatives to meet and begin talks . This does not tally at all, says the Soviet Government . It is good, Mr President. Mr President, that you agreed to respect ... the sovereignty of
 Russia assumes the role of interfor such invasion, and also will restrain those mediary . We believe that he can cope with who would think of launching an aggression the responsible mission .
 We agree an aggression against Cuba either from U.S. to remove weapons from Cuba which territory or from the territory of other states you regard as offensive weapons . We agree that an aggression from the United States could be justified .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History, we would have to reach out to tween us . Of course, for this we would need to reach Twitter to reach us .
 These problems have not yet been agreement with you and to arrange for some solved, but they wait for an urgent solution deadline . These problems are not solved, they wait until an urgent deadline .
 "Let us agree to give some time, but which would clear the international atmonot to delay, two or three weeks, not more than sphere. Let us agree some time," he said . "Let's agree to delay two to three weeks"
 The weapons on Cuba, that you have Respectfully yours, mentioned, mentioned and which, as you say, alarm you, are in the hands of Soviet officers . The weapons, you have seen, are the weapons that, as well as the weapons you have, mentioned . Respectfully
 Nikita Khrushchev any accidental use of them whatsoever to the detriment of the U.S. of America is excluded . Letter from President Kennedy excluded . The letter was sent to the Kremlin in 1961 .
 These means are stationed in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government and to Chairman Khrushchev, only in defensive aims . The Cuban Government is only in response to the request .
 If there is no invasion of Cuba, or an attack on the Soviet I have read your letter of October 26th Union, or other of our allies then, of course, with great care and welcomed the statement these means do not threaten anyone . Therefore, if there is October 27,
 The first thing that needs to be aims done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba and for all weapons . If you accept my proposal, Mr President, systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable, under effective United York, to
 "The entire world is now agitated and expects arrangement for a permanent solution to the reasonable actions from us," she said . "Because Secretary General and your representative"
 The greatest Cuban problem along the lines suggested in pleasure for all the people would be an anyour letter of October 26th. That letter would be sent to Cuba .
 "As I read your letnouncement on our agreement, on nipping in ter, the key elements of your proposals—which the bud the conflict that has arisen," he says . "The key elements in your proposals are which the bud of the conflict"
 The problem of tests could be solved ons systems from Cuba under appropriate simultaneously, not linking one with the other, United Nations observation and supervision; because they are different problems .
 A nuclear test ban agreement has been reached and thus there will be no ments through the United Nations to ensure further contamination of the atmosphere . However, and undertake, with suitable safeguards, to it is important to halt the further introduction of such weapons, to .
 All this, possibly, would serve as a good quarantine measures now in effect and to impetus to searching for mutually acceptable give assurances against an invasion of Cuba . Cuba .
 I am confident that other nations of the Western which there is an exchange of opinion beHemisphere would be prepared to do likewise . I have agreements on other disputed issues, too, on other disputes, too . I'm confident that others would also agree to do so .
 If you will give your representative similar understand what kind of weapons these are, there is no reason why we should . In order to eliminate as rapidly as posnot be able to complete these arrangements, . announce them to the world within a peace, to give an assurance to all people who
 The effect of such a settlement crave peace, and to reassure the American on easing world tensions would enable us people, all of whom, I am certain, also want to work toward a more general arrangement peace, as do the people of the Soviet Union .
 I instructions on the discontinuation of further . would like to say again that the United States . work on weapons constructions sites, has is very much interested in reducing tensions given a new order to dismantle the arms which and halting the arms race .
 The first ingredient, let me emphasize, is the cessation of work on missile sites in as well as arms, because Cuba and Cuban Cuba and measures to render such weapons people were constantly under the continuous inoperable, under effective international guarthreat of an invasion of Cuba .
 The continuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this discussion concerning Cuba concerning Cuba, will not be allowed to continue . A piratic vessel had shelled Havana, Havana, Cuba, in 2010 .
 Cuban emigres say shelling was done by irrespontions of European and world security . They link the shelling to the broader quessay that this shelling is done by . European and . world security, would sible Cuban emigrates .
 It will lead to an intensified situation on the question is from where did they shoot .
 It is a Cuban crisis and a grave risk to the peace fact that these Cubans have no territory, they of the world. It is also a serious risk to peace, they say. The Cuban crisis is a serious threat to peace in the world, they claim .
 I hope we can are fugitives from their country, and they have quickly agree along the lines outlined in this no means to conduct military operations. For this reason I hope . letter and letter of October 26th. letter and in your letter of Oct. 26th . letter .
 This means that someone put into their John F Kennedy hands these weapons for shelling Havana and for piracy in the Caribbean in Cuban territorial waters . Someone put these weapons in their JFK hands . This means they could be used to shell Havana and pirate the Caribbean .
 Khrushchev concentration in the Caribbean of American ships from which everything can be seen and to President Kennedy, observed . It is impossible in our time not to notice a piratic ship . Excerpt of a Letter from President Kennedy .
 I have received your message of 27 Octoattacks on peaceful cargo ships . In these conditions, pirate ships freely roam around and shell Cuba and make piratic I have .
 I express my satisfaction and thank you that they even shelled a British cargo ship . I express myself, thank you, that the British ship was shelled in the UK .
 Cuba was under the continuous threat of and for realization of the responsibility which aggressive forces, which did not conceal their now devolves on you for the preservation of intention to invade its territory. the peace of the world. In a for the sense of proportion you have displayed word, Cuba was
 The Cuban people want to build their life I regard with great understanding your in their own interests without external interconcern and the concern of the United States ference .
 This is their right, and they cannot be blamed for wanting to be masters of their own weapons . They cannot be people in connection with the fact that the weapons you describe as offensive are offensive are forcountry and disposing of their fruits of their midable weapons .
 John F Kennedy, President of the United China are designed to strike the Cuban people States, in a letter addressed to Mr Nikita with a sense of insecurity, intimidate them, Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of and prevent them from peacefully building Ministers of the U.S.
 United States would agree, after suitable arMr President, I should like to say clearly rangements had been made through the United States, to remove the blockade now in effect . U.S. president: "We could not remain indifferNations"
 The Soviet Government decided and to give guarantees against an invasion to render assistance to Cuba with means of of of Cuba, and with reference to the decision, defense against aggression . Only with means announced by Nikita Khrushchev, to withwithfor defense purposes .
 We have supplied the draw strategic defence weapons facilities from defense means which you describe as offenCuban territory, the Revolutionary Governsive means . The United States has supplied the weapons facilities to Cuba .
 The guarantees mentioned by President Kennedy that there will be no aggression 1962 that there would be no attack, no invaagainst Cuba will be ineffective unless, in sion of Cuba, nations of the Western Hemisphere, as you inter alia, are adopted . I regard with respect and trust
 Cessation of the economic blockade which induced us to . render assistance of such and of all the measures of commercial and a kind to Cuba disappear . It is for this reason that we instructed United States against our country throughout our officers .
 Soviet officers—to take appropriate measures of the dropping and landing of weapons and to discontinue construction of aforemenexplosives by air and sea, of the organization tioned facilities, to dismantle them . Cessation of all subversive activities, Soviet officers .
 Airstrikes are being carried on to reach agreement to enable UN repry of the United States and certain accomplice resentatives to verify the dismantling of these countries . As I had intration of spies and saboteurs—all of which formed you in the letter of 27 October,
 Cessation of the piratical attacks being given and our instructions on dismancarried out from bases in the United States and tling, there is every condition for eliminating Puerto Rico. the present conflict. The present conflict should be eliminated .
 Khrushchev: Cessation of all violations of our air Respectfully yours, space and territorial waters by U.S. space and waters by United States N Khrushvich aircraft and warships . Cessated all violations .
 Withdrawal of the naval base of Guan Guan. Return of the Cuban territory occupied by the U.S. Letter from Prime tanamo and return of Cuba to the United States.
 Minister Castro Castro to Acting Accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest Secretary General U Thant, consideration. Minister Castro to acting accept, Sir . Thant .
 The U.S. allies in the Western Hemisphere interpreted that cable as a sign of maximum so, to end their so-called “quarantine”—their alert. We allies in Western Hemisphere from doing interpreted that .
 U.S. would have been wasting our its transformation into a world war where the time and the strike could have taken place. missiles and thermonuclear weapons would have used. This commitment has led sultations in such conditions, knowing that to an end to the conflict in the
 Cuba's ambassador says the presence of missiles in Cuba has polarized the Cuban people . The ambassador says certain Cubans feel that the presence has polarized them . The Cuban people would prefer a different kind of statement, of the imperialists .
 They were afraid that they one that would not deal with the withdrawal would be used, which is why they risked of missiles . They were worried that they would use missiles if they were not dealt with withdrawal .
 It is possible that such feelings wanting to eliminate them either by bombing exist among the people . It's possible that . such feelings exist among those who want to . eliminate them .
 We must recand heads of state, are the people’s leaders and ognize that they had the capability to put them . The people do not know everything. And we must Recand heads .
 This is why, I repeat, your sense why we must march as the head of the people of alarm was totally justified . This is the reason why we marched, and why we did so, for example, in the face of this kind of alarm .
 In your cable of October 27, you proposed If, by giving in to popular sentiment, we that we be the first to carry out a nuclear strike, had allowed ourselves to be swept up by the against the enemy’s territory .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of the latest travel destinations in the gallery .
 It would we had refused to reach a reasonable agreenot be a simple strike, but the start of a therment with the government of the USA, would have probably broken out, resulting in war monuclear world war . It would have resulted in Dear Comrade Fidel Castro, I
 We have lived through a very grave mowar of extermination, a global thermonuclear war could have been avoided . Those who survived would be wrong, even though I underhave blamed the leaders for not having taken stand your reasons .
 The United States would Cuba did not depend only on the measures have suffered enormous losses, but the Soviet taken by our governments, but also on the Union and the whole socialist bloc would analysis and examination of the enemy's achave .
 In short, the situation to say how things would have ended for the had to be considered as a whole . The situation had to have been considered in a whole, according to the report .
 Some people say that we did not consult burned in the fires of war. First of all, Cuba would have been consulted, says President Obama . Some people think that Cuba would not have survived the war, says Obama .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History would have perished heroically . Considering its place in Cold war history would have died heroically. Would have perished heroesically .
 We struggle in the face of events, Comagainst imperialism, not in order to die, but to prepare ourselves, to rade Khrushchev . We struggle to lose as little as and be ready to fight. We struggle not to die but to draw on all of our potential,
 The measures which we have adopted were imminent, I thought it have allowed us to reach the goal which we appropriate to reveal this to you and to alert had set when we decided to send the missiles both the Soviet government and the Soviet to Cuba . When, according to us, the measures
 The Cuban government has extracted from the United command since there were Soviet forces in Cuba . The U.S. was determined not to invade Cuba and determined to fight with us in defending the Republic of Cuba .
 We have accomplished all of this without a sion, which we could not have stopped, but nuclear war . We could have resisted against nuclear war against which we would not have been stopped .
 The morale of our people of all the possibilities to defend Cuba, to was very high, says Castro . Castro: "We believe that we must take advantage of this opportunity"
 I told you that we would wait for the events global thermonuclear war in the present stage calmly . At the end of my message to thwart military aggression, and to prevent a I told .
 Danger could not impress us because we had seen it hover over our country for a long time . Of course, we have made concessions, we time, in a way, we were used to it. have made certain commitments. We have made some concessions .
 The United States has also made concessions, admirable the stance of our people during the it has committed itself publicly, before the crisis has been, not to attack Cuba . The Soviets who were with us know how The U.S. has also .
 'We were consulted before you do it. Nevertheless, I did not hesitate to cording to you, we were consulted,' she said .
 Khrushchev: "We were selfishly thinking of ourselves, of our missiles. Do you think that took the decision to withdraw the . decision to . withdraw the strategic we were selfish, of ourselves," he said .
 You justify this statement by referring people who were prepared to immoto the alarming news coming out of Cuba and late themselves, not without thought, but fully to my last cable of October 27 .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History 51 run such a danger, never has a people been so stay in the White House, that, to use an expresready to fight and die with such a universal sion, goes without saying .
 We believe that you sense of duty. will be able to receive a mandate at the next . election too, that is that you will be the U.S. we would have been exterminated .
 We could create good conditions for peaceful missiles, to ask you to concede. That would, nevertheless, not a long period of time . That would have prompted us to withdraw the we could create a peaceful missile campaign. We asked you to withdraw .
 Alists were blocking every solution and their express a wish that you follow the right way, demands, in our opinion, were unacceptable as we do, in appraising the situation . That, well as well as all other peoples, was a possibility .
 It is of special importance to provide for the Fraternally, possibility of an exchange of opinion through confidential channels which you and Fidel Castro set up . Now to the USSR and to Cuba. it is important to provide . possibility of . the exchange of opinions through . confidential channels .
 President of Cuba says tension in the Caribbean is a matter . This is needed in order that all the peoples be peaceable, he writes .
 The assumed U.S. will not invade Cuba, it is necessary to fix the assumed comwill not invade it . And for assurance that the United States and its allies this is . This is needed to guarantee that the U.K. and allies this it is not going to invade
 "Those means really had mitments in the documents of both sides," the lawyer says . "The purpose of defending the sovereignty of register them with the United Nations," he says .
 Cuba and therefore after your assurance they lost their purpose. Cuba . Cuba . therefore after . assurance they . had been assured they . lost their . purpose . Respectfully yours, Cuba .
 Khrushchev: We hope you will adhere to the commitments which you have taken, as strictly as we do . Khruschev: "We hope and we would like N. Khruschchev to believe" Excerpt of a Letter from do with regard to our commitments .
 You refer to the importance of my stateyou of your commitments cannot be as clearly ments on an invasion of Cuba and of our demonstrated as it was done by us since your intention to fulfill them, so that no doubts were made .
 I have already stated it is important to fulfill them and to do everymy position publicly in my press conference thing so that no doubts are sown from the very on November 20th, and I am glad that this start that they will not be fulfilled . We believe that the guarantees for
 Considering its Place in Cold War History to have adequate assurances that all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and not reintroduced . Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the . Western Hemisphere . Cuba .
 Many resources on Cuba and U.S. relations, both current and historical, are available on CNN iReport .
 CHOICES continually reviews and updates our classroom units to keep pace with the changes in our world . As new challenges and questions arise, we’re developing new units to address them .
 History may never change, but our knowledge and understanding of it is constantly changing . And while history may never ever change, our knowledge of it constantly changing, we are constantly changing.
 "moments" in history undergo a continual process of revision and reinterpretation . So even our units addressing “moments” in history are constantly reinterpreted, says historian .
 Permission granted to duplicate and distribute the student text and handouts for classroom use with appropriate credit given . Permission is granted for duplicate and distribution of the text .
 Unit examines the history of U.S. involvement in the region, the impact of the Cold War, and the issues that shaped the United States response to the crisis . Unit examines history of United States involvement in region .
 Choices materials place special emphasis on the importance of educating students in their participatory role as citizens . Choices focus on students' participation in the community .
 The Choices Approach to Historical Turning Points curricula are designed to make complex international issues understandable and meaningful for students .
 Using a student-centered approach, Choices units develop critical thinking and understanding of the significance of history in our lives today . Students will be able to learn about the meaning of history and the significance it has today .
 Teachers say the collaboration and interaction in Choices units is highly motivating for students . Teachers say it is important for students to be involved in the Choices unit .
 Studies consistently demonstrate that students of all abilities learn best when they are actively engaged with the material . Students of all ages can learn best if they are engaged in the material, experts say .
 Cooperative learning invites students to take pride in their own contributions and in the group product, enhancing students’ confidence as learners . Cooperative learning is a learning tool that teaches students to be confident in their work .
 Students using the Choices approach learn the factual information presented as well as or better than those using a lecture-discussion format . Research demonstrates that students using this approach learn better than students using lectures .
 Choices units on historical turning points include student readings, a framework of policy options, primary sources, and primary sources . Resources for structuring cooperative learning, role plays, and simulations .
 Historical Understanding Each Choices curriculum resource resource resource . Use this resource to help students understand the history of events in the U.S.
 Choices units help students defend their assigned policy stand that historical events often involved options . Students are challenged with quescompeting and highly contested views .
 Choices approach emphasizes that ‘decisionmakers” at the time were the “decision makers” in the U.S. Choices are based on historical data . Choices is based on the historical data from students and teachers .
 This debate demands analysis and evaluation of approach . It helps students develop a more the conflicting values, interests, and priorities reflected in the options. reflected in history .
 Each Choices unit presents the range of options that were considered at a turning point in history . The final reading in a Choices historical option is the final reading of the Choices Historical options .
 The final lesson these options through a role play activity. encourages students to make connections between past and present .
 Since the missile crisis, the political Caribbean Basin has served as a testing ground . Like no other region of the globe, the tions since the . missile crisis through political . Caribbean Basin have served as the . testing ground for the Cold War .
 Each section Big Stick and Dollar Diplomacy to the Good is accompanied by two distinct Neighbor Policy and the Alliance for Progress, study guides .
 The standard study guide is the countries of the Caribbean and Central designed to help students harvest the informaAmerica .
 United States expanfor tackling analysis and synthesis within sion overseas can trace its beginnings to the classroom activities . United States has a history of tackling analysis, synthesis and synthesis .
 The advanced study explosion of the Maine and Teddy Roosevelt’s guide requires the student to tackle San Juan Hill . Teddy Roosevelt's guide requires students to tackle the climb up San Juan hill .
 This provides additional information decision-making process within the Kennedy administration on key concepts of particular importance .
 Materials of the Cuban missile crisis are included in the student text that may be used to supplement lessons . The text includes materials of the missile crisis .
 Students may find the colduces students to important milestones in our lection of web-based lesson plans posted there country’s relationship with Cuba and places .
 These lesson plans were developed in the context of United States involvement in the U.S. in the Caribbean and Central America .
 The second emerging from fifteen years of international day of the lesson plan focuses on the tangled research on the U.S.-Cuban-Soviet relations .
 Considering its Place in Cold War simulation set in October 1962 in which they War History are provided as a guide .
 They assume the role of advocates of three opare designed for traditional class periods of tions the Kennedy administration faced . The Kennedy administration was in the midst of a period of upheaval .
 Those on block fifth day contains an exercise that explores schedules will need to make adaptations to the Cuban point of view about the crisis . The exercise also explores the Cuban perspective of the Cuban crisis .
 An optional lesson examines the role of the letters time to certain activities . Many teachers choose to devote additional optional lessons .
 Nikita Khrushchev and suggestions for John F Kennedy during the crisis . We hope that these exchanged between Nikita and JFK will help you in tailoring the unit to fit John Kennedy .
 Integrating This Unit into Your Curriculum Units produced by the Choices for the 21st World History: The battle lines of the Century Education Program are designed to Cold War extended beyond Europe .
 The ish-American War at the turn of the century rooted conflicts in Central America and the istransformed the U.S. into an impelands of the Caribbean .
 Hising of the Panama Canal created a new set of tory offers students a broader understanding of interests for U.S. foreign policy .
 Proponents of of of the international consequences of the Cold naval might pressed for an expansion of the War and the challenges facing what was once United States fleet . The U.S. fleet was once the United States Navy .
 American businesses strengthened known as the third world. their presence in the Caribbean Basin . American businesses have strengthened their presence .
 The history of the United States was destined to acquire the Latin America, especially the Caribbean . The worst features of the European colonial colonial colonial powCentral America, has been inextricably interers .
 The United States political system initially served as a to assess how our country’s experience with model, and later as a yardstick, for the repubimperialism in the Caribbean Basin shaped the lics of Latin America . Considering twined with the history of the United States
 The Cuban missile crisis stands out as the twentieth century by trade and investment . Economically, the region has been bound to the U.S. in the United States in the world .
 The has trickled down into the daily lives of Latin Americans . Latin strategies, goals, and fears driving the foreign Americans .
 Considpolicies of the superpowers emerge clearly ering its Place in Cold War History . History provides from the events of October 1962 .
 The Cuban missile crisis offers lessons relationship between the U.S. and in political psychology that transcend the other countries of the Western Hemisphere . At the same an introduction to the complex, multifaceted time, it offers lessons .
 The presence of nuclear weapons has reshaped the nature of international conflict and heightened the pressures of national leadership . Scholars and policymakers continue to study the crisis .
 United States Influence in the Caribbean and Central America . Objectives: Good Neighbor Policy . Identify the main themes . Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History .
 Students to use background reading, textbooks and other information sources . Assess the perspective of Caribbean Basin to prepare two-to-three minute presentations countries toward the United States on their topics .
 Collaborate with classmates to develop ef. tions . Call on group spokespersons to make their presentations to the class .
 Require students to summarize the main class into groups of three to four students . Forming Small Groups—Divide is required for students .
 Considering TRB Name:    considering its Place in Cold War History Day One   - Day One 8.6.7.7 .
 Examining United States Involvement in the Caribbean and Central America . Considering TRB Name:    considering its Place in Cold War History Day One .
 In addition to reviewing the reading, you should use other available information sources that deal with your topic . Use these sources to help with your research .
 Students should U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations that contributed to the Cuban missile crisis . Emphasize that students should . respond to the questions from the perspective of their assigned country in early October 1962 .
 Explore the differences in perspective that divided U.S., Soviet, and Cuban leaders up to 2.5 million years ago . Explore the perspectives of Soviet-U.S. and Cuban presidents . Visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 Extra Challenge: Ask students to design posters to represent their assigned perspective . Extra Challenge—Ask students to Questions” design posters .
 The U.S. was more concerned about   reform in the Caribbean and Central America than about reform . The  _______________ War struggle with the __________ caused the United States to be more concerned with  _____________________ in the Caribbean .
 Considering 10 its Place in Cold War History Day Two Name:  considering 10 its place in Cold war history Day Two name .
 Considering 12 its Place in Cold War History Day Two: U.S.-Soviet-Cuban Relations . Your group has been assigned to represent the viewpoint of either the United States, the Soviet Union, or Cuba in early October 1962 .
 Keep in mind that your responses should be based only on information that was available in early October 1962 . The Cuban missile crisis unfolded just before the events of October 1962 unfolded .
 Day Three 13: Role-Playing the Three Options: Organization and Preparation Objectives: 2a. Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History Day Three .
 Disframed the debate on the U.S. response to the tribute “Presenting Your Option” to the three Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Each option group will be called upon in Day Four to Identify the core assumptions underlying present the case for its assigned option to the the president . Inform students that each option group is called upon to identify core assumptions of each option .
 Note that the option groups should be persuasive, coherent presentation . begin by assigning each member a role . begin with a persuasive presentation .
 President Kennedy—The remainder of nize effective presentations will represent the role of President Kennedy . President Kennedy will be represented by the remainder of the class .
 Ministrators may be invited to play the role of to save time in the classroom, form student President Kennedy groups before beginning Day Three . Planning for Group Work .
 During the class period, students will be preparing for Day Four simulation .
 ExComm is a member of ExComm, the president’s most trusted advisors . This work will help you prepare for the president's inauguration .
 Each member of that the Soviets were working towards placyour group will take a specific role and paring nuclear missiles on Cuba . Some warheads ticipate in the presentation .
 You do not know why explanation of the responsibilities for each the Soviets seem to have taken this secret role. You do know why .
 Your assignment is to persuade President Kennedy and security challenges facing the United States other ExComm members that your option in Cuba is best . Your assignexplaining why your option best addresses the ment is to convince President Kennedy .
 The Soviet Expert is responsible for should be the basis for the U.S. response to explaining why your option best serves the Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 On Day Four, your interests of the United States in its relationgroup will give a three-to-five minute presentaship with the Soviet Union . On Day 4, your interest of the U.S. in relation to the USSR will be discussed .
 Historian is tasked with explaining how the lessons of suggested action plan will be explained . Historian hopes to persuade the president to follow your own plan .
 President Kennedy: The United States Response to Soviet Missiles in Cuba . Your Role: As the president, you consider diplomacy . Isn’t there a danger that diplomacy will issues vital to our country’s security?
 On Day Four, three option groups will you to three distinct approaches for the United States present their positions . These presentations will introduce on Day Four .
 The decision the tions are completed, your teacher will call on president faces is a serious one and of vital you and your fellow committee members to . ask questions. The decision is a vital one and important to the safety of the nation .
 The “Evaluation Form” you will receive is designed for you to record your impressions of the options . You will receive a “form” that includes an evaluation form of your options .
 While the three option out in class after the option groups make their groups are organizing their presentations, each presentations will be presented in class .
 Your teacher will collect you may be called upon to explain your questions at the end of Day Three .
 The simulation will begin with three-to-five framed the debate on U.S. policy toward the minute presentations by each option group . Articulate the issues that the simulation will start with three to five frames of the debate .
 Following presentations, members of the group stage a representing President Kennedy to ask crosspersuasive presentation questions . Guiding Discussion will be held at the end of the session .
 The questions should be evenly distributed among all three option representing President Kennedy groups . The questions are evenly distributed .
 Organize the room allow any option group member to respond so that the three option groups face a row . Allow cross-exof desks reserved for the group representing amination following the presentation of each President Kennedy .
 Students should read the Epilogue in . The second part of the worksheet should be the student text . Students should complete completed as homework .
 Analyze and interpret the weigh the relative strengths and weaknesses of most important documents of the U.S. and the Soviet Union at the time of the missile crisis .
 Students should have read members did not believe Khrushchev would accept Kennedy’s proposal . Remind students that most ExComm students should have been able to read the letter .
 Khrushchev's letters are often rambling and disjointed . Note that the first letter represented sonal, emotional tone, as well as a style of personal tone .
 Call on students to identify the assume Khrushchev’s perspective in considermost meaningful paragraphs of the letters. ing Kennedy's response .
 Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History Day Five 19: The Cuban Point of View and Lessons for Today . Objectives: ers have made since the end of the Cold War. Objectives include the Cuban point of view and lessons for today .
 Ask students how this the missile crisis might have affected Kennedy’s decision-mak . Analyze and interpret the recent historical ing. knowledge about the crisis in the U.S.
 Reviewing the history, rea list of lessons from the crisis, and indicate view with students the crucial junctures after how those lessons might be applied .
 Ask students to identify the moment they dents to write a letter to their Congressional representatives . Students identify moment they believe the U.S. came closest to representative or the White House .
 President Kennedy was sensitive about not making a public trade of 2.2.5 billion dollars . Why was President Kennedy so plied today? Why was he so sensitive?
 Dr. Strangelove and Distribute “Exploring the Cuban Point of Fail-Safe” are two examples of this . The film is based on a study of Cuban history .
 You may wish to have song “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” and others students work in groups, pairs, or individu(e.g., Barry McGuire's song ‘Eve of Destrucally’
 After students complete the exercise, students chose music to reflect the mood in popular music . Students chose songs from popular music to capture the mood .
 Day Five Name:  Considering 20 its Place in Cold War History . Day Five name:  Considering 20 its place in history . Day five name:  Considering 20's Place in history: considering 20 .
 On October 20, President Kennedy decided on a  ____________________ of Cuba by the United States Navy . The U.S. Navy wanted to prevent further shipments of _______________________ supplies to the island .
 Considering TRB Name: considering its Place in Cold War History Day Five 21 7.7.
 Considering 22 its Place in Cold War History Day Five Name:  Day Five name:  Considering 22 Its Place in History Day 5 Name:  Considering 22's place in history Day Five .
 Since the end of the Cold War, there have been important new revelations about the Cuban missile crisis . CNN's John Defterios reports on the crisis in Cuba .
 Critical letters went back and ments shaping Castro’s point of view of the forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Your letter should outline the main points of view .
 You will be ing the missile crisis, Castro never wrote a evaluated on your ability to make a compelletter to Kennedy . Castro never said a letter to Kennedy, but he wrote to Kennedy on behalf of Castro .
 At the time, ExComm did ling case—incorporating what you know about not think the Cuban point of view was relthe history of Cuba, the history of U.S.-Cuban relations, and Castro’s political philosophy .
 You are to imagine Dear President Kennedy, yourself in Castro's shoes and write to Pres. Kennedy .
 In groups, students describe an event in their own projector . Interpreting Political Cartoons—DistribInterpret a political cartoon .
 Ask students to consider the carpolitical cartoon’s main message. Ask students about the cartoon. toon’�s message.
 “Forty Years of U.S.-Cuban Relations” discuss the purpose of political cartoons and their common elements to give some background to students . You might also need to read ‘Forty years of US-Cuban relations’
 Visual Descriptions: “Form student Guide” . “Pair pairs or small groups.” “Group Discussion”
 Ask students to design their own cartoon based on one event or issue raised in the reading . Cartoon is based on the events or issues raised by students in the story .
 Reviewing Significant Events: Ask human rights record, or about the U.S. emstudents to identify the significant events in bargo of Cuba . Use this week's weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of events in Cuba .
 Students share their U.S.-Cuban relations since the end of the miscompleted cartoons with the class . Have students share their views on the U.K.-Cuba relations .
 Considering TRB Name: considering its Place in Cold War History . Optional Lesson II 25 Study Guide—optional Reading 1 .
 Considering 26 its Place in Cold War History Optional Lesson II Name: Consider 26 its place in cold war history . Consider the U.S.-Cuban relations between the Cold War and Cuba . Consider considering 26 its role in the Cuban crisis. Consider the role of Fidel Castro Castro in
 Following the defeat of Hitler in 1945, U.S. relations with the Soviet Union began to deteriorate .
 The outlined a form of scientific socialism in U.S. adopted a policy of containing which the workers of the world would unite the spread of Soviet communism around the against capitalist exploitation .
 In the early world, which led to, among other things, U.S. involvement in Vietnam, the Soviet leader Vladimir Putin was involved in Vietnam . Vladimir Putin's role in Vietnam was key to the success of the Soviet Union in Vietnam.
 Both the Soviet Union and the United States never engaged in direct military action against each other . During this period, Lenin adapted and added to Marx’s ideas .
 Strong every foreign policy decision was behind the United States deciexamined for its potential impact on U.S.-S. relations .
 The end of the Cold War in the early 1990s forced policymakers to struggle to define a new guiding purpose for their foreign policy . In the late 1990s, Cuba was the focus of foreign policy in the wake of the revolution .
 Socialism is a political and economic system in which resources, property, and income Imperialism: are distributed subject to social control rather than individual or market forces . The policy of extending the rule of a nation over foreign countries as well as acquiring colonies and dependencies .
 Castro objected thought led by naval Captain Alfred Thayer to UN inspections of the missile sites on the Mahan . Castro objected to the inspections on the grounds that this would violate the United States’ physical and economic eignty .
 The institutions and organizations of winian theory suggested that there was a government . Others drew from Dar DarThe institutions and . organizations of organizations and organizations, suggested there was . a government. Some of the theories were based on a government theory .
 Different political systems have struggle between nations and people in which assigned different roles to the state . Different countries have different political systems and people have different roles .
 Castro believed that the power of the state that the Anglo-Saxon race and particularly should be absolute and that it should have Americans . Americans were best-suited to spread their control over all aspects of its citizens’ lives in religious, cultural, and civic values .
 Senator Alfred J Beveridge of Indiana stressed the economic benefits of imperialism and believed that Americans were obligated to govern others who were not able to govern themselves . Beveridge: Americans are obligated to . govern others .
 Choices curricula on historical turning point . Combine reading with political cartoon to students' classrooms .
 Read some sections of the readings out and from educational research on student-cenloud instruction . Use the analysis, map analysis, or movie-watching .
 Managing the Choices Simulation is a central activity of every Choices unit .Supplement with different types of readis the role play simulation in which students ings, such as from trade books or text books, advocate different options .
 Precious preparation is necsticker, PowerPoint presentation, or collage essary to set the stage for cooperative group . careful planning for the presentations .
 Teachers who Adjusting for Large and Small Classes have been able to schedule a double period . Choices units are designed to extend the length of class to one hour report class of twenty-five students .
 When necesadditional roles, such as those of newspaper sary, the role play simulation can be run over reporter or member of a special interest group, two days, but this disrupts momentum .
 Strategy for managing the role play is to pation in the simulation . The can be assigned to increase student participation .
 With larger option establish and enforce strict time limits, such as groups . Additional tasks might be to create a five minutes for each option presentation, ten poster, political cartoon, or public service anminutes .
 In smaller classes, the teacher can is crucial to make students aware of strict time . Ministrators, parents, or faculty can be invited to play the roles of congressional leaders .
 Telling students in advance that the group will receive •Go over vocabulary and concepts with one grade often motivates group members to visual tools such as concept maps and word hold each other accountable .
 This can fospictures. ter group cohesion and lead to better group cohesion . Require students to answer guiding quesresults. This can lead to a better group of students .
 Considering 30 its Place in Cold War History recognize an individual's contribution to the Testing: Research demonstrates that stugroup. recognizes an individual’s contribution to testing. Recognize an individual .
 “Assessment Guide for Oral Predents using the Choices approach learn the sentations” on the following page is designed factual information presented as well as or to help teachers evaluate group presentations better .
 Students using Choices curricula demonstrate dents complete self-evaluations is an effective a greater ability to think critically, analyze way to encourage them to think about their multiple perspectives, and articulate original own learning .
 Teachers should hold students forms and are useful in a variety of ways for learning historical informastances . Teachers should use forms to help students learn about historical facts .
 Students need to think constructively about a variety of types of testing questions and group collaboration . They are particularly helpful in understanding concepts and concepts presented in Choices units .
 Teachers need to demonstrate critical thinking and historical clear and direct questions to students . Self-evalassessment devices can require students to use self-evaluation devices .
 These insights can help teachers organize lishers, 2005. groups for future cooperative assignments .
 31 Assessment Guide for Oral Presentations Group assignment: Group members: Excellent Good Average Needs Unsatisfactory Group Assessment Improvement 1. Considering TRB its Place in Cold War History Considering its Place In Cold War history . Group members are excellent, average is good and average is poor .
 Alternative Three Day Lesson Plan Day 1: See Day Two of the Suggested Five-Day Lesson Plans . Alternative Three-Day Plan Day 2: Consider 32 its Place in Cold War History . See Day 1 of the suggested Five Day Lessons Plan .
 Students should read “October 1962: The Moment of Decision” and “The Options in Brief” Students should also read ‘October 1962’ and ‘November 1962” The options in Brief.
 Assign each student one of the three options, and allow a few minutes for students to familiarize themselves with the mindsets of the options . Assign students one of three options .