 Plans and routines are both a response to and the context for strategic interaction by organizational participants . Ratherthan constituting fixed barriersto innovation, routines and plans can be relatively plastic .
 Decision makers may not plan even when planning is possible and why plans may not be implemented even when they already exist . I present evidence of this and suggest why planning is not always possible .
 Organization theories that are based on plans or routines can explain behavior only in the sense that they can cite the rules that govern observed action . Without an account of their source, organization theories can't explain behavior .
 A more satisfactory account requires empirical and theoretical treatment of the birth, persistence, and death of plans and routines . Theories that emphasize calculation to the neglect of rule-governed behavior are sometimes an advance .
 This article revisits terrain explored by Graham Allison in an effort to improve our understanding of the role of routines and plans in the conduct of the U.S. and Soviet governments in the Cuban missile crisis .
 First, this crisis is the closest the world has ever come to thermonuclearwar . First, it's the closest to thermo-war. First, the crisis is a nuclear war .
 Had U.S. troops invaded Cuba, they would have faced Soviet defenders armed with tactical missiles equipped with nuclear warheads . Soviet defenders would have been armed with weapons equipped with nukes .
 Any Soviet use of nuclear weapons against U.S. forces would almost certainly have led to general war . Any Soviet nuclear strike would have almost certainly led to a general war against the United States .
 First, the case is relatively well documented, and declassification of the written record has been extensive . Second, the ExComm tapes have been declassified .
 This research was assisted by an award from the Social Science Research Council of an Advanced Fellowship in Foreign Policy Studies with the support of a grant from the Ford Foundation .
 His accounts have long defined the terms of debate about the role of organizationalroutines, not just in the missile crisis, but in United States foreign policy making .
 If ever there were a situation where the involvement of leaders would override the effects of organizational factors, this would be it . This would be the first time a leader has overruled organizational factors to override organizational factors .
 If routines and plans played a significant role in shaping behavior, one can presumethat their importance is highly general .
 Evidence suggests routines and plans did not closely constrain the U.S. response to the discovery of missiles in Cuba . This article makes two points, one empirical and one theoretical .
 The amount of time that decision makers had to deal with the missile threat and to consider implementing countermeasures is much longer than commonly believed .
 A putative absence of plans and routines to deal with the threatin October 1962 raises the question of why such routines and plans were not developed as much as eighteen months earlier, when the first serious consideration of the possibility of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba occurred .
 Decision makers find they lack plans to deal with this event as they desired, they obtained new plans or modification of existing ones . Second, when decision makers found that they lacked plans, they got new plans for this event .
 Leaders found plans and routines too constraining, they were able to override or evade them by personal intervention . This was done sufficiently quickly that new plans were available when confirmed by aerial photography .
 The general theoretical point is that while circumventing routines may be costly, leaders may find it both feasible and attractive to do so . Leaders may be able to circumvent routine routines, but may also find it attractive to circumvent routines .
 The first, ironically, includes the very Model II-style processes that are often taken as providing a foundation for a view of organizations as rigid and stereotyped in their behavior . This is the first of a number of processes that have been taken into account of the organization's behavior .
 A richer conception of organizationalprocesses suggests that a rule-governed organization is capable of considerable variety and flexibility in its responses . Rule-governing organizations are capable of flexibility in their responses, authors say .
 The second set involves strategic interaction among organizational decision makers . Adherence to plans is cooperative behavior;defection is often costly, but sometimes worthwhile .
 I discuss the U.S. government's response to the possibility of Soviet missiles in Cubain terms of three puzzles . CNN's John Sutter discusses the possibility that Soviet missiles could be used in Cuba .
 The possibility that the U.S. would install offensive missiles in Cuba was recognized as early as April 1961 . Planning to deal with this contingency was extremely limited . The operations of October 1962 bore little resemblance to those planned earlier .
 Planning had identified a U.S. response to a Soviet military provocation a blockade of Cuba-that response was deemed by decision makers to be extremely problematic, and they were dissatisfied with it . Second, although the planning had . identified a United States response to . a Soviet . provocation a
 planners did not search widely for a response that would avoid the problems associated with a blockade . Nevertheless, planners searched widely for an alternative to the blockade . The blockade is expected to be a major problem .
 Plans were produced, but they did not significantly constrain how these options were implemented . Third, in the case of the air strike and the blockade, plans were produced . Plans were also produced but not constraining how they would be implemented .
 When leaders saw that implementing plans would not produce the results that they wanted, they caused the plans and organizationalbehavior to be changed . Leaders saw that implementation of plans was not producing the results desired .
 Their interventions in turn were shaped by their broader political objectives . However, their interventions in their own political objectives were shaped in turn .
 The likelihood that a government will be able to improvise a successful response to an international crisis is low . The failed 1980 mission to rescue hostages held at the U.S. embassy in Tehran in Iran was an example of this theory .
 Failures to plan adequately and to train, rehearse, and ""debug""mission procedures led to the failure of this highly risky mission, several deaths, and a humiliating defeat for the U.S. government .
 Allison's original examples of government behavior constrained by routines have not fared well upon furxamination . Other instances of routines shaping behaviors have also been revealed .
 Allison and Zelikow discuss several other instances on the U.S. and the Soviet sides of the Soviet-U.S.-Soviet war .
 The most relevant criticism is offered by Bendor and Hammond . They argue that even a complete reliance on routines to govern behavior need not entail organizationalresponses that are rigid .
 While this criticism is accurate and constructive, it does not speak to an issue that lies at the heart of any attempt to explain organizationalbehavior in terms of routines .
 If routines or plans are easy to create and to change, then explaining organizationalbehavior in terms of them will simply displace the analytical puzzle, not solve it . If routines are easy, they will displace an analytical puzzle .
 "In the long run routines can be developed or modified so that organizationalcapabilities evolve," says the author of the book .
 The failure of organizations to do this when they possess timely warning of future contingencies is not explained merely by noting that change is costly, it's costly . The failure to anticipate contingencies will not be explained merely as noting that changes are costly is costly .
 At least some of the time it should be worth paying those costs, particularly when the anticipated contingency is highly threatening . The government should pay for the costs, especially when it is in danger .
 When Allison first wrote, it seemed unproblematicto treat the missile crisis as very much a short-runphenomenon . Allison: "When I wrote this article, I would treat the crisis as unproblemsmatmatictico treat it as a very much
 Charles Hermann offered what became a widely accepted judgment, that in comparison with other international crises, the Cuban crisis was marked by unusually strong surprise, strong threat, and intense time pressure .
 If so, it is understandable why U.S. decision makers would be constrained by their alleged inability to fashion novel responses in the short time supposedly available .
 Hermann's assessment, though highly plausible based on the information available then, is wrong . Unfortunately,Hermann'sassessment, though . well plausible, was wrong, says Hermann .
 Recognition of the necessity for . preparing a response to Soviet missiles in Cuba appeared on agency agendas . well before October 1962 .
 The very existence of the White House tapes is due to John Kennedy's anticipation that a crisis involving Cuba was likely to occur in the late summer of 1962 .
 Lincoln's secretary recalls how some people said before they were for the operation and after said they were against it . As recounted by his secretary,Evelyn Lincoln,
 There is the remote possibility of an attempt to convert Cuba into a Russian base for strategic attack on the U.S. The Latest Evidence Anticipation,But No Planning, is the latest evidence of a Russian attack .
 Recently declassified documents show that finding Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba was not as surprising as it was portrayed in early accounts of Kennedy .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy started his narrative on October 16, when he and President Kennedy learned of the Soviet missiles . Theodore Sorensen began his account on September 6, when they met with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin .
 It is now known that U.S. decision makers began discussing the possibility of Soviet missiles in Cuba long before then . The blockade as a response was a response long before .
 Berle indicated that he had given considerable thought to establishment of a naval blockade of Cuba as a weapon against the Castroregime .
 The Defense representative,Mr Williams, reportedthat a blockade of Cuba was physically feasible . The blockade was physically possible .
 Such a blockade, to be effective, would require stopping, boarding and searching of all vessels destined to Cuba, regardless of flag, would be effective .
 The opinion was expressed by Mr Williams that the Soviet Government would consider such treatment of its vessels as an act of war .
 The blockade of Cubanports would in itself be considered an act of war and would violate two treaties to which we are a signator, including the Rio Treaty, he said . He also stated that unless Cuba committed a unilateral aggression against the United States, the blockade of Cuba would be considered
 The October 1962 blockade now seems remarkable in a way that it previously did not. Thus, it seems remarkable to think of the blockade now .
 Rather than being an inspired revision of an old plan in the face of a novel and extremely threateningsituation, it now appears to have been an option for meeting a dimly perceived threat .
 The timing of his query coincided with the Turkishand Italian bases for United States intermediaterange ballistic missiles becoming fully operational . The U.S. bases for such missiles are now operational .
 Well before October 1962, officials had also discussed a blockade as a countermeasure to a strengthening Soviet military role in Cuba or a Soviet move against Berlin .
 This was part of a multi-agencyassessmentof a blockadecompleted in response to RobertKennedy's March 22 request . Robert Kennedy requested the blockade in March .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone argued that the Soviets might install missiles in Cuba . McCone met with Secretary of State Dean Rusk, General Maxwell Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and Robert Kennedy .
 Former intelligence official Dino Brugioni relates that Taylor told him that no one in the group was shocked at the idea and that it had already occurred .
 McCone, Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Taylor, and others discussed the appropriate U.S. response to the placement of Soviet MRBMs in Cuba . Rusk and Bundy expressed misgivings about imposing a partial or full blockade .
 Robert Kennedy asked McCone about the possibility of provoking Cuban action against the U.S. base at Guantanamo . McNamarafavored sabotage and guerrilla warfare, while Robert Kennedy queried McCone .
 McCone tried to dampen their enthusiasm by mentioning the lack of success of previous covert actions and the likelihood that Cubaninternalsecurity would become even more formidable . Bundy also expressed interest in covert operations but recognized that they would involve a high degree of attribution""to the United States .
 McCone met with President Kennedy on August 22; they met again the next day in what has been described as a National Security Council meeting . Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric,Taylor,and Bundy attended the meeting . The next day, the meeting was described as "a
 McCone, Rusk, and McNamarainet met on August 17, but little documentation has surfaced . Although his view was not shared, he 3McCone,Rusk, McNamaraineet and McCone were in attendance .
 None of these analyses is mentioned in the October ExComm deliberations . This suggests either they had not been completed, nobody had read them, or they had forgotten .
 Apparently there were only two significant instances of political planning before October 1962 .
 The second was stockpiling in West Berlin of food, coal, medicines, and industrial materials in case the Soviets blockaded that city again . West Berlin stockpiled food and coal in case of a Soviet blockade .
 The most remarkable aspect of U.S. planning was that except for the military elements, there was so little of it . From the standpoint of these revelations, the most remarkable thing is that there were so little military elements .
 It is the lack of planning in the face of directives to do so, rather than its constraining effects, that constitutes the true puzzle concerning the relationship between plans and the U.S. government's behavior in this crisis .
 Option A was to cancel operational plans and treat Cuba as a bloc nation . Option C was to commit to overthrowing Castro, including, if necessary, use of U.S. forces . Option D was to use a provocation and overthrow Castro by United States military force .
 The B plus variant allowed the United States to seek to provoke a revolt against Castro that might require U.S. intervention . The B+ variant was designed to provoke an uprising against Castro .
 After the Soviet military build-up accelerated in late summer, the executive branch had from August to October in which to plan new responses . Decision makers were hardly limited to executing plans written before August .
 The decision makers' view in August of the blockade could have motivated them to order new plans for other political or military responses, they did not do so .
 There was nothing about the military planning process as such to suggest that novel responses could not have been created within 60 days . As will become clear from examining the air strike option, there was nothing in the planning process .
 The number of alternatives available to leaders is endogenous to the planning process that produces them and that process had enough time to produce more alternatives . However, it clearly did not produce enough alternatives .
 The case for Model II rests on organizations being unable to modify routines quickly . Model II is a model for organizations to be able to adapt quickly . The case rests on organization being able to modify routine quickly .
 If the crisis is viewed as a 13-day event, then that view is at least plausible, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The crisis is likely to have lasted 13 days .
 Recent evidence suggests that a Model II account is unappreciative of just how quickly routines can be altered . However, the recent evidence suggests . Just as quickly as possible, routines can easily be altered, even in the short run .
 The U.S. air strike planning process is the clearest case of this, and it is especially significant because it is the organizational characteristic that perhapshad the greatest impact on the outcome .
 At the outset of the crisis, most of the ExComm, including the President, favored launching an air strike against just the missile sites .
 The military warned that a strike could not be guaranteed to destroy all missiles .
 Military argued that Cuban and Soviet air power to Florida or U.S. invasion forces would have to be neutralized, thus requiring a larger attack . The military argued that the threat posed by surviving Cuban and . Soviet air . power to Cuba or to United States invasion forces .
 Had the military responded to early civilian interest in a ""surgical""air strike with more alacrity and placed less emphasis on the need for preempting an attack on Florida by widespread air attacks on a long list of Cuban targets .
 Allison: The military had to base its planning for air strikes and an invasion of Cuba that were not tailored to the special situation created by the existence of the Soviet missile sites . In Allison's original account, the military .
 The failureto propose an air strikeplan that matched civilian preferences for a highly selective use of force was described in terms of organizationalrigidity . The military allegedly failed to grasp the political importance of limiting the 1172 TimothyJ McKeown scale of damage of an air attack .
 They were allegedly unable to formulate an air strike plan that the civilians found appealing, in spite of the strong initial civilian inclination to approvean air strike . As a result of the lack of a plan, they allegedly were unable to form a plan that appealed to civilians .
 Allison and Zelikow's revised account presents a substantiallydifferent picture . Allison: "Allison's account presents an entirely different picture of the events in the U.S. history"
 The armed forces had already prepared three different plans of operations against Cuba . Prior to the discovery of the missiles, the armed forces, at the direction of the White House, had already .
 The presidential order spurred an intense reevaluation of the air strike plan, which until then had been abstract . Unlike the directives for political planning, the directives to revise military plans were energetic .
 The new work on the air strike plan went to the United States Air Force'sTacticalAir Command, headed by General Walter Sweeney .
 The White House continued to press the armed forces to update their air strike plans . White House continues to press armed forces for updates on air strikes .
 A leader who understands agencies operate on plans and routines can counteract their tendency to respond to novelty by ordering the revision of plans and supervising the revision process .
 White House shaped air strike planning for Cuba . That's exactly how the White House shapes air strike plans .
 After the missiles were photographed, the Joint Chiefs approved a menu of five air strike options . In preparation for the October 17 ExComm meeting, the joint chiefs approved the menu .
 Option I was an attack on missile and nuclear storage sites . This corresponded to what the ExComm had in mind when they discussed a ""surgical"" strike .
 Military planners kept adding more sorties to the options . However, the content of the sorties kept shifting as military planners added more and more options .
 The continual revision of the sortie numbers was noticed by the ExComm participants . It became a source of irritation to some .
 On October 19, McNamaracomplainedto the Joint Chiefs that they just talked to the President in very general terms . The Joint Chiefs said the President spoke to them on October 19 .
 Every day the number of airplanes we'll have in the air is increasing . But every day the numbers for airplanes are increasing . The numbers of airplanes flying are increasing, experts say .
 Maxwell Taylor, a member of the Joint Chiefs, was a former commander of an airborne division . Maxwell Taylor is a former Joint Chiefs member .
 Taylor grew exasperated with the air strike planning and told his colleagues that the continual increase in sortie numbers was undermining the military's case for an air strike . Taylor told colleagues he was frustrated with the number of sortie sorties .
 The political strategy of the Joint Chiefs can be understood in the U.S. Joint Chiefs . That rigidity cannot be understood without understanding the political strategy . The Joint Chiefs' political strategy is to win back control of the White House .
 It is difficult to trace empirically the reasons for the weak response to directives for planning in the period between the spring of 1961 and late summer of 1962 . Planning in the Service of the Joint Chiefs' Agenda .
 Officials do not often write down why they do not take seriously the 1174 TimothyJ McKeown directives of their superiors . Officials are not fond of recording why they don't follow up on earlier directives .
 Much of the analysis of the reasons for the weakness of the planning process rests on circumstantial evidence . As a result, much of the . analysis of . the . reasons for . the weakness . of the plan for the . failure of the , planning process in the . planning process
 The 1962 air strike planning analysis can rely on relatively abundantdocumentation . However, in one domain the 1962 air strikes planning can rely upon relatively abundant documentation .
 The military presented the option to the ExComm could be understood not as the result of a ""misunderstanding" at all, but rather a calculated gamble on their part that the President could be persuaded to use force . What he could not see then was that the way that the military
 If he were to be so persuaded, then they wanted to make the most of the opportunity to implement an air strike plan that would prepare the way for an invasion, he says .
 Once such a large attack had taken place, the level of casualties and destruction on Cuba would have been sufficiently great that an invasion would then seem a less drastic escalation than if it occurred without a preparatoryair campaign .
 Chiefs came close to saying as much in a brief conversation among themselves in the aftermath of the October 19 ExComm meeting . The Chiefs had presented their views at the meeting of the Chiefs' last week .
 After the meeting broke up, they stayed behind to talk briefly, unaware of the White House taping system . They stayed behind for a few minutes to talk to each other .
 Shoup: "Somebody's get to keep them from doing the ... thing piecemeal" Shoup says he wants to keep people not doing the same thing piecearily .
 It is in light of these comments that the proposals of the Chiefs for large air strikes can be understood . They did not want a war of limited objectives and limited means against Castro, but rather a military campaign to remove him from power .
 It is not surprising that they would be unencouraging about the success of a ""surgical""air strike . They would respond to civilian concerns about not destroying all ballistic missiles .
 Welch could divine the critical operational issue, the general probably could, too . But if Welch could divise the critical issue, he probably could also do it .
 Had he been trying to persuade Kennedy of the wisdom of attacking just the missiles, he might have been quick to volunteer the information .
 It's tempting to conclude that Sweeney wanted to answer truthfully, but in a way that did not encourage his superiorto take a course of action that he viewed as insufficient . Since he did not do so in a situation where the Chiefs wanted to prevent the civilians from "doing
 President's reply was narrow ratherthan expansive and did not speak to the larger issues behind the President's question .
 The linkage to domestic politics is only implicit, but it no doubt was understood by all the participants . The White House would be in the difficult position of having chosen policies that would lead to the first significant hostile action by a foreign government on U.S. soil since the War of 18
 The military chose not to override this rule and did not suggest it could be overridden . The civilians either did not know enough to consider overriding it, or were motivated not to discover any ways of making a limited air strike option appear likely to succeed .
 The rule constrained the responses to the missiles only because the parties tacitly agreed not to override it . The rule was only constrained by the parties' tacit agreement, the Pentagon says .
 If there were enough aircraft to fly hundred of sorties against a much longer target list, then there must have been enough to strike repeatedly at the missile sites, thereby achieving higher probabilities of destroying all the missiles .
 The problem with the Chiefs' strategy was that if a small air strike became less attractive, it might simply lead civilians to prefer no air strike at all . Maxwell Taylor: The problem is that small air strikes might lead to no air strikes .
 The discovery of the missiles was made public soon after they were discovered . That is essentially what happened soon after .
 The preferred strike plan in the ExComm was a slight modification of the original ""surgical"" proposal to strike only the missile sites .
 The need had passed for a strike aimed at targets that were not strategic weapons systems . Hence, the need for such a strike had passed, says the source .
 The ""surgical""air strike option was never abandoned, and if air strikes had been initiated, it is likely that such a plan would have been used . The 'surgical' option was not abandoned .
 Even the military'smonopoly of expertise, control of operational planning, strong aversion to the ""surgical"" strike, and efforts to achieve the adoption of an alternative plan were not enough to eliminate this option .
 The maneuveringaroundthe air strike planning shows the capacity of the White House to continue to control decision making about the use of force, the author says . Rather than establishing a case for the importance of organizationalprocesses, the maneuvering around the air strike plans shows the power of the
 As Levy suggests, organizational rigidity is partly a function of leaders' lack of effort to monitor and shape planning so that the leadership has options . Leaders need to make sure they have options, Levy says .
 The planning process can be responsive to leaders' desire for more alternatives . When they make the effort, the planning process will be responsive, experts say . When leaders make an effort, they can make it responsive to their desire for alternatives .
 Examination of alleged organizational constraints in the blockade tends to support these conclusions . The blockade has been described as 'organization constraints'
 The blockade force was planned in May 1962 to consist merely of twelve destroyers and two surveillance aircraft . The naval force actually deployed was many times that size . It was intended to consist of 12 destroyers .
 Allison and Zelikow cite an incident to illustrate the potency of plans . Plan plans can be used as objectiveseeming devices to obfuscate organizational self-interest, they say . Leaders can negate their constraining effects, provided they take time to learn what lies behind them and override them
 President's command to U.S. missile bases in Turkey not to returnfire if attacked was treated by the United States military . Joint Chiefs of Staff objected to the order and none was initially sent .
 The President learned of the failure to carry out the instruction only because of a direct question he posed to a Defense Department official during a briefing .
 The weapons were to be destroyed or rendered inoperable if any attempt were made to fire them . Only when they were not able to find such a passage did they resort to a cable to the NATO commander stating that without specific presidential authorization, the weapons were .
 Unlike the U.S. case, the top Soviet leadership seldom second-guessed the organizations charged with implementing this mission or closely monitored its implementation . The simplest explanation lies in the fact that unlike the United States case, .
 Khrushchev originated the idea of installing the missiles in Cuba, but once his plan was adopted, he did not devote the attention to organizationaldetails that the Kennedy White House did .
 National Security Council staff and made high-level foreign policy decisions simply by consulting in person or by telephone among themselves . Their ability to monitor and alter the implementation of directives was more limited than their U.S. counterparts .
 Khrushchevs. often directed that surface-to-airmissiles in Cuba be made operational before installing ballistic missiles, he says .
 Soviet 'Bracketed' text is included in May and Zelikow as editorial commentary . In the absence of high-level attention, the Soviet Union has not been mentioned in this article .
 The dictatorial regime exhibited intermittent and inconsistent control from the top, while the democratic regime performed better . The democratic regime often performed better than the dictatorial government .
 In contrast to studies of routines that treat them as cognitive constructs (Cohen and Bacdayan 1994), routines here are treated as tangible and social .
 In this context ""birth""and ""adoption""are easily separated . "Birth""refers to the drafting of a written document, while ""Adoption"" is formal approval by the relevant decision makers .
 The President as Commander-in-Chief can refuse to implement any military plan when the contingency for which it was designed and approved has materialized .
 President Obama is free to reject any plan created by the National Security Council or other agencies . He is also free to do so as long as the rejection does not violate statute law or Constitution .
 Only when the President or someone delegated by him to make the decision has ordered the plan to be implemented is implementation to have begun . Only when a decision has been made, implementation of the plan must have begun, the plan will not be implemented .
 Plans or routines are in effect political settlements . Presidentin this scheme is just anotherplayer, though one endowedwith some extraordinaryadvantages .
 In the tradition of Neustadt , obedience to presidential directives is problematic . obedience to the president is not assumed .
 The fact that the President sits at the top of a hierarchydoes not guaranteethat his orders will be promptly and faithfully executed . The President's orders are not guaranteed to be promptly executed, he says .
 The fact that they do not explore the connection between Model II and Model III processes is no reason why the connection cannot be made. However, the fact that the . fact that . they . do not explored the connectionbetween the . connectionbetween Model . II and . III processes . is
 The truce among organization members tends to give rise to a peculiar symbolic culture . Like a truce among nations, the truce among organizations gives rise to symbolic culture shared by parties .
 A renewal of overt hostilities would be costly and would also involve a sharp rise in uncertainty about the future positions of the parties . A renewing overt hostilities could be costly, according to the British Foreign Secretary .
 In particular, a contemplatedaction otherwise sensible both for the organization and for the member taking it may have to be rejected if it is likely to be interpreted as ""provocative" That is, as signaling a lessened commitment to the preservation of the truce and a corresponding willingness to risk overt
 Sometimes the revisions can proceed peacefully as when, for example, a Paretoimprovement, proposed . But there is no guaranteethat this must be so .
 Decisions to avoid planning are decisions to avoid conflict . Correspondingly,decisions are to avoid avoiding conflict, says author .
 Subunits may be reluctant to plan because they fear that the outcome will be worse than the status quo . Subunitsmay be reluctantto plan because of the outcome of the settlement . Subunitowners may not plan to plan for the future, fearing it will be a settlement that will be
 Threats inspire aggressors to work around the threat in an effort to achieve their objectives without directly confronting the deterring state . So too can decision makers work around routines or plans when the outcomes that they desire cannot be achieved through them, but only in other ways .
 Events during the missile crisis suggest that they often are able to do this . Unless task complexity is unusually high or time pressure is more severe, they often do this, experts say .
 Recognizing that informationprocessing constraintsmay not be as powerful as heretofore believed does not imply discarding Model II in toto . Recognizing the constraints does not mean discarding the Model II .
 It suggests that the kinds of information processing constraints an organization chooses to surmount are partly the product of political calculations . That's not the case, but it suggests that it's the result of political considerations .
 Sometimes it pays to devote the effort to overcoming these constraints,and sometimes it does not . Sometimes pays to overcome these constraints - and sometimes it doesn't .
 The process was manipulated to serve the policy objectives of the decision makers who controlled these processes, says the author of the book . The author says the process was controlled by the people who controlled it .
 The failures to plan political responses to the missiles suggest that the argument of Model II can readily be inverted .
 Foreign policy making is not necessarily constrained by too much planning, says President Obama . Foreign policy will not necessarily be constrained, says Obama .
 A lack of political planning places a premium on the improvisational skills of top-level officials when crises suddenly become crises, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Decision makers saw Soviet ballistic missiles as improbable, the failure to plan was simple to understand:planning was simply not worth the trouble . One might object that since decision makers . saw Soviet . missiles as . improbable, it faces several difficulties .
 Decision makers may have assigned the outcome a low probability, they also viewed it as extremely unfavorable to U.S. government interests . The contingency was important because the probability was offset by the large magnitude of the utility loss .
 Top-level officials repeatedly asked for analyses and plans for the contingency of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . Second, it is clear that top-level. officials repeatedly . asked for analysis and plans .
 Government agencies churning out plans in circumstances where it is fairly certain that top level decision makers will ignore them . Ceteris paribus one would expect that when decision makers ask for plans, this will be all the more reason for them to be produced .
 Third, military planning did go forward, even though political planning did not . Military planning was successful, but political planning was not, and military planning continued .
 This suggests that the sources of the lack of the latter lie not in general processes, but rather in more context-specific differences between military and political spheres . The lack of political unity in the military sphere is a key factor in the absence of political cooperation .
 Explaining the lack of political planning is no easier than explaining any other nonevent . Explaining this is no longer an easy task, it's no longer easy to explain .
 If a serious interagency review of the Jupiter missile deployment or possible responses to Soviet missiles in Cuba had been undertaken, it would have been difficult to prevent knowledge of it from reaching high-level officials in the relevant national security organizations . If such a review had been conducted, it could have
 The possibility that plans would then leak might have been a deterrent to conducting such a review . The possibility of a review was not a deterrent, it said .
 The request for an immediate response was written over the weekend, when offices would have been nearly empty . The response was delivered the next Monday . The legal adviser was able to transmithis response directly to McGeorge Bundy without clearing it with other offices .
 If military planning is not subject to interagency review, it could partly explain why only it was conducted . Security around it is tighter, and if the security around it was tighter, this could partly .
 Plans for foreign policy (as opposed to changes in the laws or in budgets) can never be binding on the President . Planners are aware that whatever they create may be discarded by the President when the time comes to use it .
 Presumably, this would lead sophisticated officials to devalue planning planning .
 Presidents who are aware of how these officials view the situation will tend to hold their plans in low esteem . They will realize that senior officials made little commitment to the planning process. In turn, presidents will hold plans low esteem because of their lack of commitment .
 Senior military officials were strongly motivated to secure new military plans and supervise their prompt production . However, senior military officials are strongly motivatedto secure new plans .
 If the use of force were considered, they wanted to be able to show that they could accomplish national objectives by using it . The U.S. government wanted to use force to achieve national objectives, officials say .
 They probably realized that Kennedy was skeptical of their claims, they knew that they would have no chance at all if they did not have a plan that appeared to be capable of achieving the given objective . Although they probablyrealized that Kennedy . knew that he was skeptical, they . knew they
 If civilian high-level officials are chronically overloaded, their attention is dominated by "fires in the in-basket" then they might be able to devote to planning . The time that they might spend on planning being whittled away by the constant demands of day-to-day
 As noted by Daft and Becker , organizations have queuing rules for problems . Those deemed to be low priority may be repeatedlyneglected .
 Peter Feaver explains why this appears consistent with the general pattern of information processing in the short run . Feaver says that when viewed in the long run, it appears to be consistent with what is happening .
 The question of why leaders did not invest in more decision-making capacity must be addressed . However, when viewed in the long run, the question of leadership must be answered .
 The EisenhowerNSC system had been far too bureaucratic and planned too much . These small, general purpose units were unlikely to be used for this purpose by an administration that had taken office .
 In such a situation it would hardly be surprising if officials were reluctant to delegate the preparation of contingent responses to staff . It would be hardly surprising if .
 Assessing the political consequences of actions against Castro would engage these concerns much more directly than narrowlymilitary problems facing some use of military forces . Assessing political consequences would be much more direct than an assessment of narrowly military problems .
 Officials are known to be divided, a decision to plan is a move to place a conflictual item on the agenda . The city is known for being divided, and officials are divided .
 From the time it became aware of the Bay of Pigs operation, the Kennedy White House knew that opinions on what to do about Castro were sharply divided on means, even if there was little disagreement about ends .
 There is little reason to initiate a review of policy if one believes that there is a good chance that it will produce conclusions that one does not like . There is no reason to start reviewing policy if it is likely to produce a bad result .
 For opponents of the established policy, there correspondingly is not much reason to press for a policy review if one believes that it will simply ratify the status quo . Opponents of the existing policy say there is no reason to push for a review if it is simply ratifying the status
 As long as one had hope that the problem of what to do about Castro would be "overtakenby events,"" postponing a reconsideration of Cuban policy might seem expedient .
 The military were in a weak position to press for a change in policy, they could at least prepare their case so that if events caused a reconsideration of military options .
 Political contingency planning also might not have occurred simply because it would have been very hard to do . Political contingencies would not have been possible, but they might have been difficult to do, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 "One would have to know what resources would be available, as well as the resources and intentions of the other actors," she says .
 Such planning inevitably involves the analyst in a candid assessment of the weaknesses and limitations of one's own government and policy . Such planning also inevitably involves an assessment of government weaknesses .
 If the option is a ""fallback"" position, it might therefore make the adoption of the 'fallback' seem more likely . If the choice is a "fallback" position it might make adoption of such a position more likely, according to the BBC .
 Status quo Cuba policy was much closer to civilian than to military preferences . It would have been reasonable for civilian agencies to avoid analyses that might reach conclusions that they did not particularlylike .
 The plasticity of the air strike plans and their opportunisticpresentationby the Joint Chiefs suggest a more fundamentallimitation in an analysis that focuses only on routines .
 At least in this case, routines were less a strait-jacket and more a weapon in the hands of decision makers in their struggle to have their preferred courses of action adopted . At least this time, routines are more a tool for decision makers .
 Expert can be tempted to assert that ""we have to do it this way"" in order to achieve the adoption of policies desired on parochial grounds . Expert can also be tempted by saying ""we must do it this way" to achieve desired policies .
 Air strike proposals have been rejected by the White House . That seems to have been what occurred in regard to the air strike proposals .
 The President was also using the planning process strategically by letting the Chiefs continue to plan for an air strike and invasion, by listening to their proposals .
 President Kennedy made sure that the Chiefs retained enough hope in the eventual adoption of their policies that they were dissuaded from openly breaking with the administration . McMaster suggests that doing so was Kennedy's way of making sure that .
 A model of organizationalbehavior in which actions are governed by routines, while routines evolve via mutation and naturalselection, offers a simple but powerful alternative to models resting on rational calculation .
 Human calculational ability is limited even when organizations distribute calculational tasks among subunits . There is no guaranteethat the resulting performance will mimic that of a hypothetical omnisciently rational calculator .
 Such a view of organizations is cast at an extremely high level of abstraction, says author . Such an organization is cast in such an abstraction, he says . Such a high-level of abstraction is not possible, he adds .
 It is worthwhile to ask what is lost by using a model that ignores human capacity to anticipate events and act strategically . Because organizationsare intelligent in a way that bacteria are not, it is possible to ask if the model is lost .
 First, relations between superiors and subordinates are not mechanical compliance with directives . Relations between subordinates and superiors are not automatic, says CNN.com .
 Superiorsand subordinatesknow this, and it shapes the kinds of directives that superiors send, when and how subordinates choose to comply, and how superiors respond to noncompliance . Superiors and subordinates know each other, and this shapes how they respond .
 First, dissatisfaction with currentalternativesdoes not automatically lead to the development of new ones . Second, dissatisfaction not to automatically develop new ones. Third, dissatisfaction does not automaticallylead to new ones, he says .
 Developing alternatives is costly and risky and cannot be presumed to be the result of dissatisfaction with current options . Developing alternative alternatives is risky and costly, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In a situation of strategic interaction, organizationaldecision makers may believe that a new menu of alternatives would leave them in a worse position than the status quo . Decision makers may want to make sure they don't get stuck in the current situation .
 Interests are constrainedby the discussion of plans as well as cloaked by it . Interestsare thus to some degree constrained by the discussion, as well by it.
 Much U.S. national security planning resembles the process depicted here . Much of the United States national security plans are similar to this .
 It typically involves several organizational subunits operating under uneven or intermittenthierarchical control from presidential appointees or the President himself . The subunits operate under uneven control from President's appointees .
 This analysis raises the question of how the pattern of declassification is related to the evolution of scholarly explanations . This analysis also raises the questions about how declassification has evolved .
 Early accounts tended to promote an ""inspiredimprovisation"" view of U.S. behavior . The later (but still incomplete)1""declassifications support an interpretation that is less flattering .
 Declassified information is not random and proceeds using guidelines that are themselves classified . The analyst is playing a game with the declassifying authorities, he says .
 This is unlike analyzing a randomsample or experimenting with experimentallymanipulatingstimulusconditions . This is not the same thing .
 Evidence now suggests that the President was considerably less constrained by plans and routines than Allison's original account claimed, one might conclude that this research has merely restored the pre-Allison understanding of international crisis .
 Although some routines were redesigned or ignored, that alone does not compel the analyst to revert to the Model account . The analyst says that some routines are redesigned, but that's not enough .
 Robert Kennedy's papers on the crisis and the President's briefings prepared by the CIA for this period are declassified . That understanding is deficient because it is insensitive to the degree to which government actions in crisis are a result of bargaining .
 The most obvious way is that the bargaining is often over what plan or routine will be adopted . The fact that they are often the objects of political struggle suggests that Allison was correct to call attention to their importance .
 When directives can be framed simply as asking for implementation of existing policy, they are probably more difficult to resist . This makes sense in a world where the justification for a policy matters, it makes sense .
 Third, plans or routines determine the default policy and thus the status quo point for bargaining . Plans or routines are the default policies and therefore the default point for negotiations .
 Fourth, as Allison noted, organizations often have difficulty executing options for which there is no plan or routine . Organizations can expand or shrink their range of alternatives, Allison said .
 Fifth, the information upon which policy choices are based is often gathered by routine routines . The information on which policy decisions are often gathered is often based on routines .
 Model II, devoted to the effects of routines on organizational behavior, is intimate . Model III devoted to high-level bargaining, is devoted to effects of high level bargaining . The relationship between routines and routines is intimate.
 The distinction between the two models now seems much more artificial than it did when Alison first offered his theoretical account more than 30 years ago . Specifying their linkages more precisely is one of the more importantpieces of unfinished theoretical business left from Allison's original contribution .
 George Lee Butler Rose to be Chief Commander of America's Nuclear Forces . Butler Rose will be chief commander of the U.S. nuclear forces .