 This book, or any part of it, may not be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission .
 Professor W Roger Louis provided counsel and encouragement that can only come from a true teacher and educator . Professor Louis is a former teacher and teacher .
 Professor Louis provided invaluable advice and encouragement during the publishing process . Professor Louis also provided valuable advice to the author .
 My thanks go to Professor Voll for his interest in the topic and investment of time and effort .
 His on-going investment of time and effort was fundamental to the success of this research project . The project was inspired by the work of Dr. Michael Lister .
 I also want to thank Phillips Talbot, Wiliam ‘Bill’ Lakeland, General Andrew Goodpaster, Mohammad Hakki, Christopher Van Hollen, and the late Walt W Rostow for their willingness to sit down and explain the events described .
 The idea for the structure of this book came to me more than a decade ago while evaluating the potential impact of a specific project on a client’s broader interests on a major project .
 The implications of the project were strategic and multi-lateral and potentially far more important than the specific project at hand . The immediate considerations were largely tactical and bilateral, but long-term implications were strategic .
 Given those ‘immediate considerations’, obtaining real consideration of the broader context and the longer-term perspective was difficult, but the effort paid off ultimately when taking the longer view allowed a more rewarding strategy to emerge . The effort paid to take the longer term perspective paid off when
 It was an exceptional event because of the importance of the immediate interests almost always trumped the strategic. It was the first time in government or business that such an event had been exceptional. The immediate interests of the government and business will always trump the strategic, he said .
 U.S. presidents often risked or sacrificed United States strategic interests, author says . At the time, I was reading Keith Kyle’s Svez, prompting me to consider the degree to which tactical decisions driven by ‘immediate’ pressures faced by . United States administrations
 "The events of the last few years have tended to put an exclamation point on that conclusion," he says . The events of this year's events in the U.S. have been particularly notable .
 A systematic study of a given period of time might be a rewarding and stimulating endeavor . With this thought in mind, I began to think that a systematic study could be rewarding .
 Area studies and international relations tend to narrow the policy to the point that perspective on the broader context was lost . This brought another observation, namely, that area studies and . international relations tended to narrow, rather than narrow, the policy .
 It also occurred to me that this had an effect on historical writing on the Middle East . I'm not sure how much of this has affected historical writing .
 Rarely did authors attempt to deal with region within a context that reflected the fundamental organizational structure of the policy making and implementation organizations within the U.S. government .
 Dulles described the Middle East as stretching form ‘Morocco to India,’ this statement reflected not only the reality and linkages on the ground but also reflected the organizational structure within the U.S. government that dealt with it .
 The Near East and South Asia Bureau and divisions within other government agencies reflected the connectivity across the region that I have chosen to describe here as the Greater Middle East .
 Historical writing on the topic tended to be broken into vety focused monographs on bilateral relations, the Arab world, Iran, or South Asia .
 Bush administration has insisted that various issues across the region are unconnected and can be successfully dealt with on an independent basis . Palestine, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan, radical Islam, etc. etc., also spatked a desire to explore the recent past and evaluate the experience of previous
 At the same time, I became increasingly interested in the 1950s and the struggles that accompanied the US’s emergence as the dominant western power in the Greater Middle East . The U.S. became the dominant Western Power in the Middle East in 1950s .
 President Eisenhower and his two Secretaries of State, John Foster Dulles, and Christian Herter, were close friends . This interest brought me to the relationship between Dulles and Herter . The two secretaries of state and secretary of state met in 1953 .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy policy with regard to the Middle East might be worthwhile, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Eisenhower's Cold War policies contrasted with Kennedy's flexible approach to the region under Kennedy . Kennedy's open approach to region under Eisenhower was a realist and, at times, ideological hard-line Cold War policy .
 Both were driven by very similar views of the best course for maintaining pro-western states and achieving modernization in the developing world . In fact, both were driven to similar views .
 The real story laid not in the differences between the two administrations but in the similarities, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The real story is that the similarities between the Obama administration and the Clinton administration are very similar"
 At this point, I concluded that only an in-depth research effort could adequately make the point . At this time, I decided to make a point .
 This effort would have to explain the policies of both administrations from the broader context of a Middle East that fundamentally covered the geographical area from North Africa to India . The effort would need to explain both administrations' policies from a broader context .
 The study would have to delve into the details of the relationships and key events in order to glue the overall argument together .
 A global three year research project to obtain a clearer understanding of what actually happened and cast light on the real policy relationship between Eisenhower and Kennedy . Beginning in 2001, that effort involved a global three-year research project .
 The research represented here is a broad selection of sources and materials . We are happy to provide an overview of the science behind the project .
 It includes multiple archives, PREFACE xxi collections, interviews, and libraries . Preface xxi is a collection of more than 1,000,000 books and videos .
 It is an effort to interpret events and policy from a wide-angle perspective and support those views by telescoping in on key events .
 Many of the topics discussed here have been dealt with within individual monographs, but their scope has been largely limited to single states or bilateral issues between two or three states . The dimension of the broader geo-political context is generally missing in this article .
 To accomplish this, the initial research effort focused on unpublished soutce materials .
 From unpublished materials the research effort progressed to published collections, interviews, memoirs and first person accounts, and then secondary source materials . The research effort began with unpublished material .
 "By going directly to the raw documents, I determined the historical significance uninfluenced by a previous judgment," he says . "I determined the historic significance of the documents uninfledenced by previous judgments," he adds .
 It then became possible to compare a broader segment of documents to ascertain what actually happened and why . It was then possible to find out what was actually going on and why.
 This methodology was also used at the Eisenhower, Johnson, and Kennedy presidential libraries .
 The historical shadow cast by published documentation sometimes took a different, and hopefully, more accurate form . When combined with the research effort at the British, Eeyptian, Indian, Australian, and New Zealand national archives, the historical shadow was cast in a different way .
 With regard to referencing, I have culled duplicate footnotes from the text . I have also culled duplicated footnotes .
 If there are three endnotes in succession from the same source and pages, I eliminated the first two and kept only the last reference . If there were three or more endnotes were in succession, I cut them out .
 In practical terms this means that in some cases a notation might refer to the information in multiple preceding paragraphs within the same section . The notation is used to indicate that the information is in multiple parts of the article .
 Transliterations reflect common usage, ie., Nasser, not Nasir, and a simplification of Arab names, i.e. Nasser .
 Despite the linkages and broadened geographical conceptualization, some regions and countries receive only passing mention .
 North African states of Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Algeria and Morocco are a case in point . The North African nation is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 North Africa played a peripheral role in North Africa's political action from 1958-1963 . This limited treatment results in part from the more peripheral role played by North Africa in the war .
 President Habib Bourgiba of Tunisia ranked almost as high as Nuri Said in the Egyptian president’s hierarchy of reactionary leaders, but these states were not central to the struggles of the late 1950s and early 1960s .
 They were central to the struggle for North African independence but that had its own much more European overtones .
 In Algeria, the liberation movement drove French participation in Suez in 1956 and later support for Israel . By the late 1950s, there was growing acceptance that France would eventually have to seek accommodation with local resistance leaders .
 Turkey also receives limited Xxil GREATER MIDDLE EAST and the COLD WAR attention . Turkey also gets limited attention from the Middle East .
 Turkey would have stayed in the Western orbit of NATO and Europe . Had Iran and Pakistan collapsed or joined the neutral camp Turkey would've stayed in NATO orbit . Turkey has a history of instability in the region .
 In examining the historiography, there is no single historical work that compares in scope to this study . The list of historical writings dealing with vatious aspects of this study is lengthy .
 "My purpose is to create an historical mosaic as opposed to a natrow study," says author . "I want to create a mosaic of history, not a study of history," she says .
 Carl Brown’s International Politics and the Middle East to some degrees introduces this idea of a mosaic and provides an ovetview of the ‘Eastern Question’ from the eighteenth century to the 1980s . L. L. Brown's book provides an overview of the 'Eastern
 The United States is merely the latest new player in the Middle East, says Brown . Brown asserts that the Middle Eastern Question is an extension of the Eastern Question that had plagued European powers since the early 1700s .
 The broader context of U.S. involvement in Syria needs to be explained .
 Current coverage of U.S. policy in the Middle East during the formative years of the late 1950s and early 1960s comes in the form of limited treatments in articles or works on Eisenhower and Kennedy years .
 None have dealt in depth with the late Eisenhower administration, and most tend to take the position that Kennedy brought in a completely new progressive approach .
 Warren Bass’ Swpport Any Friend provides an interesting look at ‘Kennedy’s Middle East’ from the perspective of the relationship with Israel, but consistently understates the impact of the pro-Israeli lobby on the administration .
 In American Presidents and the Middle East, George Lenczowski provides a series of short policy summaries . He provides a short policy summary each week .
 A Study of Ideology in Politics perhaps comes closest to offering a snapshot of the inter-Arab confrontation of 1958 to 1967 . The study offers a glimpse of the conflict between Arab and Arab nations .
 Kerr also produced the excellent PREFACE Xxili article, ‘The Emergence of a Socialist Ideology in Egypt,’ in The Middle Eastern Journal in early 1962 . Kerr produced the article in the pre-1962 edition of The Middle East Journal .
 This article is particularly interesting for its informed, ground level view of Nasset’s attempt to establish an ideological basis for his regime . Nasset is attempting to establish a ground-level view of his attempts to establish his ideological basis .
 Eeypt adopted the ideological weapons of class struggle without the content . The party adopted the ideology of the struggle without content, says the writer .
 Jordan 1955-1967 are examples of the often solid works of limited scope that deal with the period targeted by this work . Jordan 1955/1967 is one of the best known works of the period .
 Both the Iraqi and Jordanian works are useful and take advantage of published and periodical documentation from the period . The Iraqi and Jordanian works are very useful .
 The Middle East in 1958, offers interesting views of the emergence of the U.S. as the preeminent Western power in the Middle East, but limited references to Iran and Pakistan are the only ventures outside the Arab Mideast .
 Robert McNamara in Britain, Nasser and the Balance of Power in the Middle East, 1952-1967 discusses the British relationship with Nasser but the chronological span leaves treatment of key issues at a cursory level .
 The various biographies of Nasser provide insight into the Arab Middle East equation . But all suffer from the limitations imposed by narrow biographical focus . The Last Arab, Robert Stephen’s Nasser, and Jean Lacouture's Nasser are examples .
 Wilton Wynn’s Nasser of Egypt deserves mention because it is a sympathetic, contemporary account of the Egyptian leader by a journalist who knew him and Egypt in the 1950s .
 Anthony Eden’s Guildhall speech that the Israelis scuttled . Wynn takes the view that handled correctly a Mideast peace could have come to fruition in 1955 .
 This and other sympathetic views of Nasser earned Wynn’s work banishment from the political and journalistic mainstream . Wynn: Nasser's sympathetic views have earned him a banishment .
 The work offers an informed alternative view of the Egyptian regime . Nevertheless, it is an interesting work that offers an interesting view of Egypt .
 Useful works target national history but these usually provide an overview of some of the specific issues affecting Israel, Jordan, Iraq, Yemen, and Egypt . No work attempts to examine the period .
 With respect to Iran, Jim Bill’s work, The Eagle and the Lion, focuses primarily on the 1979 revolution . Jim Bill's work focuses on Iran .
 His treatment of the Eisenhower period is cliché in the sense that it borrows from generally accepted later interpretations of the Kennedy administration . He says his treatment of Eisenhower period borrows .
 Bill argues that Eisenhower coddled the Shah with military and security support and created the Iranian animosity and hatred of the regime that ultimately led to 1979 . Bill argues the Shah's regime was created by Eisenhower .
 Bill’s emphasis underscores the problems associated with interpretations of the relationship between the Eisenhower and Kennedy policies . The Xxiv GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR United States might have brought about a different outcome, Bill says .
 John F Kennedy and the Shah of Iran, comes much closer to the fundamentals of Kennedy policy toward Iran . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran during the Shah's reign .
 The article does not adequately explain the struggle over policy formulation between the White House activists typified by Robert Komer and the State Department led by Ambassador Julius Holmes . The resolution of that struggle pushed the United States down the road to 1979, it says .
 Britain, Iran, and Afghanistan, 1798-1850, offers a useful perspective on Persia in the nineteenth century that applies equally equally equally as well to the Iranian situation of the 1950s and 1960s .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy saw Iran as an albatross as well as the Soviet Union as well . Both were unwilling to risk potential consequences of aggressively pursuing an alternative to the Shah’s rule .
 Much of the post-1979 writing on Iran suggests that the U.S. might have prevented 1979, an interesting ‘salvationist’ idea that seems to imply that the United States was more responsible for Iran than the Iranians .
 Others take the view that the Shah was actually in control and used the relationship with the U.S. to his own ends . Others say the Shah used his influence to gain control of the relationship .
 He stabilized his personal rule, modernized his army, and assured himself of enough U.S. support to allow him to undertake reforms to undercut opposition . He also assured himself that the United States supported him .
 To the east, Pakistan and India were inseparable from the Middle East political and diplomatic dynamic of 1958-1963 . To the west, India and Pakistan were inseparably from the Mideast .
 The best existing historical writing on this period comes in the form of biographies of Nehru . Nehru's biographies are the best existing biographies on the period .
 A Political Life, concludes that Nehru’s insistence on personally conducting Indian foreign policy provided the innovation of the ‘non-aligned’ concept but ultimately impeded implementation .
 The author asserts that, unfortunately, Nehru was extremely difficult to deal with . Nehru is a prime minister of India . He asserts that he was a very difficult person to work with .
 Nehru’s relationship with Nasser allowed him to attempt mediation at Suez . Brown argues that it was Nehru's relationship with the Arab Mideast that allowed the Indian to work closely with Eisenhower .
 The author points out that as a result of PREFACE XXV Suez, Nehru came to believe that Eisenhower was actually ‘flexible’ with regard to non-alignment . Nehru believed Eisenhower was a 'flexible' man . The author also believes that Eisenhower
 Krishna Menon’s gaffs and for the pathetic performance of the Indian defense establishment during the border war with China . The pathetic performance has been blamed for the India defense establishment .
 Brown’s treatment of foreign policy represents the best overview of Indian foreign policy of any of the biographies . Brown's treatment is the best of all biographies to look at India's foreign policy .
 Neville Maxwell's India's War with China is superb, well balanced, and broad in its scope of inquiry . Neville Maxwell’s War with the China War is superbly balanced and well balanced .
 The 1970 publication date prevented Maxwell from accessing significant declassified research materials . Interviews with participants more than compensate for the lack of declassified material .
 Other works discuss Indian foreign policy and non-alignment but in a much less organized fashion . The works discuss India's foreign policy in a far more organized manner .
 Sarvepalli Gopal’s three-volume biography of Nehru explains Indian policy predominately in terms of Pakistan and China . Gopal: Nehru's policy was based on Pakistan, China .
 Gopal's tationalizations of Nehru’s shortcomings detract from an otherwise factually interesting work .
 Gopal’s is the stronger work with regard to the Middle East and U.S. foreign policy, but both Gopal and Akbar suffer from the limitation imposed by the biographical narrative .
 Several works discuss 1958 to 1963 within the context of its relations with India, the United States, and the members of the vatious western alliances to which Karachi adhered . In the case of Pakistan, several works discuss the period between 1958 and 1963 . Pakistan's relations with the United
 These include Ayesha Jalal’s The State of Martial Rule and Lawrence Ziring's The Ayub Khan Era . Hasan Askari-Rizvi's The Military ¢ Politics in Pakistan is a recent example .
 Ayab Khan’s autobiography, Friends Not Masters, is also an explanation for the military role in Pakistani politics from the former Pakistani president himself .
 Ayub is highly critical of Kennedy’s ‘betrayal’ of Pakistan in 1962 and 1963 . As one would expect, Ayub was highly critical . Ayub wrote that Kennedy was ‘naive’ and ‘unprofessional’ in Pakistan .
 The best overall study of Pakistan that cotrelates with this study is The United States and Pakistan, 1947-2000 by Dennis Kux . The best study of the country's history of Pakistan is that of the U.S.
 This work addresses the history of US-Pakistani relations paying particular attention to the Eisenhower and Kennedy years . This work is a look at the Eisenhower-Kennedy years and the Kennedy years.
 This work attempts to go beyond the normal historical analysis that focuses on the principals or ‘decision-makers’ in U.S. foreign policy . In a final comment on the formation of United States policy, this work goes beyond the usual historical analysis .
 Robert Komer exemplifies how a knowledgable, frenetic, and prolific fountain of memos and papers placed in a key position on the NSC can influence the policy process .
 Kennedy's oral history and files at the Kennedy Library are highly informative and instructive . For this reason, his oral history .
 Kennedy’s distrust of the traditional foreign policy appartus and his desire to create a new policy paradigm magnified the influence of officials of Komert's ilk . Kennedy's distrust of foreign policy has magnified his desire for a new paradigm .
 A balanced well informed policy depended on the mental acuity and intellectual rigor applied by officials in the Oval Office . This occurs to some degree in every administration but it was patticularly pronounced in the early Kennedy years .
 In the case of the Kennedy administration, the intelligence of the President allowed him recognize policies gone awry and then to flexibly adjust . The President's intelligence allowed him to adjust his policies, says historian John Sutter .
 In late 1962 and 1963, Kennedy salvaged the U.S. policies in the Middle East by shifting back to his predecessor’s pragmatic model . Kennedy shifted to a more pragmatic approach in the Mideast .
 Kennedy grasped that world was not what he had conceived it to be in 1961 . Kennedy grasped the world had not been what he'd have imagined in his life .
 This is all the more interesting when viewed in light of other chief executives who have been hampered by the apparent inability to understand the world as they have conceived it to be .
 History may not repeat itself but it certainly contains some interesting parallels and comparisons . History is not going to repeat itself, but there are some parallels .
 This study is an attempt to provide a fundamentally different perspective on the world's most important issues . This study was published in the U.S. National Geographic Geographic Geographic Society .
 Its goal is to provide a breadth and depth of analysis that connects events, movements, and leaders across the Greater Middle East . The goal of the project is to create a comprehensive analysis of events and movements in the region .
 It discusses the motivations that drove the complementary policies of Nasser and Nehru during the early 1950s . It also discusses the motivation that drove Nasser's policies .
 It includes an explanation of the profound impact that the Baghdad coup of 1958 had not only in the Atab world, but also in Iran, Pakistan and India .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations share the similarities in the policies of the two administrations . Eisenhower's administration failed to find a way to reinvent the policy initiatives that failed under Eisenhower between 1953 and 1956 . Kennedy's administration was criticized by some for being too naive and naive .
 This study takes all of these issues and places them in the larger regional context to which they belong . This study places these issues in the context of which they are .
 In doing so, The Greater Middle East and the Cold War offers new facts and a detailed reexamination of the events and key players from a fresh, more holistic perspective . In doing .
 History of events across the region during the 1950s and 1960s will provide provocative perspective on the ideas and policies of the recent past . Hopefully, the reader will find it useful and informative, but most of all, in light of the current myopic policies .
 United States Foreign Policy under Eisenhower and Kennedy examines Ametican foreign policy in the Middle East from 1958 to 1963 . The U.S. foreign policy under Kennedy is examined in a new book titled "Ametican"
 It examines the Eisenhower experience between 1953 and 1955 as the basis for the more realistic approach to the region following Aswan decisions, Suez and mixed reaction to Eisenhower Doctrine .
 This work’s implicit lack of emphasis on the Suez war reflects the view that while certainly attention-getting, the flash and bang of 1956 represented an interlude, the exception rather than the rule in political, diplomatic, and even military interaction between the US, its Western allies
 Much mote typical and thus more central to an overall understanding of the policy interaction during the Eisenhower and Kennedy yeats were the periods before and after Suez . The period before Suez was the most significant period of the Eisenhower-Kennedy era .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations searched for ways to sway countries of the Muslim Middle East to cooperate and participate in Washington's campaign to contain the Soviet Union and Communist influence .
 Both administrations promised rewards for countries that would come to either a formal arrangement or, in some cases, just a working arrangement with the U.S. If it benefited containment, it would be rewarded .
 Initially, the 'promises' were most often heavily weighted toward economic aid and development assistance, but after 1958, security and military aid received increasing emphasis .
 This study of U.S. foreign policy in the Greater Middle East examines the attempts, some successful and some not, to enlist the Muslim world in the Cold War struggle to contain the Soviet and Communist expansion in the Middle East .
 It reevaluates and challenges many of the fundamental assumptions associated with the Eisenhower and Kennedy periods . The book is published in the U.S. House of Representatives .
 The work examines the political and diplomatic interaction behind this policy formulation at a level of 2 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR significantly greater granularity . The work provides a more detailed view of the actual events and how policies related to those events developed .
 U.S. policy in the Middle East, Iran, and the South Asia subcontinent reflected this commitment . United States policy in Mideast reflected the commitment to the region, the author says .
 Containment in the region was the top priority of both administrations . Kennedy was no less a ‘Cold Warrior’ than Eisenhower . Containment was a top priority for both .
 The Kennedy administration has consistently been given credit for more nuanced, sophisticated, reform-oriented policies . Despite these similarities, the Kennedy administration is consistently credited with more nuanced and sophisticated policies .
 Eisenhower and Dulles are often viewed as bumbling, coercive, and less astute than Kennedy and his team of policy experts . In contrast, Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles, his foreign policy confidant and lightning-rod, are often seen as less savvy .
 In reality, both administrations practiced containment in a remarkably similar manner . The White House and the White House are in a similar way .
 Both were uncomfortable with non-progressive, traditional regimes; both had a strong faith in and desire to see controlled reform in the region . Both supported anti-Western instability when faced by the possibility of anti-western instability .
 Liberal democractic notions of representative politics and economic development are much more easily talked about than realized throughout most of the region . As the most recent U.S. administration is in the process of learning, they are learning .
 In those cases where popular democracy did exist, it often ran counter to Western interests in general and U.S. interests in particular . In some cases, popular democracy often ran against Western interests .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy found the more democratic progressive regimes, Musaddiq's Iran and Nehru’s India, at odds with Western interests . They exhibited a noted preference for authoritarian elements because of the stability they offered .
 Both administrations followed the mantra of imposed stability as the basis for ‘controlled’ political reform and economic development . Both administrations had imposed ‘imposed stability’ as basis for 'controlled' political reform .
 Policymakers in both administrations borrowed eclectically from the precepts of ‘modernization theory’ to create a set of policies that supported economic development as a means to economic, social, and political reform .
 Military support for a regime, covert and overt internal support for security organizations, and a push for economic development and political reform comprised the major elements of U.S. containment policy . Military, in rare instances, provided support for regime .
 Economic development emerged as the preferred path to political, economic, and social reform, and thus pro-Western stability . In fact when all these elements are evaluated, economic development emerged to be a key to stability .
 Influential foreign policy advisors, including Walt W Rostow, were involved in both administrations . Rostow advocated policies that approached an almost absolute faith in the efficacy of economic development as a pillar of political stability and containment .
 It was economic development that would provide the engine for long-term pro-Western social development and political liberalization . This faith in economic reform also carried with it a steadfast belief that when necessary political stability had to be maintained by force in order to create a secure environment for development, says
 The danger is that underdeveloped countries develop along lines hostile to the West and Western tradition, writes David Frum .
 An opinion expressed in 1957, the accuracy of which the West now can better appreciate . The West can now better appreciate this, the West can better understand .
 This growth constituted the path to social and political reform, fostering democratic political institutions and social justice . This growth led to the creation of democratic political and social institutions, the author says .
 Post-war economic and development aid in thwarting Communist influence in Western Europe and Japan . These views became the Western democratic vetsion of economic determinism, answer to Marxist-Leninism .
 Both administrations adopted these arguments more or less as ground-truth . Both administrations adopt these arguments as ground truth .
 For both, economic aid was the preferred type of assistance in the Greater Middle East . Economic aid was accompanied, to varying degrees, by advocacy of political and social reform . For both economic aid and political reform, the U.S. helped both countries .
 Both administrations saw economic development and reform as the only way to establish stable societies and governments . The most effective bulwarks against Communist expansion, they say .
 Both administrations pushed for political, economic, and, to some degtee, social reform as the preferred means of preventing Communist expansion and limiting Soviet, and to a lesser extent, Chinese influence .
 Economic development and reform became fundamental corollaries of Cold War containment . Economic development, reform and economic development were fundamental to containment . The Cold War era was dominated by the Cold War .
 Whether emphasis fell on economic modernization or political reform depended almost entirely on Washington's perception . Washington’s perception at any given point in time of the course that would best contribute to pro-Western stability .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy were quick to drop calls for reform and support repressive governments through military and security assistance when they perceived that reform would induce instability and threaten Western interests . Kennedy and Eisenhower were also quick to back repressive governments .
 Kennedy 'mystique' or ‘myth’ left an indelible imprint on outside perceptions . Kennedy ‘stique’ or 'myth' left an impression on the outside perceptions of the Kennedy family .
 The understandable urge to canonize Kennedy and his policies as exceptional certainly had a major impact, but timing also played a significant role . Kennedy's policies were not exceptional, but they were exceptional .
 In terms of the Middle East and Asia, Kennedy’s tenure in office fell between the chaotic policy formulation in the mid-1950s and the 4 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR realization in the late 1960s that his policies in Southeast Asia had been
 Eisenhower's and Kennedy's policies are to be properly calibrated . Understanding the chronological context is critical. Understanding the chronology is critical, writes David Gergen .
 Eisenhower faced the task of constructing a U.S. policy in the developing world largely from scratch in the early 1950s . Eisenhower faced a task of reconstructing a United States policy from scratch .
 This task was considerably more complex than that faced by the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration faced a more complex task than that of Kennedy's .
 Truman administration left no blueprint for how to deal with the Middle East . The initial learning curve in the region was steep, and there was no blueprint .
 In 1953, the United States was feeling its way through the Middle Eastern labyrinth . The U.S. was in the midst of a crisis in the region .
 From Truman, Eisenhower inherited Israel and an ill-defined set of policy ideas, including Mideast Defense Organization and ‘northern-tier’ concepts . Eisenhower inherited the Middle East Defense Organization from Truman .
 Washington relied upon former colonial powers, principally the British and the French, to protect Western interests . The United States tended to follow their policy lead .
 The events of 1955 to 1958 increased the complexity of Washington’s responsibilities in the Middle East . The events occurred during the 1950s to 1958 .
 The period 1958 to 1963 witnessed the beginning of an even more profound change in the nature of the British and French influence in the region .
 The British and French have made consultations with the U.S. a fundamental part of their policy formulation in the Middle East .
 British consultations tend to increase their influence in Washington, as U.S. responsibilities in the region increased . Ironically, in the case of the British, these consultations tended to increase influence .
 To adequately understand these developments and relationships, they must be examined within a chronological progression . To understand this, these developments must be viewed in a chronological order .
 Understanding Eisenhowet’s accomplishments in the 1958 to 1960 time-frame requires a review of his early years, from 1953 to 1955 . He was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey, in 1953 .
 The dashed hopes for economic development and political and social reform during the early administration and the chaos of 1956 and 1957 resulted in the emergence of the pragmatic, workable U.S. policies of 1958-1960 .
 In 1961, Kennedy inherited a largely functional set of policies and alliances . Kennedy and his advisors inherited a lot of the same things as his predecessors .
 Kennedy and his team essentially followed the course set by Eisenhower . Try as they might to represent it in another light, Kennedy's team ultimately followed Eisenhower's course .
 Their attempts to deviate from the 1958-1960 models invariably failed, for one of two reasons . They often failed to do so, for either reason or not .
 Kennedy’s team failed to recognize that their policy initiatives were often replications of earlier, failed Eisenhower initiatives that ran fundamentally against the political grain in the region . Kennedy's team didn’t recognize that such policy initiatives ran against the grain of the region, he says .
 Kennedy often overestimated the impact of personal diplomacy and his ability to use it to manage regional conflicts . Second, Kennedy overestimated his impact on personal diplomacy, he says .
 Kennedy and his advisors didn't give credit where credit was due to Eisenhower . Kennedy's advisors were too critical of Eisenhower's achievements, too much to blame .
 Kennedy administration dissipated much of its strength and influence in the Middle East trying to resurrect long-dead policy initiatives . As a result of the Kennedy administration, the administration has dissipated its strength in the region .
 Under both Eisenhower and Kennedy, regional issues, leaders, and forces determined the agenda . For these, parochial regional interests took precedence over Washington’s fixation on containment .
 The shift toward regional influences reinforces the need for examination of events within a significantly broader geographical setting . The shift to regional influences .
 This geographical context exceeds the limitations imposed by traditional area studies . In this case, the context of this study is that it is not limited to traditional areas . The study was published in 1996 and 2013 .
 Dulles' repeated references to the Middle East as the region stretching ‘from Morocco to Pakistan’ thus drawing India into the equation . It reflects Dulles’ repeated references .
 This expanded geographical view of the ‘Middle East’ is a particularly effective vantage point for viewing the 1950s and 1960s .
 Non-alignment and positive neutralism overlaid an often ignored historical connectivity with a loose ideological and political framework . The advent of non-alignability and positive neutralityism overlays an often overlooked historical connectivity .
 Washington’s global commitment to containment and its support for political and economic modernization further reinforced this more holistic conceptualization of the region . At the same time, Washington's global commitment .
 In 1958, events in Iraq affected relations with Egypt and India, as well as with neighboring Iran and Jordan . The events in 1958 affected relations between Egypt, India, and Iran .
 Problems between India and Pakistan complicated U.S. relations with Egypt . In like manner, problems between Pakistan and Egypt complicated relations with the United States .
 Colonial control had tended to isolate problems, whereas its temoval resulted in a reemergence of historical regional connectivity . Colonial control led to a re-emergence of regional connectivity, the author says .
 U.S. policymakers had to adjust to a situation in which decisions in one area of the Middle East often had immediate and pronounced repercussions in another . As a result, policymakers in Washington have to adjust .
 The British exerted the greatest influence on Washington’s practice of containment, historian says . "Beyond a shadow of a doubt, the British, of all the Allies," he says .
 Policy differences, sometimes major, existed, but each recognized that they needed each other .
 London’s influence created a series of fluctuations in U.S. policy in the Persian Gulf and Arab Middle East, where British interests were paramount . U.N. policy fluctuates in the Middle East .
 The confusion, disagreements, and sometimes cross-purpose policies, as well as areas of cooperation between Washington and London, are central to any evaluation of the Anglo-American relationship .
 Fundamental changes in their abilities to project power brought on the confounding and always perplexing task of rethinking long-held assumptions . Fundamental changes to the power of the U.S. can be seen as a result of the changes .
 As Britain’s unilateral ability to protect its interests collapsed, the British adjusted their tactics and began to use their influence with Washington to achieve many of those same goals .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy often found themselves modifying policy because of British influence . Eisenhower often found himself modifying policy due to British influence in the U.S.
 Good relations with London constituted the bedrock of U.S. Cold War strategy, and global containment depended on it . British interests in the Greater Middle East had to be considered, even when they ran counter to United States plans .
 British learned early on that U.S. concerns over Communist inroads could be exploited in a way that directly benefited the interests of Her Majesty’s Government . Winston Churchill was Winston Churchill as its initial practitioner, the British learned from the British .
 The Suez crisis in 1956 taught London that the failure to manage Washington could have serious and humiliating consequences . The failure of London's management of the U.S. in the 1950s taught London how to deal with Washington .
 Prime Minister Harold Macmillan used his relationship with Eisenhower to reestablish British influence in Washington . To this end, he used to use the relationship with the U.S. military to help his government .
 This influence most often aggravated U.S. relations with revolutionary nationalist regimes . It resulted in a clear United States tilt toward the traditional rulers of the region .
 British saw aid not in terms of political and economic modernization, but as a means of influence and maintaining the 6 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR status quo .
 The U.S. often viewed as the more progressive states in the region . They urged an aid policy that fostered traditional regimes and British interests . Thus, they consistently urged the United States .
 The British focus on influencing Washington became particularly acute following the 1958 debacle in Iraq .
 The British had their pet regimes and interests, and they were adept at using their influence in Washington to protect them . The British were adept in Washington, Washington, and used their influence to protect their interests .
 In addition to Anglo-American relations, Israel and oil also influenced the practice of U.S. foreign policy and containment . Israel, oil and other factors also influenced U.K. policy .
 Israel and Zionism constituted the only issues upon which all of the Arab states and Muslim populations in the region could agree on . Israel was the only issue on which Arab states, Muslim populations could agree . Israel and Zionism was the top issue on the agenda of Arab nations and Muslims in the
 Even Hindu-dominated India shunned Israeli patticipation in the non-aligned movement because of the potential diplomatic fallout .
 The Jewish state was a clear liability for U.S. hopes in the region . The state was seen as a liability for the United States in the Middle East . Israel is now a key ally in Israel .
 Both Washington and London viewed Israel as a policy albatross, an obstacle to a successful policy in the Middle East . Israel was viewed as an obstacle in a successful Mideast policy in Washington and Britain .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations clearly supported Israel’s survival . Despite this problem, the Eisenhower and JFK administrations supported Israel's survival .
 Both administrations attempted to orchestrate peace settlements and both failed . Both administrations failed to achieve peace settlements .
 Eisenhower contrasted sharply in his ArabIsraeli policies with Kennedy . Eisenhower and Kennedy were both prominent figures in the Middle East .
 The Republican administration attempted to putsue a balanced policy between the Arabs and Israel . Republican administration tried to put together a balance between Arab-Israeli relations .
 Kennedy succumbed to domestic political pressure and increasingly pursued pro-Israeli policies for domestic political reasons . Kennedy, after considerable internal debate, succumbed to internal political pressure, he says .
 From 1958 to 1963, the so-called Arab Cold War had sublimated the Arab-Israeli dispute to a degree . However, the Palestinian refugees remained a fundamental regional issue . The Palestinian refugees and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict were a fundamental issue .
 The revolutionary regimes in the Arab Middle East had all achieved power in part as a result of the inability of their predecessors to deal with the Zionist issue .
 Being a good Arab, a good Muslim, or, a non-aligned, anti-colonial regime in good standing, required opposition to Zionism as a colonial creation . Being good Arab or Muslim requires opposition to Zionism as colonial creation, writes David Frum .
 Fundamental to the struggle for power, influence, and leadership in the Arab and Muslim worlds was the question of who would best confront expansionist Zionism . The Arab-Muslim struggle was fundamental to the Arab world .
 Israel as an issue existed at or neat the surface of any U.S. attempt to further its influence in the Middle East . Israel as a issue existed in or around any attempt to strengthen the U.K.
 Tel Aviv pursued its own interests regardless of the consequences to the US . The Israelis consistently undermined any attempts to bring about a more pro-Western stance on the part of the secular, mote 'progressive', revolutionary Arab regimes .
 Oil constituted the other background influence on U.S. policy . Oil was also a background influence in the United States .
 Oil contributed to the U.S. obsession with containing the Soviet Union in the Mideast . Oil helped contribute to the United States obsession with containing Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations understood the long-term implications of growing oil consumption in the U.S. The Eisenhower, Kennedy administrations grasped the immediate, critical petroleum requirements of their European and Asian allies .
 The British played the more immediate and significant role in the equation . The British were involved in the creation of the British Empire .
 British oil interests in the region provided petroleum products to European markets and, at the same time, propped up the British economy . The British oil industry was a major source of revenue for British oil .
 European, Japanese, and British willingness to partner with the U.S. in the global containment of the Soviet Union depended on oil . Oil was key to the success of the United States in containment of Soviet Union .
 With the exception of post-1958 Iraq, states ruled by traditional regimes possessed most of the petroleum resources of the region . Post-1957 Iraq was one of the most oil-rich states in the world .
 Advocating reformoriented modernization as the corollary of containment in those oil-producing states carries risks . Advocating modernization as a result of containment carries risks, experts say . The U.S. government has been criticized by some in the past for its policies .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations were reluctant to push reforms that might threaten the flow of crude oil . Reform could bring instability and even collapse, therefore, the Eisenhower administration was reluctant to reform . Reforms may bring instability, even collapse .
 Oil was a thread periodically pushed to the forefront as Washington attempted to deal with crises in Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia . Oil has been a key issue for the U.S. since the 1980s .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy policies of containment and modernization in the Greater Middle East are connected to each other . These themes, taken in ageregate, underscore the fundamental connectivity between the Eisenhower-Kennedy policies .
 U.S. susceptibility at any given time to influences of indigenous forces, the British, oil, and Israel . They also demonstrate United States susceptibility to the influences of those influences .
 Kennedy administration tried to reinvent Eisenhowet’s failed policies of 1953-1954 and found itself limping back to what remained of the bequest . Kennedy administration attempted to reinvent failed policies and found it limping .
 In the mid-1950s, Eisenhower and Dulles learned the pitfalls of an ideologically motivated activist policy .
 Kennedy repeated many of those same mistakes in the early 1960s . Failing to appreciate adequately the experience of his predecessors, Kennedy repeated the same mistakes, he says .
 In these two experiences, we will hear a warning echoed against well-intentioned policy activism . It presumes to impose simplistic foreign solutions on very complex, well-established political, economic, and social structures .
 The end results of such policies in the Middle East have rarely been predictable, U.S. writes . They have almost always created unpleasant situations that complicated relations, he says .
 While this study focuses on the period from 1958 to 1963, the seeds of these events were sown between 1953 and 1955 . The seeds of this study were planted between 1953 to 1955 .
 In 1953, Joseph Stalin died, the Korean War ended, the French were preparing a knockout blow against the Viet Minh in Indochina, the situation in Europe was improving, and the situation was improving in Europe . The new French administration took office .
 In 1953, events in Iran seemed to offer a reassuring model for dealing with regional nationalism run amuck . In 1953 the Iranian government seemed to be in control of the situation in Iran .
 Muhammad Musaddiq, the man who nationalized British oil interests in Iran, symbolized the threat that secular nationalism posed to Western interests if it was not managed correctly . In Iran, he symbolized a threat posed by secular nationalism .
 Musaddiq’s nationalism threatened the British-dominated status quo in Iran . He encouraged other potentially anti-Western nationalist elements in the region . Although he was thoroughly Westernized and a reformer, he was also a reformist .
 Musaddiq’s tolerance of leftist political groups seemed to promise increased Soviet influence, or the potential for a neutral Iran . More problematically, his tolerance of left-wing political groups seems to promise more Soviet influence .
 Iran's political ferment initially provoked distinctly different reactions from Whitehall and White House . As will be seen, this increased Iranian political ferment, and instability, initially provoked distinct different reactions .
 In 1952, the collapse of the regime of King Farouk I at the hands of a group of largely British-trained military officers was hardly a national tragedy . The collapse of Farouk's regime in 1952 was hardly the national tragedy, but it was a British military success .
 The emergence of General Muhammad Neguib and the Revolutionary Command Council under the control of Colonel Gamal Abd-al-Nasser held both risks and promise . The emergence was both a risk and a promise for the country .
 It looked as though U.S. influence and aid might protect British interests, and enlist Egypt in a pro-Western mutual security arrangement .
 Washington hoped withdrawal of British forces from Suez would dampen political unrest and anti-Western, if not anti-British, agitation .
 Nehru understood that the economic development of India depended on Western aid and his relationship with the U.S. and Britain . Despite periodically tense relations with the West, Nehru knew that India's economic development depended on the West .
 India continued its participation in the British Commonwealth . To that end, India continued to participate in the UK Commonwealth .
 Baghdad government began various projects designed to raise the standard of living for the general population . The Baghdad government has also begun various projects aimed at raising the standards of living .
 Most expected that the Western allies would maintain their ascendancy . Problems in the region appeared manageable, and while thete were clouds on the horizon .
 Only the Suez Canal treaty negotiations with Egypt were a serious point of contention in the 1950s .
 Eisenhower wanted to create a new paradigm for relationships with emerging nations, particularly in the Middle East and Asia . Eisenhower wanted the U.S. to create new paradigrams for relations with emerging countries .
 Eisenhower viewed Truman’s close association with the British as a major mistake . Eisenhower viewed the close relationship with the UK as a mistake .
 The new president was absolutely certain that he could better manage the mess created by Truman . Truman was the president of the United States in 1945 .
 Eight years later, Kennedy and his set of advisors held the same negative view of Eisenhower . Eisenhower was the president of the United States in the early 1950s .
 Both Eisenhower and Kennedy were acting well within the policy parameters of containment and economic development . In fact, both were acting within the policies of the two presidents .
 Study first looks at how the Middle East dynamic unstrung the policy plans of the Eisenhower administration between 1953 and 1955 . It looks at the necessity of cooperation with London, complicated by the need to cooperate with London .
 The study will explore Eisenhowet’s 1958-1960 accommodation with the new Middle Eastern political reality . Then, in the series of chapters, will explore Britain's deft adjustment to its own receding power and influence .
 9 highlight the remarkable similarities and nuanced differences that existed between the policies pursued by the two presidents . Subsequent sections will examine Kennedy’s policies and examine Kennedy's policies .
 The study will analyze the degree to which Eisenhower and Kennedy operated within the same fundamental set of policy parameters . It will examine the similarities and differences between their two administrations during this critical period .
 The Greater Middle East 1953-1958 is a look at the U.S. policy in the late 1950s and early 1960s in historical context . Analysis of the policy initiatives and attitudes in the early Eisenhower administration is needed .
 Anti-colonial bent put them at cross-purposes with long-established British interests . This anti-colonial stance was at odds with British interests at the time .
 Winston Churchill was committed to preserving London's political influence and economic interests . Winston Churchill wanted to preserve the system of political influence in Britain .
 The economic benefits of the remnants of the British empire provided Churchill with all the incentive necessary to press Eisenhower to acquiesce to British policies and interests in the Middle East .
 The critical first meeting between the President-elect and Prime Minister proved to be a harbinger of things to come .
 The discussions coveted a range of topics — including the Communist threat, European economic and defense issues, and trade with the Communist bloc . The discussions were held on a number of topics, ranging from economic, defense and trade issues .
 Eventually, the conversation turned to the situation in the Middle East . The conversation ended up turning to the topic of terrorism .
 The Labor government of Clement Atlee had attempted to create a MEDO but the stench of colonial domination had effectively undermined every attempt .
 The Arab states’ lack of ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958,’s Suez Crisis . Eisenhower and Dulles discussed the Suez crisis in 1956 .
 The British opposed Dulles’ appointment as Secretary of State . Eisenhower saw Dulles as a loyal instrument whom he could use to execute his foreign policy . Dulles was a lightningrod to divert criticism from the Oval Office .
 Truman administration had toyed with the idea, but left it to the incoming administration to decide how to proceed . Dean Acheson of the Truman administration left the issue to decide .
 The mere fact that the new administration in Washington might attempt to directly insert itself into the region was disquieting enough . The lectures on the necessity of respecting regional nationalisms were nothing short of alarming . The new administration's lectures on respecting nationalisms are alarming .
 Both Eisenhower and Dulles had made numerous pronouncements on the passing of empire and the rise of nationalism in the developing world .
 Eisenhower made it clear that they were very serious about supporting the emerging states and their national aspirations . Eisenhower made the meeting with Churchill .
 When Churchill raised the issue of joint action in the Middle East, Eisenhower reacted negatively . Eisenhower pointed out to the Prime Minister that his joint proposals with Truman on Iran had backfired and only served to taint Washington .
 Despite his concern about ‘immediate independence’, the message was clear. Despite his concerns, the messages were clear. The message is clear.
 British opposition to emerging national movements and association with London’s colonial past was a liability . The new administration intended to chart its own course, and viewed British opposition as a liability.
 Eisenhower told Churchill that he viewed persuasion and the more ageressive use of U.S. economic and military aid as the basic levers of foreign policy .
 The heavy emphasis on economic aid reflected the influence of advisors, including Walt Rostow and other technocrats, who believed that through economic aid the U.S. could bring developing nations to the point of economic self-sufficiency and foster proWestern democratic institutions .
 The meeting heightened Eisenhower's concerns about the British and his old comrade-in-atms, Churchill . The meeting also heightened Eisenhower’s concerns about Churchill .
 Churchill was ‘trying to relive the days of World War II... sitting on some rather Olympian platform with respect to the rest of the world, and directing world affairs’ with another American president .
 Winston does not by any means propose to resort to power politics and disregard legitimate aspirations among weaker peoples . Winston says he will not resort to 'power politics' and 'disregard legitimate aspirations'
 He says other nations should recognize the wisdom of our suggestions, and follow them . But he does take the rather old-fashioned, paternalistic, approach .
 Eisenhower commented that Churchill’s view might be ‘true — in the abstract’, but the reality of the situation dictated the use of ‘persuasion and example’ and not a ‘take it or leave it’ approach .
 Washington had every intention of avoiding the baggage of British colonialism, while promoting a ‘slower and more orderly progress towards independence’ for the developing world . Strategic cooperation with London was critical .
 Eisenhower and Dulles confirmed the priorities for U.S. policy in the Middle East would be containment of the Soviet Union and of Communist influence . Economic development, covert assistance to pro-Western elements, and, if necessary, military assistance .
 Eisenhower’s intended policies in 1953 and those of the Kennedy administration in 1961 were uncanny. The similarities, in terms of both policy planning and practical application, were uncanny . The similarities between Eisenhower's intended policies and that of Kennedy's in 1961 are uncanny, says historian .
 In 1953, the Suez Crisis and the Iraq Coup had yet to undermine the aura of London’s expertise and dominance in the Middle East . The new administration was leery of Britain's colonial baggage and particularly reluctant to support Churchill in the disputes with Iran and Egypt .
 Churchill viewed the Middle East as traditionally a British sphere of influence . Churchill viewed it as a necessity for continued British influence in the world and prosperity at home .
 The thought of a concerted Yankee intrusion on behalf of emerging progressive regimes was distressing . The potential threat to British interests was to say the least distressing.
 Iran constituted a serious immediate concern in early 1953, and ironically again in 1961, again in early 1961 . Preemption and Iran were pre-emptive actions in 1953 and 1961 .
 The policy of containment tequired the maintenance of a pro-Western Iran tied to the U.S. through Western security arrangements . The policy was meant to maintain the pro-West Iran ties to the United States through security arrangements.
 In 1953, the Iranian crisis drove a series of U.S. policy decisions that made a Mideast collective security arrangement based on the ‘northern tier’ increasingly attractive .
 Musaddiq’s political roller-coaster and confrontation with London over the Anglo-Persian Oil Company substantially increased Iranian instability . Iran has been in the grip of a growing instability in the Middle East .
 Dulles underlined the word ‘any’ indicating that he clearly understood the Iranian prime minister’s lack of political options . Dulles: ‘Any’ is the word 'any' indicating that . He clearly understood that he had no political options to choose between
 Washington began to fear that a dictatorship under Musaddiq could bring the Communists to power through his assassination or coup . Washington began increasingly to fear the Communists could bring them to power .
 Eisenhower’s cabinet, and in particular Secretary Dulles, believed that the oil issue could be managed with the Musaddiq government in power . In contrast, Eisenhower's cabinet thought that the issue could not be managed by a new government .
 Eisenhower administration preferred an alternative to intervention . Despite concern about what might happen, the Eisenhower administration chose not to intervene .
 The British took a dim view of any U.S. plans to strengthen Musaddiq .
 London’s arguments that the Musaddiq government had to be replaced gained traction with Eisenhower . With the pro-Western propaganda campaien failing, direct aid blocked by British protests, increasing instability, and the exaggerated specter of a Communist takeover, the arguments for a British government
 Military elements led by General Fazlullah Zahedi overthrew the Musaddiq government . With the support of most of the Shi’a religious establishment, military elements led to the overthrow of the government .
 Zahedi restored the Shah to the throne, crushed the Communist Tudeh, suppressed the National Front, and handed Iranian petroleum to an Anglo-American consortium . Zahedis restored the shah to the power of Iran .
 The coup may have defused the immediate crisis, but it hardly solved the problem of Iranian stability . Eisenhower administration: coup defused immediate crisis but hardly solved problem of Iran stability .
 The administration continued to view economic development and social and political reform as the only real insurance against instability and Communist subversion . Social and political reforms were the only insurance against subversion, the administration said .
 At the 30 December 1953 NSC meeting, Dulles’ comments continued to reflect the administration’s desire for fundamental reform in Iran . Dulles continued to say he wanted to reform Iran .
 Secretary complained that the Shah and Zahedi had accomplished little in the way of ‘critical’ economic and social reform . The Secretary of State complained that they had achieved little .
 A solution to the dispute over oil appeared to be in the offing, but none of the problems that brought on the instability had been addressed . While a solution was in place, the problems still remain unresolved .
 Dulles went on to say that the only bright spot was the suppression of the opposition . Dulles said that the opposition was suppressed by the government .
 The reform policies of nationalist politicians in the Middle East tended to create political instability, which, in turn, opened the door for Communist and Soviet inroads . Reform policies in the region created political instability and instability .
 Regimes that relied on conservative military officers appeared to provide a lower-risk path to economic development and political and social reform . ‘The Greater Middle East, 1953-1958,’ was the region’s first regime to reform .
 Despite protestations to the contrary, the administration’s faith lay in General Zahedi, not the Shah . Despite later protestations, the Shah's faith was not in the Shah, it was in the general's faith .
 Eisenhower administration maintained a degree of separation between its policies and personal support for the Shah . As a result, the Eisenhower administration pointedly maintained a . degree of . separation between policies and support for Shah .
 The administration supported a pro-Western independent Iran, not the Pahlavi dynasty . For good reason, the administration supported the territorial integrity of an independent Iran . The administration backed Iran's territorial integrity .
 Real faith lay in the conservative military and security services as foundation for stability and reform, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Real faith in the security services, not only as foundation of stability, but also as potential instrument for controlled reform .
 Islam and religious establishment across the region constituted a natural enemy of Communism, thus another potential ally in the Cold War . Islam and the religious establishment in the region was also a potential ally of Communism .
 The Iranian coup moved Washington toward a view of Western interests in the region that was more closely aligned with British views .
 Eisenhower and Dulles now had confidence that, when necessary, the United States had the capability to control the political situation through covert action . Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles .
 Churchill and the British government faced a crisis in Egypt in 1953-54 . Unfortunately for Churchill, Egypt was not Iran . Churchill and his government faced another crisis in 1954 .
 Eisenhower considered the Anglo-Egyptian dispute over the presence of British troops in the Suez Canal zone as a more acute problem than either Arab-Israeli dispute or Musaddiq's rogue government in Iran .
 The Egyptians demanded British withdrawal from the Canal zone and threatened guerrilla war if London refused . Egyptians demanded withdrawal from Canal zone . The Egyptians also threatened guerrilla warfare if British refused .
 Washington made it clear that the British presence was an impediment to U.S. interests . Egypt was the key to Western fortunes in the Middle East, Washington said .
 Eisenhower and Dulles wanted to pursue a policy of economic assistance, including support for the Egyptian plans to dam the Nile at Aswan . Aswan is the site of the planned dam .
 In 1961, Kennedy’s assessment and plans with regard to Egypt were virtually identical to those of Eisenhower . Kennedy's assessment of Egypt in 1961 was almost identical to that of Eisenhower's .
 Eisenhower characterized the Anglo-Eeyptian crisis over the Suez Canal as the ‘most dangerous’ situation in the Middle East . In May 1953, Eisenhower described the crisis as the 'most dangerous' situation .
 Churchill’s government fumed over pressure to come to terms with the Egyptians . Churchill's government fuming over pressure from Egyptians to accept the deal .
 Churchill threatened an Anglo-Israeli alliance to intimidate Egypt . In a bid to moderate this pressure, Churchill threatened to moderate the pressure .
 Both the United States embassy and the CIA had consistently reported that Nasser was the real power in the RCC and thus, the de facto leader of Egypt . The CIA and U.S. embassy had consistently said Nasser would be the real leader of the Egyptian government .
 Dulles promised additional pressure on the British and mote economic aid . Hoping to gain a new hearing for MEDO, Dulles said MEDO will be given a hearing .
 Dulles broached the idea of MEDO, and Nasser asked against whom the defense pact was aimed . Nasser said against whom it was aimed, the pact was intended .
 Nasser believed that despite his refusal on MEDO, the U.S. would provide modern arms for the Egyptian army . Nasser also believed that the United States would provide arms for Egypt's army .
 The Secretary concluded that MEDO as envisioned was ‘impracticable’ due to ‘recurrent’ tensions and British pressure against economic and political aid .
 The idea was first discussed during the Truman administration . The idea of a Western military alliance with Arab nations was first proposed in 1950s .
 Churchill hinted that Labor government might suspend U.S. basing rights in Britain . Warned that United States pressure threatened his government . Hinted that Labor Government might suspend United States baseing rights .
 Churchill blamed Dulles and Ambassador Caffery for the lack of progress on the new Canal treaty . At boiling point, Churchill muttered about setting up high-level talks with the Soviets on the Egyptian situation .
 Eisenhower administration walked a tightrope in trying to avoid a break with London or with Egypt that would benefit the Soviets . Eisenhower administration tried to avoid any break from London or Egypt that could benefit the Soviet Union .
 I'm very much wotried at the idea of the grant of American economic aid to Egypt at a time when our differences with them are so acute . I am very much concerned at the proposal of U.S. economic aid .
 It would, I am sure, have a grave effect in this country on Anglo-American telations. It would ... have, I'm sure, would have, it would be a grave . It would have an impact on Anglo American telations, he said .
 Socialist opposition would use it to urge us to press for the inclusion of Red China in U.N.O. and might class it with trade to that country upon which subject McCarthy’s unjust charges are already much resented . Socialist opposition might use it as a tool to urge
 The frontier of the Suez Canal zone shows very much the same conditions of unrest and potential warfare, as does the frontier in Korea . The frontier is very similar to the border in Korea and the borders in Egypt .
 Churchill wrote Eisenhower that recognizing ‘Red China’ was hardly a threat since the British were already trading with them . Eisenhower responded to the ‘somber tone’ of the letter .
 The President wanted Churchill to commit that if the United States withheld aid and Eeypt agreed to the terms discussed by the Prime Minister and President at their earlier meeting in Bermuda, Britain would settle its differences with Egypt .
 In 1954, the AngloEgyptian treaty over the Canal allowed a British military presence until 1956, and the right of reoccupation if the Canal were threatened . In 1956, the treaty gave the British the right to occupy the Canal if it threatened .
 The British, no longer able to to maintain large forces in Egypt, were willing to settle for the right of reentry . In reality, the British were able to .
 The Egyptians grudgingly accepted the tight of reentry in the event of a war that included an attack on Turkey . Eventually, the Egyptians agreed to re-enter the country if Turkey attacked Egypt .
 The treaty seemed to resolve the Anglo-Egyptian impasse and cleared the way for closer Egyptian ties with the West . The treaty was finalized in October 1954 .
 In November 1954, Nasser removed Neguib and took direct control of the government . Nasser took control of government in November 1954 .
 The treaty, coupled with Dulles’ alternate strategy for containment along the ‘northern tier’ unintentionally undermined the administration’s early hopes for Western gains . In reality, the treaty, and the alternate strategy, unintentionally undermined their early hopes .
 Nasser and the RCC had needed U.S. help in getting an agreement with Britain; thus the completion of the treaty reduced Cairo’s dependence on Washington .
 The treaty also provoked a revolt by the Muslim Brotherhood, forcing Nasser to take a public anti-Western stance . Nasser took a public stance against the treaty, leading to his anti-West stance .
 The fact that the propaganda campaign was largely orchestrated with CIA assistance was beside the point . Nasser could not openly pursue pro-Western policies after the treaty than before it .
 Nasser believed that Dulles had promised massive U.S. economic and military aid in return for comptomises with the British . Nasser thought Dulles promised massive United States economic and . military aid to the British in a deal with Washington .
 Nasset’s point of view was that the utility of a relationship with Washington was rapidly decreasing . Nasset: The utility of the relationship with the U.S. was rapidly waning .
 Washington alluded to economic aid, and military aid was limited to security assistance for internal purposes, not modern arms for the Egyptian army .
 Dulles’ ‘northern tier’ substitute for the Egyptian-based MEDO crashed head-on into US-Egyptian relations . At this point, Dulles' ‘N.T.O. substitute’ crashed head on into U.S.-Egypt
 At the eastern end of the region, the arming of Pakistan would galvanize Nehru into a frenzy of opposition to U.S. policies, but the response in the Arab Middle East was muted on the condition of nonparticipation by Arab states .
 On 1 August, at Egyptian prodding, the Arab League issued a statement opposing the inclusion of any Arab states in a nonArab defensive alliance . The Arab League said it was opposed to any Arab state joining a non-Arab alliance .
 Iraq adhered to the Arab League declaration only when speculation about membership in the Turkish-Pakistani pact resulted in nationalist rioting in Baghdad . The British supported the Iraqi decision, and the British supported it .
 British government feared that U.S. influence in Iraq would increase as it had in post-coup Iran and post-revolutionary Egypt . The The Greater Middle East, 1953-1958, was the focus of the British government in the region .
 At this juncture, the terms of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty altered the course of events in the Arab Middle East .
 The treaty linked Egypt to Turkey and the British defense of the Canal . The treaty stated that British forces could reenter the Suez Canal zone in the event of an attack on Turkey .
 The fact that the Egyptians had strongly opposed this clause was lost on the Iraqis, it was lost to them, he said . The Egyptians had strong opposition to this clause, he added .
 Nuri Sa’id interpreted the treaty as a tripartite defensive arrangement between Turkey, Egypt, and Britain, with Iraq effectively out in the cold . The treaty was interpreted as a defensive arrangement .
 To recoup Itaq’s position, he moved to form his own alliance with Turkey . Itaq moved to Turkey to recoup his position, and formed an alliance .
 In early January, Iraq and Turkey announced their intention to enter into a defensive alliance . The alliance was announced in early January . Iraq, Turkey announced they would enter into an alliance in January .
 Nasser saw the Iraqi move as a direct challenge to Egypt’s leadership and an indication of the continued British divide-and-conquer policy . Nasser moved to form an Arab defense arrangement .
 Only Yemen and Saudi Arabia supported Egypt, while Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon refused to condemn Iraq . Only Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Lebanon supported Egypt .
 It caused Washington to reconsider support for Iraq’s inclusion in any Western defense scheme . It caused U.S. to reconsider its support for the Iraq defense scheme.
 Cairo began to view the U.S. role with greater suspicion . Having specifically warned the United States about the inclusion of Arab states in its defensive alliances, Cairo now views it with more suspicion .
 Nuri Pasha had managed to place the Eisenhower administration’s security plan on a collision course with the very country that Washington viewed as the ‘key’ to the region .
 The British supported the inclusion of Iraq and other Arab states into the defense alliance . Recognizing an opportunity to separate the United States from Egypt, the British now supported inclusion of the Arab nations .
 London threw caution to the winds in its Iraqi policy by undermining the Arab nationalist credentials of the Hashemite regime . London also undermined the Arab nationalists of the regime .
 Nasser wanted to preserve his relationship with Washington . The potential for Iraq’s inclusion in a Western military alliance raised serious questions about the potential threat posed to Egyptian interests .
 In Washington, Eisenhower and his advisors were beginning to grasp the limitations that the political realities of the Middle East placed on the influence to be gained through economic assistance and on local participation .
 Washington provided support but refused to join, while still hoping to gain something positive from its courtship of Nasser . Largely in deference to Cairo’s negative reaction to the inclusion in what became the Baghdad Pact .
 Eisenhower and Dulles agreed with Secretary of State George C Marshall’s assessment that the recognition of Israel had fundamentally been a 20 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR policy made for emotional and political reasons .
 By 1953, the creation of Israel was so much spilt milk, but it threatened to sour relations with the Arab and Muslim worlds . Israel's creation of the state of Israel in 1953 threatened to upset relations with both the Arab world and the Muslim world .
 The problem now centered on how to neutralize Israel as a stumbling block to US-Arab relations . The problem is how to remove Israel from the Middle East as a blocking block .
 There is no doubt that American initiative in the establishment of the Israeli State and the resulting Arab refugee problem has led to increased anti-Western feeling throughout the Arab countries . Arab-American relations have embittered, in particular, Arab-Arab relations .
 It may be, too, that the aid which Israel has received from the United States has delayed the possibility of a settlement by enabling Israel to avoid facing the issue that, unless she trades with the Arab countries, she cannot be a viable State .
 President viewed the Arab-Israeli dispute as a distraction from the proper focus on economic progtess. With regard to the situation in Egypt, he viewed the situation as an issue .
 The administration attempted to leverage the Egyptian regime into breaking the impasse over an Arab-Israeli peace settlement . The negotiations took place against the backdrop of the Suez Canal .
 Eisenhower had repeatedly stated that his administration intended to ‘do what it thought was right’ and not, as Vice-President Richard M Nixon put it, ‘kowtow’ Nixon .
 Washington believed that it could use economic leverage and manipulate the valve on foreign aid to control Israel . The U.S. government believed it could control Israel with economic leverage . Israel has been a key ally in the Middle East for years .
 It included compensation for Palestinian refugees and the right of return for refugees . The Palestinian government has rejected the idea of returning refugees to Israel .
 It called for a settlement of the Jordan River water- usage issues and a joint program to develop water ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958,’
 During his Middle East trip in May 1953, Dulles broached the topic of refugees with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion .
 Ben-Gurion quickly disabused Dulles of any hopes of Israeli cooperation . Ben-Dissing Dulles had hoped to secure cooperation with Israel .
 Dulles quickly drew the only conclusion possible, namely that any hope for peace rested on the success of a step-by-step apptoach . Dulles: "Any hope of peace rests on the successful success of the step by step app toach"
 The administration recognized the ploy for what it was and pressured the Israelis to withhold any initiative . The Obama administration recognized it and pressured Israel to withhold initiative .
 Washington then focused on the Jordan waters issue as a first step in getting an agreement between the two sides . The refugee problem was a dead issue, Washington said .
 Johnston obtained an agreement ftom the Arabs, but the Israelis changed their position, jeopardizing the entire negotiation . In point of fact, Johnston got an agreement .
 On 28 February, Israeli forces mounted a raid into Gaza, in retaliation for minor border incidents . The raid took place on 28 February in response to minor incidents .
 Nasset: The West intended to strengthen Egypt’s enemies and undermine his prestige throughout the region . Nasset says the Iraqi issue and the Gaza raid made it appear that the West wanted Egypt to strengthen its enemies . The Gaza raid and Iraqi issue were seen as a plot to undermine
 Nuri Sa’id and Ben Gurion had succeeded in undermining the lynchpin in Washington’s Arab policy . Ben Gurions had succeeded to undermine the Arab policy of the U.S. in Israel .
 None of the patties involved were interested in a compromise settlement . None of them wanted to settle for a compromise .
 Israelis in particular viewed any compromise as a threat to their goal of creating a Jewish 22 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR state and excluding the Arab population .
 "Tis Johnston’s own Plan We only entreat you Be ready to sign We'll furnish the paper And the dotted line. Flow Gently Sweet Afton .
 "We will tell Those waters of Jordan To steam heat all Hell. Now all that we ask you Is simple and sweet Just have full authority Whenever we meet So you all may sign up"
 The British had never the liked the project, United States officials ascribed this to London’s ‘pique’ at not being ‘sufficiently’ consulted before Johnston undertook his mission .
 Eisenhower and Dulles had a plan, but no-one was willing to participate in it . Eisenhower and D.C. Dulles were able to get a plan out of the closet . No-one would participate in the plan .
 With the failure of the Jordanwaters effort, the Eisenhower administrations efforts to establish a peace process effectively ground to a halt . The Eisenhower administrations .
 "Economic incentives were simply insufficient inducements to outweigh the associated political risks," says President Obama . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 The Arab ‘threat’ became the critical internal political issue in the Arab world and Israel . This was not only true in Arab world, but in Israel as well, where the Arab 'threat' became a political issue .
 Fear politics and exaggerating that threat became the political bread-and-butter that paid off in Knesset seats . Fear politics pays off in Israel's Knessets .
 Arab and Israeli fear of a settlement trumped any gain that might accrue from increased economic aid . The settlement is a settlement between Israel and the Arab state of Palestine .
 This clearly demonstrated the limitations that economic aid could play as an inducement to an Arab-Israeli settlement . This clearly demonstrates the limitations of economic aid as an incentive to Arab-Israel settlement .
 Eisenhower administration looked with justifiable satisfaction on its overall Middle East policies in 1954 . Eisenhower administration ran afoul of non-alignment in the Mideast .
 The situation in Iran, while leaving much to be desired in the way of political reform and economic development, was stable . Iran's situation in the Middle East was stable in 1953-58 .
 Egypt and Britain had signed a new treaty that would remove British forces from the Suez Canal zone . The treaty was signed grudgingly, but Britain and Egypt agreed to pull troops from the area .
 Economic pressure and incentives showed promise as the first steps toward a possible Arab-Israeli peace . Economic pressure is the first step toward a potential Arab-Israel peace, experts say .
 At the same time, a rudimentary alliance system to contain the Soviet Union seemed to be emerging . The U.S. was in the throes of the Cold War .
 In reality, these tactical successes had begun the process that would turn U.S. relations with the ‘progressive’ regimes in the Middle East on their ear . The United States would soon be turning relations with 'progressive' regimes .
 The inclusion of Pakistan in the Western defense structure alienated India . Just as the linkage between Turkey and Egypt in the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1954 had unintended consequences .
 At the same time, it made New Delhi an integral part of the Middle Eastern power struggle . New Delhi was made part of Mideast power struggle at the time .
 Nehru’s matriage of political democracy and economic development in India largely followed the model that Eisenhower and his advisors saw as so central to proWestern development in Asia . Yet the requirements of containment would foster an increasingly problematic relationship between the world's two largest democracies . The requirements of
 Neither Nehru nor Nasser were willing to trade national interests for arms or economic assistance from the West . These problems also contributed to growing political and diplomatic synergy between India and Egypt .
 India and Egypt refused to enter a Western military alliance . Given their deep-seated distrust of Great Power machinations stemming from their colonial experiences, they refused to join forces .
 Nehru had made it clear that he envisioned a new political order for Asia that rejected the traditions of Rea/politik . Nehru's vision for Asia was that he rejected the tradition of ReA/Politik . He envisioned a political order that rejected traditions of the Rea
 In India during the early 1950s, Nehru began to reverse the trend toward diffusion of political power following independence . Nehru reversed the trend following independence in India in 1950s .
 Regional political chiefs threatened to fracture the unity of the republic . The power of regional political chiefs was threatened to split the country's political parties .
 Non-alignment, or ‘neutrality’ in Washington’s parlance, had a clear anti-American, almost pro-Communist tint . ‘Nebraska’ was a state-run by the U.S. government in the 1960s,
 It flew in the face of the ‘with us or against us’ attitudes that framed the Cold War diplomatic and security mentality . It was the first time the U.S.-led forces had been involved in the conflict in the Middle East .
 Nehru's India was too important to ignore or totally to alienate . Despite this, Nehru’s India was still too important for India to ignore .
 India was the largest democracy in the world, a potential Asian counterbalance to Communist China . Nehru had innumerable admirers, including key members of the U.S. Congress .
 Eisenhower and his advisors recognized the necessity of a working relationship 24 GREATER MIDDLE EAST and the COLD WAR with New Delhi . Eisenhower recognized the need to work together in the Middle East .
 India had played a key role in Korea, and chaired the International Control Commission on Indochina . In addition to Korea, India had also chaired the international Control Commission . India has also played a major role in the Korean peninsula .
 Dulles monitored US-Pakistani bilateral developments when he visited New Delhi in May 1953 . Dulles referred to an alternative defensive alliance on the northern tier . This meant Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan, meaning Turkey, Pakistan and Pakistan .
 No-one in Washington had any illusions about the desirability of avoiding involvement in the Kashmir dispute . No. one in Washington would want to avoid involvement in Kashmir .
 In between these two extremes is a vast center group, which in basic beliefs has much in common . This reason, it should be a closely-knit organization, he says .
 In point of fact this vast center or ‘Middle of the Road’ group prefers to shut its eyes to the dangers represented in the extremes . In the current state of affairs, the only threatening extreme is Communism, Communism .
 The group of nations of which this center is constituted constantly indulges in all kinds of divisive arguments and name-calling that grow so important in their cumulative effect as to nullify any attempt toward unity in working together .
 The administration pinned its hopes of managing India on the importance of massive U.S. aid . Anticipating New Delhi’s reaction, the administration pinred its hopes on massive aid .
 Nehru’s plans for economic development were totally dependent on that aid . The U.S. was the largest contributor of economic assistance to the Indian Empire .
 Eisenhower administration encouraged the formation of a defensive alliance between Turkey and Pakistan . Viewing this economic leverage as insurance against a radical Indian reaction, the Eisenhower administration sought the alliance with Turkey .
 In December 1953, Nehru expressed his opposition to arms for Pakistan to Vice-President Richard Nixon during the latter’s visit to India . Nehru said he was opposed to arms being sent to Pakistan .
 Nixon’s assessment tipped the balance in favor of providing arms to Pakistan . Arguably, Nixon's assessment tipped . the balance .
 By March 1954, Eisenhower had tired of trying to mollify India and made it clear that the security requirements of the United States would determine the status of military aid to Pakistan .
 U.S. would take ‘appropriate action’ in the event that Pakistan attempted to direct this military aid toward India, he said .
 Rostow’s evaluation of containment and Communist China underscored the consensus existing in Cold War Washington . Rostow: “China is a major source of tension in the United States. It is a key ally of the U.S. in the Cold War.”
 Nehru reacted with a vehemence that surprised all but the most experienced India hands in the foreign policy community . Nehru's reaction surprised most of the world's foreign policy experts in India .
 The Indian Prime Minister claimed that the U.S. had completely altered the ‘roots and foundations’ of any proposed settlement on Kashmir . The Indian PM said that the United States had altered the 'roots' of any proposal .
 From Eisenhower’s perspective, Indian neutrality had become ‘neutrality against the West’ as Nehru increasingly refused to differentiate between the Soviet and U.S. political systems .
 Despite his pique, Nehru resisted more radical action against U.S. interests . Nehru's pique was not the first time he had taken action .
 He understood that the loss of U.S. economic aid would have disastrous consequences for Indian economic growth . The loss of United States economic aid to India would have been disastrous .
 Nehru's ‘socialist’ leanings notwithstanding, his vision appealed to Washington’s belief in economic prosperity and reform as the surest counterbalance .
 He would find other ways to vent his unhappiness with U.S. policy, he says .
 The arming of Pakistan contributed directly to a ‘Vigorous Indian campaign to assett its prerogatives and emphasize its independence from Washington, and to show its overall displeasure with Western military alliances,’ says the author .
 Nehru had at his disposal the perfect instrument for harassing the Americans . Coincidentally, Nehru also had at the disposal of the American .
 This instrument left no doubt as to the origin of the message but provided Nehru with a fig leaf of deniability . Nehru was the prime minister of India in 1961 .
 An avowed leftist, inspired by Lokmanaya Bal Gangadhar Tilak and the Bolshevik Revolution, Menon had served as Nehru’s friend, publicist, and personal representative in Britain during the 1930s and 1940s .
 By claiming that he had authored the term ‘non-aligned’ and by his uncompromising hostility to the West, he managed to further taint nonalignment as pro-Soviet . He managed to claim that . by claiming that . he had created the term 'non-
 Nehru placed Menon in the Indian delegation at the conference, where he managed to severely antagonize Washington . Menon managed to antagonize the U.S.
 "He consciously and conspicuously played to audiences well beyond the confines of the Palais des Nations," he said .
 Despite differences in style, Menon was, in fact, the more strident expression of Nehru’s positions . Nehru was a more tadical expression of his views than Menon .
 U.S. assistance to Pakistan aside, Nehru abhorred Eisenhower’s commitment to Asian leaders like Chiang Kai-Shek and Sygmund Rhee . Nehru also opposed Eisenhower's commitment to Asia's leaders .
 In non-policy areas, Nehru increasingly resented what he viewed as the attitude of ‘American superiority’ and pushed for limiting U.S. influence . Nehru resented 'American superiority' and pushed to limit influence .
 Nehru’s commitment to non-alignment accelerated and intensified the deterioration of Indian relations with the West . Nehru and Bandung Nehru were both committed by the Nehru government .
 The geopolitical and military aspects of U.S. containment policy began to overshadow the initial commitment 28 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR to economic development as the initial theme in combating Soviet, Chinese, and indigenous Communist influence .
 In much of the developing world, Washington’s linkage of military and economic policies under the containment umbrella transformed perceptions of the US . The US is now seen as a neo-colonialist interloper tied to a very Britishlike policy of indirect colonialism .
 Non-alignment came to symbolize independence and freedom of action to Nehru, Nehru . It also provided a means to indirectly tweak the Eisenhower administration for its policies .
 Nehru's unhappiness placed a greater emphasis on pressing forward with a major non-aligned initiative . Nehru’s unhappiness also placed a . greater emphasis . on pressing ahead with the major non .aligned initiative, Nehru said .
 The 1954 Colombo and 1955 Bandung conferences were directly stimulated by Nehru’s objections to the system of Western alliances . Nehru's objections to Western alliances led to the 1954 and 1955 meetings in Sri Lanka .
 The 28 April to 2 May 1954 Colombo conference was a trelatively limited affair . However, it quickly took on broader overtones .
 Key participants recognized it as a path to greater stature and independence of action . Key participants quickly recognized it was a path for greater stature . The U.S. Senate will hold a series of hearings on the issue of immigration reform .
 The Indians and Pakistanis disagreed on everything, from condemnations of Communism and anti-Communist movements to the order in which the ‘US, the UK, China, and USSR’ were to be listed in the call for non-intervention in Indochina .
 Nehru's experience at the Colombo conference created something of a quandary for him . Nehru’s experience at Colombo Conference created something .
 Nehru set about finding additional international support to counteract Pakistan before he committed to attend . Already leery of a follow-up, Nehru was already wary of following Pakistan . Nehru attended Afro-Asian conference the next year .
 Nehru's lukewarm support for Afro-Asian conference in 1955 raised doubts that it would occur . Nehru’s support for the conference raised doubts about it .
 Initially, the Eisenhower administration believed that the effort would likely collapse . However, by late 1954, it had become apparent that Nehru intended to proceed and on a clearly anti-American note .
 Nehru sent Britain and the United States scrambling for a response . Nehru invited Beijing to attend, sending Britain and U.S. scrambling for response .
 The potential diplomatic and political ramifications were so broad that the Eisenhower administration had great difficulty formulating a strategy at all . Eisenhower administration struggled to formulate a strategy after the attack .
 Dulles called a meeting of key State Department and CIA officials in an attempt to come to some resolution concerning the proper course of action for Washington . The meeting was held on 14 January 1955, 1955 .
 Allen Dulles, Director of the CIA, expressed serious concern about the purpose of the Bandung meetings . Dulles' younger brother, Allen, expressed concern over the meetings . The meetings were held in Indonesia .
 Suggestions for dealing with the ‘rigged conference’ ran the gamut from delaying it to organizing a boycott to supporting the attendance of solidly proWestern nations in the region . Suggestions range from delaying the conference to supporting a boycott .
 Washington worried about the potential for an anti-Western tone and increased acceptability for Communist China in the world community . Washington was worried about potential for the potential . Washington worried .
 Conference highlights differences between non-aligned and pro-Western camps in Asia and the Middle East . Conference also highlighted differences between pro-western camps in both Asia and Mideast .
 Secretary Dulles concluded that, given the exclusion of Israel from the conference, Atab attendance would determine its success or failure . Secretary Dulls concluded that . Given the exclusion . of Israel, . atab attendance . would determine the success of the Atab . conference .
 Dulles proposed that should the conference actually take place, the U.S. should use attending friendly states to ‘propose courses of action which would embarrass Communist China’ and minimize the possibility of the formation of an Asian-African bloc .
 Washington viewed participation of the countries in the Arab Mideast as a litmus test of success . Washington viewed the participation of countries in Arab Middle East as a success test, Washington said .
 Initially, the United States subjected Egypt to the ‘strongest pressure’ not to attend, the U.S. said . Initially, Egypt was subjected to ‘the strongest pressure not to participate’ in the Arab Spring . The United States said Egypt was under ‘
 Nehru’s courtship of Nasser seemed to pay off . Unfortunately for the Eisenhower administration, U.S. influence in Cairo had taken a downward turn .
 It was no accident that Nasser decided to attend Bandung on the eve of the Cairo conference on the TurkeyIraq agreement . Nasser attended Bandung in Indonesia on eve of Cairo conference .
 Western aid for Israel and Iraq created a similar reaction to that Nehru’s view of weapons for Pakistan, says Nasser . In Nasser's mind, Western aid created a reaction to similar reaction, he says .
 The British promised a ‘moratorium’ on the entry of other Arab states, with the exception of Iraq .
 India and Egypt now faced a British-led, Ametican-sponsored and -financed anti-Soviet alliance that was arming theit principal regional adversaries . Egypt and India now faced .
 Eisenhower administration encouraged pro-Western states in Africa and Asia to attend the conference . Eisenhower administration hoped to transform the conference into a pro-West display of solidarity .
 Fearing that Pakistan would attempt to assume ‘the self appointed role of spokesman of the Arab countries — or rather the Muslim World,’ the Indian government needed the presence of a staunchly neutral Egypt . The Indian government feared Pakistan would try to take over the role of ‘
 At Bandung, Nasser was feted by Nehru and by Achmad Sukarno of Indonesia . Nasser found himself feted and flattered by Jaw Jaw Jawean and Achmad Suarno .
 Eisenhower and Dulles were not overly concerned with the results of Bandung . It appeared that the pro-Western states were not interested in the outcome .
 The caption read ‘Please You First’ referring to their decision to simultaneously recognize Communist China, much to the chargin of the Eisenhower administration . The caption was 'Please Please You First' referring to the decision to recognize the Communist China .
 This relationship would come to symbolize ‘positive neutrality’ and non-alignment in the Greater Middle East .
 Charles Habib Malik, who attended as a member of the Lebanese delegation, warned the Dulles brothers’ special envoy, Wilbur Eveland, that Tito, Sukarno, and Nehru would unite the developing nations of Africa and Asia to oppose the Western alliance systems .
 Malik described Nasser as ‘mesmerized’ by non-alignment and beguiled by the attention showered on him . Malik also described him as 'mesmerizing' and 'be beguiling' by attention shown to him . Nasser was ‘
 Nasser proclaimed Egyptian adherence to non-alignment in 1953-1958 . To the annoyance of the White House, Malik’s concern took concrete 'THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST' form .
 The ageravation caused by this move paled in comparison to the announcement that would follow . The announcement was the first to be announced by the president of the United States .
 The Soviet Ambassador to Egypt offered modern weapons on generous payment terms . The Aswan Dam project was also offered by the Soviet ambassador .
 Initially suspicious, Nasser held back, hoping for an American counteroffer . Nasser hoped for a U.S. counteroffer, but was initially suspicious .
 In the minds of many in Washington, it irretrievably linked ‘non-aligned’ and proCommunist policies, but perhaps more importantly, it directly affected USSoviet relations . The U.S. State Department's decision to withdraw from the Soviet Union in
 Eisenhower believed that at the Geneva conference 1955, he had achieved an ‘understanding’ and ‘basis for a working relationship’ with the Soviet Union with regard to spheres of influence . Eisenhower believed .
 Nasser would have found his way to Moscow without Nehru’s help . Nehru paved the way for Nasser to find his way into Moscow .
 Nasser provided Nasser with an ideological justification and international support for his actions, says Nasser . Nasser's actions provided international support, he says .
 The Indian Prime Minister also facilitated a diplomatic imbroglio between the United States and the Soviet Union . The Indian PM also facilitated the U.S. and Soviet Union's diplomatic relations .
 The Soviet arms agreement with Cairo had other troubling repercussions . Soviet arms deal with Cairo ended in 1979 . It was the first time the Soviet arms embargo was lifted .
 Shah and his ‘pro-Western’ advisors revised their assessment of Iran’s value to U.S. interests in the region . The Shah's 'pro-western' advisors revised his assessment of the value to American interests .
 They found the threat of neutralism or non-alignment to be an effective shield against pressure to reform and useful leverage for additional economic and military aid . The threat of non-alignedism or neutralism was found to be a useful leverage to get more aid from Russia .
 On 13 September 1955, John D Jernegan, Deputy Secretary of State for NEA, and Norman B Hannah, Desk Officer for Iranian Affairs met with Sir Robert Scott and Willie Mortis of the British Embassy .
 In a ‘gloomy’ summary of affairs, they discussed the ‘internal drift’ in Iranian domestic programs . They discussed the 'internal drift' in Iran's domestic programs.
 The British wanted the U.S. to intervene with additional aid and pressure on the Shah to reform his government . The Shah's government was overthrown in 1953 .
 It would be a mistake to think that this Government, unless it drastically changes its character, can or will provide the firm leadership for the successful execution of important reforms — political, economic or administrative .
 Shah does not have the capacity to make a sustained effort in the ditection of basic social reforms, says Shah . An attempt by him to embark on such a program would probably have chaotic results, he says . Shah says he is not capable of making sustained social reforms .
 News of a 'good neighborly' visit by the Shah to the Soviet Union filtered in from Tehran . Two months later, news of a Soviet ‘Good neighborly’ visit to Iran filtered in .
 The Soviets were now openly supporting historic Iranian claims to Bahrain, and comparing it to Nikita Khrushchev’s support for India over Kashmir and the Afghan Pushtuns in their territorial disputes with Pakistan .
 Washington worried that Iran might also seek its own version of an arrangement with Moscow . The memory of Nasser’s accommodation with the Soviet Union painfully fresh .
 Despite differences over policy matters, at a personal level both leaders seemed to share great respect for each other . This was a contrast to the icy relationship between Nehru and Kennedy . Despite differences, both shared great respect .
 Eisenhower administration had linked economic development, political reform, and military assistance to prevent Soviet expansion and Communist influence in the region . In pursuing a policy of containment, the Eisenhower administration linked economic and political reform to preventing Soviet expansion .
 Economic development was the key to bringing long-term, pro-Western stability to the region, says President Obama . Economic development is the key, he says .
 Eisenhower borrowed the ideas and terminology from the progressive economic development theories of American academia that would dominate a generation of U.S. policy makers . In 1953, Eisenhower and his advisors borrowed ideas from American academic theories .
 They believed in creating ‘take-off points’ and in the ability of the United States to use economic and development aid to make emerging national states, even those with revolutionary regimes, look inward .
 Eisenhower foreign policy establishment was nigegardly in its provision of military assistance, attempting to limit military aid to security assistance and to support internal security without providing offensive capabilities . Eisenhower was trying to keep military aid from security assistance .
 Washington viewed economic development as the best means of assuring proWestern stability and preventing Communist expansion . Economic reform metely represented the preferred path to containment .
 Eisenhowet’s administration, like that of Truman before and of Kennedy after, was committed to containment by any means necessary . He says the Kennedy administration was committed by any way necessary .
 When Washington believed that the tactical situation dictated short-term methods, then the administration was willing to use military aid, security assistance, covert assistance, and, in rare cases, direct intervention .
 To the policy makers, political expediency demanded the immediate maintenance of pro-Western political reliability, even at the expense of longterm stability . The policy makers are concerned about the stability of the country's political stability .
 Eisenhower came to Washington believing that colonialism was dead and that the West had to make accommodations with growing nationalism in the developing world . Eisenhower: The West must accommodate growing nationalism .
 On the one hand, the U.S. recognized the importance of good relations with their traditional European allies, but on the other wanted to distance themselves from the heritage of colonialism in the developing world .
 From the very beginning, Eisenhower made it clear to Churchill and the British that he believed their focus should be on European affairs and that they should give up the trappings of empire in places like Egypt and Iran .
 The administration initially resisted British calls for intervention in both Iran and Egypt . The administration resisted calls from the British for intervention .
 Egypt's administration infuriated London by consistently taking the Egyptian side and pressuring Britain to compromise with the new revolutionary regime . In the case of Egypt, it infuriated the British government .
 Eisenhower and Dulles viewed the traditional regimes supported by the British as anachronisms soon to succumb to the rising tide of nationalism . Dulles and Eisenhower viewed traditional regimes in the 1950s and '60s as outdated .
 Eisenhower’s lack of success in using economic incentives to induce key states, like Egypt and India, to enter Western defensive alliances created frictions that over time boded well for increased British influence in Washington .
 Eisenhower found traditional regimes and a British presence provided the only real basis for Western alliance systems in the region . Eisenhower found that the traditional regimes provided the . Only real basis was the British presence in the .
 It also provided a screen behind which the U.S. could support pro-Western elements and avoid overt participation . The United States also avoided overt participation in the conflict .
 Obviously, this system fooled no one, and increased U.S. friction with various nationalist movements . Obviously, the system fooled everyone, and this increased friction with nationalists .
 The White House understood that U.S. support for the 1954 Turkish-Pakistani ‘THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST, 1953-1958 37 defense arrangements would evoke a negative reaction in New Delhi, but they failed to gage the intensity .
 Even had they predicted the extent of Nehru’s unhappiness, they most likely would have proceeded with arms for Pakistan anyway . Even if they had predicted, they would have gone ahead anyway .
 British support for Iraq’s inclusion in the alliance with Turkey surprised and annoyed Washington . Later that year, the move by Hashemite Iraq to join the alliance surprised Washington .
 Washington supported the combining of the various bilateral agreements and the enticement of Itan into a defense alliance . It further strained the relationship between Washington and Cairo, but friction or not, Washington supported .
 The administration did not back away from supporting the British lead in the alliance . At the same time, it identified ever-increasing American involvement in the region with Britain’s colonial past .
 The creation of the ‘northern tier’ alliance, known as the Baghdad Pact, firmly attached the very neo-colonial label that Eisenhower and Dulles had so assiduously attempted to avoid . It alienated Nehru and Nasser and alienated Nasser .
 Eisenhower and Dulles believed in the belief that economic development would entice the states of the Greater Middle East to abandon their internecine disputes and focus inwardly on creating prosperity for their people . The Kennedy administration took office eight years later .
 The Holy Grail of economic development would bring pro-Western, political stability, says President Obama . "The Holy Grail" is economic development, says Obama .
 Having reduced regional tensions, this inward turn would eliminate the need for massive arms buildups, allowing member states to rely on the United States defense umbrella for protection against the Soviets .
 This long-term strategy for pro-Western stability in the region ran counter to short-term political reality . This is not the case for the U.S. in the Middle East, it is the case that it will be difficult to deal with .
 The experiences of 1953-1955 basically turned the administration’s containment policy on its head . Eisenhower's faith in economic development as the cure-all for Western influence was shattered by the events of 1953 to 1955 .
 Political stability rests on loyalty and pro-Western orientation of the military and security forces . Increasingly, political stability rested on the loyalty of the security forces, says President Obama .
 The loyalty of the military became the primary issue associated with pro-Western governments . Even in the case of traditional monarchies, the loyalty became the main issue .
 Political and economic reform remained highly desirable, but rather than being the lead elements of containment policy, political and economic development would now only be pursued within the context of a stable, pro-Western policy .
 When economic or political reform threatened to destabilize a Western ally, the focus was immediately returned to the loyalty of the security forces, the maintenance of order, and the suppression of threats to the particular regime . The focus of the focus in the Middle East and the Cold War was returned to
 Controlled, top-down reform became the only acceptable model for the region, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The Czech arms deal in late 1955 undermined confidence in U.S. policy in the Middle East, and led to broad criticism of Eisenhower and Dulles . In addition, consummation of the Czech arms .
 It also underscored the limitations of economic aid as a ptimary bargaining tool, it says .
 Nasser’s discussion with Chou En-lai at Bandung and the subsequent Czech arms deal happened as a result of internal Egyptian political requirements . Even with U.S. support for the massive Aswan Dam project hanging in the balance, Nasser's involvement in the deal
 Nasser determined, and correctly, that the Gaza taid and repeated provocations by Israel required the acquisition of modern arms for the Egyptian army . Nasser decided to arm Egypt because of the Gaza situation .
 Economic aid for non-aligned India had not prevented Nehru’s attacks on U.S. policy or Indian acceptance of Soviet economic assistance . At the other end of the Greater Middle East, economic aid did not prevent Nehru's attacks on United States policy .
 Containment of the Soviet Union and its fellow traveler, Nasser, now rested on the survival of pro-Western regimes, no matter what their internal political system, state of economic development, or social structure . The U.S. now relies heavily on its allies to contain the Soviet
 Pakistan insisted on dragging up the issue of Kashmir in the U.N. against U.S. and British wishes . Pakistan insists on dragging the issue up in the United Nations, against the wishes of the British and American governments .
 The resulting marathon speech by Krishna Menon attacked Pakistan and its colonial backers, Britain, and the United States, created another low point in relations with India . Menon's marathon speech was a low point of relations between India and Pakistan .
 Developments in Cairo and Damascus sent shock waves across the Arab world, ultimately bringing down the Hashemite monarchy in Baghdad . Baghdad's monarchy was overthrown in 2003 .
 The collapse of the pro-Western regime in Iraq in turn rippled through Tehran, Karachi, and New Delhi, as well as the Arab Middle East . The collapse in Iraq laid the foundation for more than four decades of friction and conflict .
 1958 stands as the pivotal year in American foreign policy across the Greater Middle East . For that reason, 1958 stood as a pivotal year for U.S. foreign policy in the region .
 Nasser and Nehru stood at the apogee of non-alignment and positive neutrality . They were representing a ‘third way’ between competing superpowers . Nasser was a 'third way' between the world's two most powerful superpowers.
 Their policies demonstrated that charting an independent course had political and material benefits . The U.S. should chart a course of its own independent course, the authors say .
 Non-aligned and aligned states borrowed tactics to extract aid and support from their power-bloc sponsors . Increasingly, non-aligned states borrowed their tactics to extort aid from their allies .
 1958, more than 1956, heralded the end of colonial power and the beginning of the contemporary era . In addition, 1958 also heralded an end to colonial power, and the start of the modern era .
 British attempts to indirectly control the Arab Middle East following World War II had failed . British attempts at indirectly controlling the Arab Mideast had failed.
 The Arab League as an instrument of British foreign policy had backfired and, as feared, turned into ‘Dr. Dr. King’s “Dr. George’, the Arab League had turned into a failed state of Arab Spring .
 The Canal treaty of 1954, a shotgun wedding with Uncle Sam presiding, further demonstrated the inability of Britain to control events . The canal treaty was the result of a treaty between Britain and the United States .
 The British were going to have to get out of Egypt . Regardless of the success or failure of Anthony Eden’s adventure with his friends in France and Israel, the British had to leave Egypt .
 Suez also affirmed the close connection between the political and regional aspirations of the primary non-aligned powers, Egypt and India . Suez was the first meeting of the two nations to meet .
 The political institutions of Nehru’s India and Nasset's Egypt diverged widely, but their style of charismatic leadership, the jealous protection of THE NEW Order and RECONSIDERATIONS 41, created a synergy that was real . The shared colonial experience of the colonial experience created a
 Despite their very different temperaments and backgrounds, Nehru and Nasser were pragmatic politicians . They were motivated by revolutionary idealism and a belief in their leadership roles .
 1958 exposed for all to see Britain’s weakened stature and circumscribed options in the Mideast . At the time, many blamed the failure of the Suez on Washington .
 By 1958, both Nehru and Nasser had amply demonstrated their determinatrion to pursue policies tailored to what they saw as their own political priorities .
 Nehru expelled of U.S. observers attached to U.N. contingent in Kashmir . Krishna Menon harangues against Pakistan and the West . Nehru’s sponsorship of Communist China left little doubt about Indian willingness to act independently .
 Nehru’s position on Indochina and military alliances in Asia and Africa may have been problematic to the West . But he opposed the Communist party in India and led the largest democracy in the world .
 In short, he was a useful window on the non-aligned and developing world and a Western-educated leader to be cultivated and tolerated . He was useful window to the non -aligned world and to the developing world .
 Nasser demonstrated his independence and non-alignment in his reaction to the ‘northern tier’, to Western support for Israel, and in attending the Bandung conference . Far more impatient and insecure, Nasser was far more insecure and insecure .
 He turned to the Soviet Union for arms, and when the U.S. refused to support the Aswan Dam project, he nationalized the Canal, sparking the Suez imbroglio . The Suez Canal was the site of the S.Suez Canal .
 Nasser demonstrated that he had to be taken seriously . Failure to do so invited unanticipated and often unpleasant developments, he says .
 Eisenhower administration continued to view Egypt as the key to the Arab Middle East . Eisenhower administration desired a working relationship with Egyptian leader .
 Eisenhower administration to accelerate plans for new formula for U.S. policy in the Greater Middle East . Eisenhower administration accelerated plans for a new formula in the region .
 Containment required the preservation of pro-Western states and the encouragement of truly neutralist policies on the part of the non-aligned . Containment needed to be truly neutralistic, the author says .
 Eisenhower and his advisors turned again to economic assistance as the most effective lever for maintaining some semblance of normal relations with the radical nationalist states of the region .
 To some extent, long-standing U.S. policies toward Nehru and India served as the model for this .
 Despite problems, the relationship with New Delhi had proven useful, says PM . The relationship had been useful, and a tactical case-by-case approach to issues had maintained ties .
 Economic aid had also prevented a total breach with India over military aid to their neighboring rival, Pakistan . Economic aid prevented a complete breach with the Indian government over military assistance to Pakistan .
 A similar approach to Egypt, based on renewed economic incentives, appeared to hold the potential for like results . Egypt's economy has been hit by a wave of anti-government protests .
 Decreased tensions with Egypt also might to some degtee undermine the ‘northern tier’ alliance, particularly on Iraq and other pro-Western Arab states and Iran . Soviet influence and perhaps aleviate Nasserist pressure on the 'northern tiers’
 U.S. policy evolved in a less ambitious, less ideological, and more pragmatic approach . United States policy evolved as a result of less ambitious and less ideological approach . The United States has a more pragmatic and less ambitious approach .
 Between 1953 and 1955, Washington had hoped to solve long-standing Middle East disputes over Kashmir and Palestine . Washington hoped to coax Egypt and India into defensive alliances against Soviet Union and China .
 The policy approach of 1958 were more modest and aimed at reducing Egyptian and Indian opposition to the Baghdad Pact and SEATO . The policy was aimed at undermining Soviet influence .
 As this policy adjustment got underway events in Baghdad struck Cairo, Tehran, Karachi, New Delhi, London, and Washington like a bolt from the blue . Washington, Tehran and Cairo are among the countries affected by the changes .
 The varying reactions would have repercussions that would carry into the 21st century . The differing reactions to the reaction would carry on into the next century .
 Policy makers continued to view Nasser as the key to U.S. influence in the region, despite this hostility .
 His ‘victory’ at Suez had made him the standard by which Arabs judged their leaders . His 'victory' at the Suez made him a standard for Arab leaders, he said .
 Nasset’s simplistic ideas on revolutionary Arab nationalism and his pronouncements on non-alignment and positive neutralism formed an ill-defined ideological potpourti . Nasset's simplistic ideas and pronouncements were formed in the 1970s and 1980s . The confluence of
 Nasset’s lack of definition and systematic ideological structure worked in his favor . Nasset won’t be defined as a political party, he says. Nasset is the only party that has a clear definition of a party .
 Nassetism promised something to everyone, while challenging the traditional ruling elites, many of whom were aligned with the West . Nassetists promised something for everyone, but challenged the traditional rulers, many in the West.
 By 1958, Nasser had navigated Egypt into the post-colonial period . He had also become the symbol of radical change in the Arab world .
 In one sense, Nasser’s success confirmed the accuracy of State Department and CIA assessments . Nasser's success confirmed accuracy of CIA and State Department assessments .
 Both predicted that Egypt was the most important Arab state and that Nasser alone determined the course of Egyptian policy . Nasser was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Nasser's relationship with Nasser and thus Egypt had not gone well . Unfortunately, the relationship with the Egyptian president had gone bad .
 In Washington, ideological prejudices have made the relationship virtually unworkable . The relationship between the White House and Congress has been strained for years .
 The White House believed that Nasser had become a Soviet proxy during the preceding five years . Nasser was believed to have become a proxy for the Soviet Union .
 Washington faced the conundrum of coming up with a policy for the future . Still, Washington faced a conundrum: What do you do?
 Eisenhower reverted to economic aid and financial incentives as the basis for regenerating normalized contacts with Cairo . Given Nasset’s arms relationship with the Soviet Union, Nasset had to rely on economic aid .
 In London, the Macmillan government also wanted an accommodation with Nasser and a settlement of claims resulting from the Suez crisis that would allow for the reopening of the Canal . Nasser was the prime minister of the Egyptian government .
 Wary, London believed that the West would have to confront and thwart Nasser’s more aggressive policies, but wanted to see the chapter on Suez closed . London was wary of Nasser's aggressive policies but wanted the chapter closed .
 Neither Britain nor the U.S. had any illusions about Nasset’s intentions to undermine Iraq, Jordan, the Gulf emirates, and the Aden Protectorate . Nasset's intentions were to undermine the interests of Iraq and Jordan .
 For the British, their oil concessions in Iraq and the Gulf were critical . The British oil concessions were critical for the British government .
 London believed that further erosion of its position and prestige in the Arab Middle East would threaten its position in the Gulf states, but the British also understood that in the post-1956 order any action against Nasser required the clear agreement of the United States .
 1958 witnessed an unusual situation in which Nasser, Eisenhower, and Macmillan wete all attempting to define Nasserism . Thus, British confrontations with the Egyptian leader became indirect affairs carried out by proxies .
 Eisenhower needed a definition that would justify a working relationship with Cairo . Eisenhower needed the definition to justify a relationship with Egypt, he says .
 London wanted a definition that would, when necessaty, gatner American support in containing revolutionary Arab nationalism . London wanted to use that definition to protect American interests in Syria .
 Nasset’s accumulated ideological baggage as of 1958 is in order . Nasset's ideological baggage is in fact a brief examination of his ideological baggage in 1958 is needed .
 Nasser lacked a structured, clearly articulated framework for ruling, but he possessed a crude set of ideologically-based principles . Nasser may have lacked a structure for ruling but possessed a set of ideological principles, he says .
 His simplistic ideas resonated with the Egyptian people, radical Arab nationalists, and with many emerging nation states . These simplistic ideas, expressed in his 1952 manifesto, resonated .
 Nasser’s successes between 1955 and 1958 meant that the serious pursuit of these goals resulted in varying degrees of trouble for the Western powers . Nasser's successes in the 1950s and '60s meant that Western powers were at risk of being at risk .
 For the United States, Nasser’s successes were largely an annoyance . For the British, success could mean catastrophe. For the U.S. it was an annoyance, for the British .
 Nasset's success confirmed the U.S. administration’s long-held assumption that Egypt and its leader were the batometer of the Arab world for the foreseeable future .
 For two years, United States policy in the Middle East had gone into free fall . The ‘vacuum’ that resulted in the Eisenhower Doctrine now resembled a policy ‘black hole’ stretching from North Africa to Pakistan .
 This would mark the hightide of Nasser’s pan-Arab ambitions . Although not apparent until much later, this would mark a significant shift in the region .
 The union added a sense of urgency to U.S. plans to reconstruct a working relationship with Nasser . The union now pushed Washington toward an accommodation, now pushing Washington .
 Nasser’s growing influence combined with U.S. domestic criticism of the administration forced Eisenhower to reexamine its policies toward Nasser . The Egyptian-Syrian Union, and saving the Middle East from Communism from Communism .
 Eisenhower and Dulles focused on Nasser’s shared antipathy for Arab Communism . Nasser and Eisenhower were looking for areas of potential cooperation .
 The 46 GREATER MIDDLE EAST and the COLD WAR initiative received a boost when talk of Arab unification under Egyptian leadership began to take concrete form . The initiative was backed by the Egyptian government .
 Popular agitation in other Arab capitals added weight to the view that Nasserist influence might actually culminate in some form of broadly unified Arab state . Popular agitation also added weight in the view of the view .
 The weakness of pro-Western Arab regimes lent an air of inevitability to the Nasserist triumph . The weakness placed additional pressure on the administration to come up with new policies, he says .
 This reevaluation of U.S. policy also required an assessment of the problem presented by US-Israeli ties . The United States is reevaluating its relationship with Israel .
 State and Defense Departments opposed establishment of Israel because they had envisioned the very situation now confronted the U.S. Secretary Dulles pointed out that both the State . and Defense . Departments had opposed the creation of Israel .
 Dulles bluntly stated that because of the ‘potency of international Jewry’, not even the Soviet Union advocated an end to the Jewish state . Dulles said that because . of the 'potency' of international . Jewry, not . even the . Soviet Union
 He concluded that ‘no greater danger to U.S. security’ existed than that posed by the Arab-Israeli dispute . Viewed it as the means by which the Soviet Union might eventually gain control of the Middle East .
 In January 1958, the Syrians agreed to unification on Nasser’s terms . Nasser's terms were already under consideration when he agreed to the unification .
 Details of the agreement surprised even the Syrian Ba’thists, army officers, politicians, and also Egyptian officials . In fact, the details of the deal surprised even Ba'thists and army officers .
 Nasser believed that Syrian acquiescence to his demands for a centralized state on the Egyptian model would overcome potential for problems . Nasser's demands included dissolution of all political parties, including the dissolution of political parties .
 Nasser had no intention of sharing power with the fractious Syrian politicians . Of course, Nasser was not keen on sharing power .
 On 1 February 1958, from the balcony of the Abdin Palace, Nasser and Quwatli, the President of the Syrian Republic, proclaimed the creation of the United Arab Republic, announcing that Nasser would be the first president of the country .
 Washington took a positive position to avoid being criticized for opposing the sacred cow of Arab unity . Seeing the handwriting on the wall, Washington took the position, Washington said .
 Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia publicly welcomed the union despite that they might create an opposition group . In the confusion, Iraq and Jordan, Jordan and Lebanon, the union was formed .
 Eisenhower administration wanted to keep options open . Eisenhower administration was pessimistic about the outcome of the war .
 Jordan’s efforts to interest Iraq and Saudi Arabia in a closer association of the three Kings to which Lebanon could adhere have so far fallen on barren ground .
 Four Arab states must come up with a common position of opposition, which is feasible and acceptable to us, says PM . "We are giving urgent consideration to appropriate ways in which we could assist those states in the implementation of their common action," he says .
 He argued that he had been forced to accept union to prevent a Communist takeover . Playing the reluctant suitor, he argued that the union had to be stopped by the Communist .
 President Obama asked Washington for a three-month moratorium on criticism in order to allow him a free hand in dealing with the Communist threat . He asked Washington to allow a moratorium on criticising him .
 Washington plans to provide Egypt with economic aid and financial incentives . Suppression of the Communists resurrected, albeit a more modest form, plans in Washington .
 Nasser had been reviled as a Soviet agent in the Middle East; now he was to be the recipient of U.S. economic aid . This list included trade, cultural exchanges, economic assistance, military training, CARE programs, and grain .
 The United States moved quickly to take advantage of Nasset’s promise to do something about the Communists in Sytia . Using the thin veil of the 'schedule'
 The administration began preparations to ease relations, provide him with aid, and normalize the relationship . Even as a crisis in Lebanon loomed on the horizon, the U.S. made preparations .
 Some saw the anti-Communist campaign as a ruse approved by Moscow to further Soviet interests . Ironically, the administration had so thoroughly vilified Nasser .
 Officials in Washington are trying to find advantages for the U.S. in the fusion of Egypt and Syria into a single nation .
 The display of Arab unity in Damascus and Cairo upstaged talks between Jordan, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia .
 At the Baghdad Pact conference in Ankara, the United States again refused to join, and offered only $10 million in military aid . The U.S. offered only a miserly sum in comparison with the military aid from the Soviet Union to Syria and Egypt . The United States refused to
 In the Arab world, both supporters and opponents of the Egyptian-Syrian union criticized Dulles and the administration for their ‘negative, unimaginative and contradictory’ policies .
 Pro-Western Arabs bitterly blamed Dulles’ handling of the Aswan Dam project, the denial of arms to the Egyptians, and U.S. support for Israel for causing Nasset’s turn toward the Soviet Union .
 There was also considerable criticism for pressuring countries into defensive pacts .
 The Secretary then provided a detailed list of policy positions to be given to Ghalib, knowing full well that he would immediately forward them to Cairo, and probably to Sarraj .
 Beirut channel attended to the negative policy chores vis-a-vis Nasser so that embassy contacts in Cairo could be mote positive . Nasser was the prime minister of Egypt in the 1970s .
 Dulles’ ‘instructions’ to the U.S. Embassy in Beirut laid out the United States position in detail . Dulles: ‘Instructions to the . United States Embassy in . Beirut laid . out the . position in . detail .
 The instructions expressed a desire to focus on the ‘broader issues’ in the relationship . They argued that the real U.S. position on ‘neutrality and nationalism’ had been misrepresented or misunderstood in Egypt .
 Ghalib was told that Egypt had not been neutral and had attacked independent countries which had banded together to protect themselves from Communism . He was told Egypt had attacked .
 The instructions asserted that the Eisenhower Doctrine merely supported the ‘very integrity and independence, which Egypt has sought and treasured’ It denied plans for United States economic dominance in the region .
 Washington then offered to unblock Egyptian assets in return for a settlement of the Suez Canal Company’s claims . Washington then agreed to a settlement in exchange for an unblocking of Egyptian assets . The U.S.-Egyptian-controlled Suez canal was blocked by Egypt in
 Washington. D.C. had more misgivings about the union than Washington. Preditably, they had considerably more misgiving about it .
 First, they feared increased pressure on Hashemite Iraq and Jordan, and second, they questioned the competence of the Secretary of State . They expressed concern that he would be hoodwinked by Nasset’s antiCommunist rhetoric .
 The British agreed with the U.S. position that the current position should be neither support nor condemnation . The United States said that the position should not be condemned .
 At the Baghdad Pact meeting, Nuri Sa’id, the Prime Minister of Iraq, suggested that the majority of the Syrian people in a ‘free election’ would elect for union with Iraq .
 He then sounded out the council about support for Iraq’s claims to the districts in the ‘Mosul vilayet’ ceded to Syria but belonging historically to Iraq . The districts were ceded by Syria but belong to Iraq historically .
 Iraq was simply too weak, even with Jordanian help, to challenge Syria and Egypt . The country is now too weak even with Jordan's help to challenge Egypt and Syria .
 The British believed that, left to its own devices, the union would generate its own set of disruptive forces in Sytia and create serious problems for the Egyptians and Syrian supporters .
 From London's perspective, the principal aim was containment of the union . From London’s perspective, it was containment . The principal aim of the London government was containment, it said .
 Lebanon came to center stage as the most immediate crisis confronting the West . With Iraq discouraged from adventures, Lebanon became the most urgent crisis confronting West .
 Lebanese President Camille Nimur Chamoun rigged the 1957 election of 1957, paving the way for his reelection to the presidency in 1958 . Chamoun, a Maronite Christian, had, with Western assistance, rigged the election . The Lebanese president was elected in 1957 and re-elected in
 Under the National Pact of 1943, a president could not succeed himself, and the next president had to be a Sunni Muslim . Under the pact, the president must be Sunni Muslim and succeed himself .
 Chamoun plotted to retain power, and embroil the West in supporting him with troops, if need be . The EgyptianSytian union was feared by Chamoun, who wanted to keep power .
 Their youth underscores Western fears that they were no match for Nasser and the rising tide of revolutionary Arab nationalism .
 Feisal’s death in the Baghdad coup of July 1958 put an exclamation point on those fears . and retain the presidency for another term . Feisal died in July 1958 in Baghdad .
 Chamoun’s Foreign Minister, Charles Malik, believed that unification between Syria and Egypt meant the end of Lebanese independence unless the West actively opposed Nasser . Malik: "The West, meaning principally the United States, actively opposed" Nasser.
 He argued that the union would increase anti-Western Arab nationalist ‘intransigence’ and create new balance of power in the Middle East that favored the Soviet Union .
 The British recognized the threat posed by a true union, but realistically, they also saw an upside . The British knew the threat of a union but also saw the upside of it .
 A union, which resulted in any real union, would leave a good many Syrians out of a job . A union would leave many Syrians without a job, he says .
 Resentment in Syria is likely to be exacerbated by the Egyptian tendency to treat their smaller allies in a cavalier fashion . Syrians find it hard to work harmoniously for any length of time with other Syrians let alone Egyptians .
 London dismissed Malik and the Lebanese as unduly alarmist, but sought out American views on the Lebanese request for ‘military assistance’ just the same . London sought out U.S. views on Lebanon's request for military assistance .
 The British agreed with the fundamentals of the American position laid down by Dulles in Ankara . After some discussions, the British finally agreed with Dulles .
 Only another Arab state could initiate intervention, which precluded moves by Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan . Turkey, Pakistan, Turkey, and Iran would not want to intervene in Syria .
 The U.S. would buttress any Arab initiative, but if that failed, Washington would take no action . Washington would not take action if Arab initiative failed .
 While Syrian resistance should be discreetly encouraged, neither the British nor the Americans would take the lead . Neither the British or the American would take a lead in Syria .
 At London’s urging, Washington agreed that it would encoutage Baghdad to refrain from unilateral opposition . In addition, at London's urging, the U.N. will refrain from unilaterally opposing Iraq .
 The preferred course of action would be for Iraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Lebanon to actively pursue an “alternative expression of Arab unity’’, with Baghdad Pact support . The preferred way of action should be for the Baghdad Pact to pursue .
 Washington realized that no effective opposition to the union existed in Syria and that only King Saud of Saudi Arabia showed any inclination to oppose it .
 Nasset's message to the union underscored the potency of Nasset’s message . The teaction of other Arab leaders to union underscores the potency . Nasset: “The union is in the heart of the Arab world. The union is a non-union state of
 The Saudis plotted to permanently curtail Nasset’s activities, the Saudis say . Nasset was publicly supported by the union and discussed the possibility of an alliance with Nasser .
 At King Saud’s urging, Saudi officials attempted to bribe Satraj, the Syrian intelligence chief, to assassinate Nasser and stop the union . The union union was formed in the early 1950s in Saudi Arabia .
 Sartaj accepted the money, but unfortunately for Riyadh, King Saud had misjudged his man . The money was accepted by the Saudi government .
 Nasser had made Sarraj and his associates in the security apparatus the basis for centralized control in Syria because of their loyalty . Nasser was made the basis of centralized control because of his loyalty, he says .
 Nasser used the attempted compromise of Sarraj to embarrass Saud and his advisors . Nasser also used the attempt to embarrass his brother-in-law .
 The UAR propaganda attacks on Saud sparked pro-Nasser unrest in the Kingdom . The attacks placed Saudi vulnerability on public display, placing Saudi vulnerability public display .
 Tunisia claimed to have uncovered a Nasserist plot to assassinate Bourgiba and take over the government . Tunisia claimed the plot was uncovered by its security services . Tunisia said it had uncovered the plot to kill Bourgibiba .
 In Iraq, an alarmed King Feisal II reappointed Nuri Sa’id as Prime Minister . He announced the federation, with British backing, of Jordan and Iraq in an Arab Union .
 Nasser labeled the Union as nothing more than a belated attempt to shore up feudal regimes . Nasser said the Union was nothing less than an attempt to save the country from a feudal regime .
 In Saudi Arabia, Crown Prince Feisal Ibn-Abd-Al-Aziz forced King Saud to give up responsibility for defense, foreign affairs, and finance . King Saud was forced to relinquish control of defense and foreign affairs in Saudi Arabia .
 Feisal placated domestic unrest by supporting an accommodation with Nasser while he sought to ‘clean up the Augean stables of Saudi finances’ and save the monarchy . Nothing if not shrewd, Feisal was shrewd .
 Feisal charted a policy that followed Nasset’s lead in non-Arab affairs while avoiding confrontations on Arab matters . The educated classes viewed Nasser as the 'only Arab leader worth following’
 As a gesture to Nasser, Feisal criticized the United States position on free passage for Israel in the Gulf of Aqaba . Feisal called it ‘aggression against Egypt’ and contrary to international law .
 Egyptian demands that Saudi Arabia end United States ‘basing tights’ at 54 GREATER MIDDLE EAST and the COLD WAR Dhahran . Feisal said the status of United States 'transit rights' would not be changed .
 The administration considered King Saud a pro-Western stalwart . President Eisenhower had hoped that Saud’s influence might one day rival that of Nasser .
 Dulles lamented that instability in Riyadh also undermined the Iraqi and Jordanian regimes . Describing the situation as ‘very grave indeed’, Dulles said it was 'a very grave indeed'
 The administration feared a collapse, or perhaps a formal alliance with Cairo on the Syrian model . The administration was worried about a collapse .
 Two years after Suez, the British government was attempting to conclude negotiations with the UAR to settle outstanding claims from the Suez crisis and resume diplomatic relations with Caito . Now, two years after the crisis, the UK government was trying to conclude .
 Macmillan and his advisors still viewed Nasser as a teal threat to Iraq and Kuwait . Nasser was still viewed as a threat to both countries in the early 1950s .
 British oil interests in these two states determined to a great extent the economic health of Britain itself . British interests in the two states determine the economic fortunes of the UK .
 Aden, Jordan, and the Gulf emirates also played an important role for British interests . Aden and Jordan also played important roles in British interests in the region .
 The WAVE OF THE FUTURE 55 would encourage nationalist elements in Iraq and Kuwait and might well presage a collapse of the entire British position in the Middle East . Whitehall believed that should any of these states succumb to Nasser’s Arab nationalist agitation, the damage to
 The British also feared Nasserist agitation in Lebanon and Sudan . Although less acutely, the British also worried about Nasserism .
 The inclusion of Sudan in Arab Union might very well reverse hard-won Egyptian recognition of Sudanese independence, and further enhance Nasset’s prestige .
 The British lamented the United States decision to resume aid and worked assiduously to minimize it . Fearing any increased stature for their nemesis on the Nile, the British feared it would increase .
 British priority was to prevent Nuri Said, encouraged by promises of U.S. support, from leading Iraq into militarily debacle by opposing Nasser . As noted in the immediate aftermath of the formation of the UAR, the first British priority .
 London cautioned Sa’id in the strongest possible terms not to follow Dulles’ lead . Fearing that Dulles would court disaster and leave the Iragis out on a limb, London warned Sa'id .
 Sa’id wanted London to pressure the Kuwaitis to join the proposed Itaq-Jordan union . The Kuwaitis are currently in the process of joining the proposed union .
 British were horrified by any Iraqi mention of a union with Kuwait, and moved to quash that idea . The British, for a number of reasons, were horrified .
 By the spring of 1958, it had appeared that London had managed to get the Iraqi situation in hand .
 Yemeni scheming and UAR-sponsored subversion directly threatened British control in Aden . In contrast to Iraq, Yemen's scheming, Yemeni subversion threatened British rule in Aden.
 Yemen and Egypt had had an onagain off-again relationship since 1955, based on various treaties of friendship and cooperation . Yemen had had a relationship with Egypt since 1955 based on treaty treaties .
 Yemen’s ruler, Imam Ahmad, and his heir apparent, Crown Prince Muhammad al-Badr, saw Arab nationalism as a vehicle to press Yemeni claims over Aden and Aden .
 Nasset ended the ‘vitriolic’ attacks from the Caito-based Voice of the Arabs Radio, and curbed Muhammad Mahmud al-Zubayri’s anti-Imamate Free Yemeni movement . In return for ‘federating’
 The British were of two minds about this down-turn in US-Yemeni relations . The British are not sure about the situation in Yemen .
 British Colonial Office officials in Aden and diplomats in Yemen wanted the U.S. to participate in an ‘anti-Communist’ propaganda campaien .
 Foreign Office wants U.S. to increase economic and development assistance to Yemen . Foreign Office wanted to use aid as leverage to force Yemen to moderate its policies toward Aden .
 The British took exception to U.S. indifference to the prospect of a long-term economic and military relationship with Soviets and Chinese .
 They were extremely concerned that Soviet and Egyptian penetration of southern Arabia would bring increasing pressure on Aden and the Protectorate . The Protectorate was extremely concerned about the threat posed .
 Eisenhower administration preferred to use aid to gain influence at the source of the problem, in Cairo . In fact, the Eisenhower administration was resigned to chronic problems in Yemen .
 Riches Riches, explained to Sir William Hayter that it was no longer that simple . Riches explained to him that it had to be done with money to get it on top .
 The Canadians, who chaired the UN Secutity Council, had to be on board . The Canadians were the first Canadians to join the UN Security Council .
 There is some tendency in Canada to think that it is no longer necessary ot possible for us to maintain our special position in the Middle East . This is not less true when it comes to defending a colonial position in Aden by means of attacks on foreign soil, than in defending the kind of
 We are engaged in an exercise to try to bring Canada round THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 57 towards our point of view on Mideast policy generally; but it will take time . We are trying to bring the U.S. round the world's view on Middle East
 The British launched a vigorous spring campaign against rebellious tribes and military units along the border with Yemen .
 By late spring 1958, the Yemenis began to shelter artillery in populated areas along the border, increasing the possibility of escalation, civilian casualties, and serious political fallout . The Yemenis also began sheltering artillery in densely populated areas .
 Washington told the British to bring in the UN and negotiate . Believing that the Imam wanted a way out, that Badr was in disgrace, and that Soviet influence was waning, Washington .
 Colonial Office opposed UN involvement or bilateral talks with Yemen . They believed that ‘the tide in the Yemen over the last 18 months flowed steadily in the direction of more Soviet and Egyptian influence’
 London hoped to ‘satisfy the Americans and Mr Hammerskjold and ease the pressure in Parliament for a time’ London hoped it would ease pressure from the Americans .
 The Soviets had followed up their military and economic aid by inviting Nasser to visit Moscow; he accepted . Nasser accepted the invitation . The visit was the first of his visit to Moscow .
 Nasset's greatest successes had come while he was ‘the irresponsible champion of Arab nationalism’, the U.S. Ambassador in Cairo, Raymond A Hare, prophetically pointed out that Nasset’s greatest success had come when he was the ‘responsible champion of
 The administration attempted to enlist West Germany in a plan to offer ad hoc economic development aid . The administration tried to get West Germany to offer the aid .
 This statement was the first public acknowledgement that something ‘new’ was afoot between the U.S. and Egypt . It was first acknowledgement that the United States and Egypt were at odds .
 In light of the growing power of Egypt since the formation of the United Arab Republic, I am sure that our country is giving the utmost thought and consideration to what should be our future relationships with Egypt . I'm sure that .
 The Democrats saw an opportunity to emphasize Republican foreign policy setbacks in the fall elections . 59 years ago, President Obama was in office in Washington, D.C.
 He pointed out that the release of frozen assets awaited only the formal acceptance of the Suez canal settlement . He said the settlement would only be formally accepted .
 Eisenhower administration lacked key ingredients for success, namely a respect for ‘neutrality’ and non-interference in the region . Many Middle East observers argued that the Eisenhower administration lacks the key ingredients of success .
 On 9 April 1958, Washington had approached London about the planned first stage to free frozen funds and resume limited aid programs . Washington had also approached London to free London's frozen funds .
 Foreign Office objected to $400,000 worth of road building and communications equipment . The Foreign Office informed the State Department that they did not mind licensing of quasi-military items .
 A resumption of the U.S. aid program to Egypt would have an ‘adverse’ effect on the Iraqi-Jordanian Arab Union, they said . They reasoned that a resumption . of the United States aid program would have a 'adverse' effect on
 We have decided that effort should be made to place US-UAR relations on more normal basis . U.S.-U.A. relations with the U.K. should be more normal, officials say .
 Nasser’s basic philosophy or objectives can’t be effectively altered to reflect proWestern orientation, we believe . We believe removal of certain points of friction and minor irritants might help achieve this purpose and that it might place us in position to exert more effective influence over U
 The embassies were to stress that Nasset’s behavior toward Iraq and Jordan would be a major factor in determining the course of Egyptian relations with the U.S.
 Egyptian President wanted assurances that the U.S. would not attempt to remove his regime . The Egyptian President was seeking assurances that he would not be removed from the country .
 Nasser pointedly told Hare that the Soviets had always been more receptive to non-alignment . Nasser said he did not anticipate any problems with Moscow .
 Hare reported to Washington that Nasser’s confidence during the meeting made him uneasy . Hare reported Nasser's confidence during that meeting made Hare uneasy .
 Nasser was the first non-Communist to receive the ‘guest of honor’ salute in Red Square . Nasser received the salute as a 'guest-of-honour' in the square .
 Mote telling was the total lack of official criticism from the West . Perhaps mote telling is that the West did not criticise Russia .
 In May 1958 Nasser undoubtedly felt that he controlled his destiny and the destiny of the Arab world . Although well awate of Egypt’s weaknesses, Nasser was well aware of Egypt's weaknesses .
 Many in the Arab world shared his vision and enthusiastically embraced it . But leaders of traditional regimes feared its effect on their restive populations .
 Chamoun government and Hashemite monarchy faced growing instability . Both Chamoun and the Hashemites had growing instability in the country .
 Both Radio Cairo and Radio Damascus broadcast open invitations to revolt . Both stations broadcast open invitation to revolt.
 Egyptian arms shipments to the rebels, and the patticipation of Syrian military personnel as instigators in Lebanese riots, fueled the instability . The Syrian military is accused of instigating the riots in Lebanon .
 Noting Eeyptian-inspired attacks in the ‘venal press of Beirut’ and on Damascus Radio, as well as Syrian arms-smuggling, he stated that he saw ‘no evidence of a concerted UAR plan’ to topple his regime .
 The situation in Jordan has taken an unexpected turn for the worst . As if Lebanon were not enough, the situation in Lebanon has also taken a turn for worse .
 Jordanian security arrested a number of officers and enlisted men for plotting to overthrow the monarchy by assassinating both the King and Prime Minister . There was widespread unrest, and Jordan's security arrested many of them .
 The regime in Amman made a compelling case that the plot originated with UAR agents in Syria . It emphasized the similarities between UAR subversion in Jordan and in Lebanon .
 'With definite probability entire Middle East will be lost free world. Such an eventuality would encourage every ‘malcontent’ in the region ‘with definite probability’ of the Middle East ‘will be lost’ ‘permanent’ world. ‘
 On 17 May, following his return from Moscow, Nasser met with Ambassador Hare in one of their now regular exchanges of views . Nasser returned from Moscow and Hare met with him on 17 May .
 Nasser instructed UAR officials in Cairo and Damascus to take no action regarding Lebanon during his absence . Claiming he had been ‘out of touch’, Nasser said he had instructed officials in Egypt and Damascus not to take action . Nasser claimed he was 'out of
 At the same time, he areued that Washington was ‘ignoring the facts’ in Lebanon . Washington was 'ignoring facts'
 Nasser wanted turmoil, but not Western intervention; it was a fine line . "Nasser wanted chaos, not intervention," says Nasser . "It was a very fine line. It was a line between chaos and Western intervention"
 In preventing intervention, he hoped once again to take credit for saving the Arab world from imperialism, he said .
 Hare responded by telling Nasser the U.S. had the records of THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE 63 organizational and financial plans to prove direct Syrian military involvement . Hare responded to Nasser by saying the United States had the files of the Syrian military .
 Nasser believed that without such support, Lebanon, Jordan, and even Iraq would succumb . Nasser said that without the support of Nasser, Lebanon and Jordan, they would not survive .
 His prominence in the nonaligned movement provided him with a legitimacy unthinkable only three years before . His rise in the Nonaligned movement gave him a legitimating status as a nonaligned politician .
 The Syrian union, coupled with pro-Nasserist agitation against his Arab opponents, appeared to portend the collapse of traditional Arab regimes and the continued spread of his influence . The union and Nasserism are seen as portending a collapse of Arab regimes .
 It was in this atmosphere that Washington dusted off its policies of 1953-1955, modified them, and basing them on carrot-and-stick economics . Washington tried to build a realistic working relationship with Nasser .
 The renewed effort to improve relations with Cairo reaffirmed Washington’s long-held view that Egypt, for better or worse, was indeed the most important country in the Arab Middle East . The tottering traditional regimes would likely come under the influence of Cairo or fall to pro-N
 Given the Cold War patadigm that viewed Communism, albeit incorrectly, as monolithic, the White House tended to view revolutionary Arab nationalism and Nasserism as also monolithic .
 Despite rapprochement with Nasser, U.S. concerns about Lebanon and the potential for UAR expansion left the impression in London that Eisenhower actually regretted his decision not to back the British at Suez in 1956 .
 Eisenhower fundamentally believed that the British had mishandled the crisis from start to finish . Eisenhower no doubt had second thoughts from time to time but fundamentally believed it had been mishandled by Whitehall .
 London convinced itself that the U.S. now clearly recognized Britain’s superior Middle East expertise .
 Because of our greater experience in the Middle East, the suggestions must often come from us. Because of their greater experience, we often have to come up with suggestions .
 The British believed that the Eisenhower Doctrine and the U.S. reaction to the Lebanese situation represented the policies that they had advocated at the time of Suez . The Eisenhower Doctrine was the precise policies that the British believed to have been in place since the Suez crisis .
 Cairo engineering the collapse of an independent Lebanon through their Syrian partners presented an equally unappealing and embarrassing possibility . At the same time, having just initiated a new policy based on economic incentives with Nasser .
 The British government was split, with some supporting and others opposing intervention . Some of the British government is split on whether or not to intervene .
 Beirut was quiet but the standoff between government troops and rebels continued around Tripoli . Tripoli was quiet as government troops battled rebels in Tripoli .
 Washington equivocated, stating that any intervention would be to protect American lives and property . The U.S. would not support any particular faction .
 Washington sought to avoid the appearance of conflict with UN Security Council peace initiatives . Given the presence of UN observers, Washington tried to avoid conflict with the UN .
 The idea is that the Lebanese should ask for an emergency meeting of the Security Council at which they would appeal for the despatch of a United Nations military force . The Lebanese should also ask for a U.N. military force to be deployed .
 We and the United States would support this suggestion and offer contingents, says President Obama .
 The British attempted to arrange quietly for Jordanian and Iraqi participation in any potential Lebanese intervention . In a reversal of policy, the British now tried to arrange for Jordan and Iraq participation .
 Dulles became increasingly frustrated with the Secretary’s desire for French participation . Dulles was frustrated with Dulles' desire for France participation in the war .
 London was certain that a French ‘gate-crash’ meant that neither Iraq nor Jordan would participate . The French 'gatecrash' as they put it, meant that Iraq and Jordan would not participate in the French military exercise .
 London would have been far better off had the Hashemites stayed out of it . As things would turn out, London would've been better off if they stayed out .
 London opposed Dulles’ nearfixation on ‘extending’ Chamoun’s tenure beyond the 24 July date for new elections . London also opposed the nearfixations on extending Chamoun's tenure beyond that date .
 The White House vacillated between apprehensive optimism about Chamoun’s chances for sutvival and hope that Nasser, heeding U.S. warnings, would end support to the rebels .
 U.S. committed to preservation of Lebanon’s integrity, ambassador says . Chamoun said earlier that he would not seek a second term . Ambassador told Chamoun that the United States was committed to preserving Lebanon's integrity .
 The representations made at the meeting had exceeded a previous agreement . Apparently the representations made . had exceeded previous agreement, it is claimed .
 The US, France, and Britain may have been somewhat at odds over the meeting, but there were indications that Chamoun had gotten the message and was lining up his replacement, General Fuad Chehab, the Chief of Staff .
 It appeared that the crisis might dissipate and the intervention could be avoided . The crisis appeared to be over, but the intervention was likely to be averted .
 The British had maintained their position in Iraq, come what may, for over 30 years . The British government had maintained its position for more than 30 years before .
 Iraq stood as the bulwark of the British political, economic, and military position in the Mideast . Iraq was a bulwark in the Middle East, standing as a political and economic bulwark .
 When Nasser announced the creation of the UAR, the British assessed the situation in Baghdad . The British divided the Iraqis 68 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND the COLD WAR into three groups .
 Second, there were ‘active politicians’ who were largely suspicious and resented his claims to Arab leadership . Third, the 'active politicians' who were . largely suspicious' of his claims, he said .
 The Iraqi government began to explore union with Jordan, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia . To provide an alternative to Nasser’s vision for Arab unity, the Iraqi government explored union with them .
 London quickly blocked Kuwait’s participation, fearing that it would ‘probably backfire’ and make Kuwait a target for Nasserist agitation . Nuri Sa’id expected King Saud to ‘sit on the fence’
 The Foreign Office observed that the Ruler of Kuwait had prevented a ‘collision with Arab nationalists’ and the younger generation in Kuwait .
 Nuri Said also had his eye on incorporating Kuwait into Iraq, and in conversations with the U.S. Ambassador to Iraq he demanded ‘money and Kuwait’, threatening to resign if he did not get both .
 Sir Michael Wright wanted more U.S. economic and military aid for Baghdad . In February 1958, he warned London that the long-term prognosis was problematic . The British prime minister of the late 1960s urged the United States to give Baghdad more aid .
 If the West cannot give at least some of the help that is needed, it will be extremely difficult in the long term for the present regime to maintain itself . This means that the Government and the many in Iraq who believe in the Western alliance look to Britain and America for leadership and help
 London wanted more support from Washington, both financially and militarily, in propping up the Baghdad regime . London also wanted more financial and military support from the US .
 Ironically, the British and Iraqi fixation on the UAR would prove their undoing . Ironically, it would prove they were wrong to have a fixation on UAR .
 Brigadier Abd-al-Karim al-Qasim and_ his cohorts had learned from the short-lived Rashid Ali coup of 1941 .
 Taking no chances, the plotters decapitated the regime, removing any figure around which a cohesive opposition might coalesce . The plotters took no chances. Taking no chance, they decapitated regime, remove any figure .
 The British had arguably shot themselves in the foot. Adding insult to injury, the British had perhaps shot themselves .
 They had encouraged the Iraqi government to move military formations to the Sytian border in an attempt to divert UAR attention from Lebanon . The Iraqi government had been trying to divert attention from the UAR .
 Iraqi high command issued ammunition and arranged for brigades to pass through, rather than around, the capital . Unfortunately, the high command decided to let rebels pass through the capital, not around .
 Proper security precautions were not taken, and no other loyal army units were in the city . Proper security was not taken and the city was not properly protected .
 Rebel brigades detouring to besiege the palace, occupying Radio Baghdad, and taking over the telephone exchange were the first sign that something was amiss .
 The ease of the takeover, the liquidation of government officials, and the murder of the royal family also surprised the conspirators, also surprised them . The ease the takeover of the government officials and the assassination of the royals surprised the plotters .
 They had expected a protracted struggle, and when rioting broke out, they lacked an immediate plan to deal with the situation . They had been expecting a long-term struggle, but they had expected it to be protracted .
 The new regime realized that excessive rioting and damage to foreign interests would damage its credibility, the new regime said . The regime realized it would invite intervention, and the rioting would damage credibility .
 Downing Street concluded that a ‘small body of troops ... tan amok’, murdered Nuri Sa’id, the King, the Crown Prince and other key officials . Downing Street concludes that a 'small body' of troops 'tan amok'
 There had been no inkling of a real nature of the threat from the military . There had also been an inkling that the military was in danger .
 Facing harsh criticism ftom all quarters, the administration was under pressure to act . The administration is facing harsh criticism from all quarters .
 The Iraqi coup revitalized and inextricably linked containment policy to the survival of that alliance . The failure to form MEDO in 1954 provided the impetus for the formation of a defense alliance based on the ‘northern tier’
 It was with Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan in mind that Washington considered taking action in Lebanon . The U.S. considers taking action against Lebanon .
 Both the State Department and the CIA concluded that inaction would result in three probable outcomes . These conclusions went far beyond the Arab Middle East, they say .
 First, Nasser believed to be behind the coup, would take over the entire region . First, they believed Nasser would take control of the region .
 The United States would lose influence and probably critical bases in Libya and Libya . The U.S. could lose some sensitive intelligence sites in Iran and Pakistan that directly affected the strategic defense .
 This assessment directly linked the outcome of the situation in Lebanon to U.S. global credibility . This assessment was directly linked to the outcome in Lebanon .
 Allen Dulles briefed the CIA’s sketchy intelligence on the situation in Iraq on 14 July . The CIA was briefed by the NSC at a tense and hastily convened NSC meeting . Dulles was the CIA's chief intelligence officer .
 Director Dulles confirmed that the Crown Prince was dead and a ‘Leftist government’ headed by pro-Nasserist army elements had taken over . A 'Leftist' government, headed by Nasserists army elements, had taken control .
 Chamoun had frantically asked for US, British, and French intervention in Lebanon within 48 hours, he said . Chamoun said Chamoun asked for U.S. and British intervention in the country within 48 days .
 Murphy’s association with Eisenhower dated back to the North African campaign in World War H . He was a trusted trouble-shooter for the administration . Murphy drowned out the Embassy's even-keeled evaluation .
 Eisenhower telephoned Macmillan, who offered his complete agreement and cooperation . After the decision was made, Eisenhower called the British Prime Minister .
 In a follow-up telegram, Macmillan promised Britain’s support and called for ‘urgent action’ But he quickly made a point of London’�s main concern . In a second-legend, he promised Britain's support .
 Eisenhower cabled Macmillan with a review of the situation, including his thoughts on the situations in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia .
 Both agreed that the U.S. and Britain had to mount coordinated and effective propaganda campaigns at the UN and against the Communists in the Middle East .
 Nasser, who had worked diligently for the overthrow of the Hashemite regime and Nuti Sa’id in Iraq, knew little more about what had actually happened than Washington or London .
 Egypt immediately recognized the new regime in Baghdad . President Hosni Mubarak assumed that the coup was good news . He assumed that it would be good news, and Egypt recognized it .
 Nasset believed that Iraq was next . Nasset: "In Yugoslavia, when the revolution occurred, the British and Americans announced their interventions in Jordan and Lebanon" Nasset believes that Iraq is next .
 The Soviets offered unlimited bluster and moral support, but risking a nuclear war with the U.S. over some Arab revolution in Iraq was not on their agenda . The Soviets were not willing to risk nuclear war over Arab revolution .
 On 18 July, he flew to Damascus and met with Sarraj, the UAR Syrian security chief, and an emissary from Baghdad, Abd-al-Salam al-Aref .
 First and last agreement between Nasser and the new Iraqi regime . It would prove to be the first and last deal between the two .
 Eisenhower’s special envoy, Robert Murphy, went to the Middle East on a fact-finding mission shortly after the Iraqi coup . Murphy had little insight into the political dynamic between Baghdad and Cairo . Murphy was convinced that Nasser was behind the coup in Baghdad .
 Murphy met with Nasser, who denied rumors of an impending UAR move against Amman . Nasser denied rumors that UAR would move to Amman, saying Amman would not be interested in the move .
 Qasim had no intention of joining Egypt and Syria, primarily because he had every intention of preserving Iraq’s oil wealth for Irag . He said: “Qasim wanted to preserve Iraq's oil wealth .
 Qasim paid lip service to Arab unity . Kurdish groups in the north and Shi'a population in southern Iraq opposed submersion in a super state .
 Nassetists, like Qasim’s deputy, Colonel Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref, found themselves increasingly isolated and alienated from the new regime . As a result, Nassetistists have become increasingly isolated from the regime .
 The arrest of Aref was a clear ‘slap in the face’, and placed Nasser in uncharted territory . Nasser has been accused of being a 'terrorist' in the past .
 Attacking the ‘feudal’ Hashemites or Saudis was one thing, but dealing with an Arab nationalist rival with solid revolutionary credentials was another . Attacking ‘Feudal Hashemite’s or Saudis or Saudis is one thing .
 Qasim opted for greater reliance on Communist support . In addition, to counter Nasserist and Ba’thist influence, he opted to rely heavily on the Communist Party .
 From Washington’s perspective, this reliance made Qasim vulnerable to a Communist coup, the very reasoning that had prompted Eisenhower to take action in Iran in 1953 . Nasset: From Nasset's perspective, the alliance with the Communists deprived him of the potential membership of the U
 This situation did not bode well for stability in an already restive Syria . This situation does not have any effect on stability in the country, says CNN.com .
 Qasim’s courtship of the ICP also enhanced his standing in Moscow, cooling the relationship with Cairo . The ICP is a key ally of the Egyptian government in Cairo .
 Growing coziness between Iraq and the Soviet Union created friction between the Egyptians and their Russian benefactors . Egypt's relationship with the USSR created friction with the Egyptian government .
 Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion made it ominously clear that any change of regime in Amman would result in decisive Israeli action to occupy the West Bank and to ‘make provision’ for the Palestinian population there .
 With the less desirable ‘revolutionary’ outcome in Iraq and the Soviet tilt toward Baghdad, he, like Washington, needed a new ally. With the . less desirable outcome in . Iraq, he needed a . new ally .
 Washington, by now, was beginning to understand what had really happened in Baghdad and how Lebanon fit into the picture . As for Lebanon and intervention, Washington began to understand how it happened .
 Secretary Dulles pointed out that the U.S. had opposed the British folly of including Iraq in the Baghdad Pact . Dulles said the United States had opposed Britain's folly .
 The strain placed on the Hashemite regime by its membership of the Pact brought about its collapse, he said . With some justification, he stated that the strain placed . on the regime was the result of its membership .
 He concluded that oil supplies would be stable so long as threats to Kuwait, Iran, and Saudi Arabia were quashed . Oil supplies will be stable, he said, as long as they are quashed threats to Iran, Kuwait, and Iran .
 The President’s decision to send in troops was based on the ‘frightened’ appeals of Chamoun and Hussein, Secretary of State said .
 He stated that it would maintain U.S. credibility with ‘smaller nations’ but solve nothing . He said the move would maintain United States credibility with smaller nations .
 Eisenhower concluded that the U.S. had not done enough to protect and aid their friends in the region or to combat their enemies . In something of a soul-searching self-indictment, Eisenhower concluded .
 Eisenhower stated that the U.S. position had to be ‘rehabilitated’ in the region and that would require money . Eisenhower said that the United States position in the Middle East would have to be rehabilitated in order .
 Facing a storm of criticism, the U.S. and Britain now attempt to sort out what had actually happened . The United States and Britain are now attempting to sort the situation .
 On 16 July, John Hay 'Jock' Whitney, the United States Ambassador to London, reported that the landings in Lebanon had heartened Prime Minister Macmillan .
 At an 18 July dinner with the ambassadors of the 'Old' Commonwealth, Lloyd tried to put the best face on the situation and deflect Dulles’ criticism of British policy .
 Lloyd also pointed out that Eisenhower had made the decision to intervene in Lebanon on an ad hoc basis . Lloyd also said that Eisenhower's intervention in Lebanon was on a 'ad hoc basis'
 Riches, the Chief of the Arabian Department, minuted his superior, Sir William Hayter, with a note of reason . Riches minuted Hayter's superior to his superior with a 'note of reason'
 If the revolution in Iraq succeeds, when the smoke clears we shall presumably be left with a military dictatorship on the Nasser model . The revolution is likely to lead to a Nasser-style military dictatorship .
 This government will certainly express emotional solidarity with pan-Arabism and therefore with Egypt . But it is likely to wish to preserve Iraqi oil revenues for itself and therefore to maintain its separate identity .
 It seems unlikely that it would even join the United Arab States — except perhaps as a desperate last fling if it felt its position severely threatened . The U.S. is unlikely to join the U.K. if it feels threatened .
 Egyptian argued that in such a case, Egyptian would likely support a Kuwait free of Iraqi control, either as an independent state or as a part of the UAR .
 Colonial Office and British authorities in Aden took a narrow, hard line, and a thoroughly alarmist view of events . The Colonial Office took a very hard line .
 The events in Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan constitute a crisis of the greatest magnitude for the future of the Arab world and for the West’s relations with it, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says the events in Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq constitute the greatest crisis of all three countries .
 Unless there is swift and effective intervention by Western powers to contain the expansion of Russian influence and to cutb Nasser’s ambitions, the Arabs would soon be united in bondage .
 They clearly regarded supptession of the Iraq rebellion as an essential part of intervention . They were clearly regarded as a key part of the intervention .
 Dulles concluded that Iraq needed to maintain good relations with the West because of oil revenue and Nasser . Dulles: Iraq needs to maintain a good relationship with the west because of Nasser's influence .
 In something of a contradiction, he stated that he still believed that Nasser was the teal ‘authority’ behind the Qasim regime and that the . authority behind the Soviet Union was the . Soviet Union .
 The CIA believed that the Iraqi regime had no effective opposition but would probably disappear within six months in a Nasserist coup . In contrast, the CIA thought that the regime would disappear in six months . The CIA said that Nasserism was likely to be a success in the Nasser
 Agency also made it clear that they thought the long-term British position in Jordan and Iraq was untenable, thus contributing to the view that Jordan was a bad bet for U.S. support .
 Washington could now take a direct role in protecting its regional interests . Washington could then take on the role of protecting its interests in Syria .
 UAR’s energy could be ‘channeled’ and allowed to dissipate, says Secretary of State . Meeting also reinforced the Secretary's view that time might take care of time .
 Disenchantment with Eisenhower administration’s UAR tilt also affected British views of the situation in Jordan .
 The State Department view ... reflects that defeatist ‘Rountreeist’ philosophy, which has always seemed to me unworthy of a great country like the U.S. It assumes what I call the double standard. The State Dept. view is ... a defeatist 'R
 Nasser is against us, therefore we must kowow to him and regard his triumph as inevitable . We must regard Nasser as inevitable, and regard him as against us . Nasser's triumph is inevitable, therefore he must be kowtowed to him, his triumph
 Jordan is for us, therefore the task of preserving it is utterly hopeless . We must see how we can hand it over to Nasser as gracefully as possible . We need to see how to hand Jordan over to him as gracely as possible.
 Nasset’s “THE TEMPEST” 77 regime is now at least as unpopular in Syria, and perhaps also in Egypt itself, as Samir Rifai's is in Jordan . This theory blandly overlooks the fact that Nasset's ‘THE
 The administration had no illusions about Nasser, but it simply did not think Jordan’s survival was worth the cost . The administration did not want to risk the cost of Nasser .
 Dulles intended to buy time until the flood was subsidied . Accepting Arab nationalism and anti-Western policies as a fact of life, Dulles wanted time to save time . Dulles was trying to play down Arab nationalism .
 The administration believed Jordan, in the direct path of the flood, had little chance of sutvival . Choices had to be made .
 Washington feared that a violent collapse in Jordan would bring the calamitous consequences of Israeli intervention . Washington feared the collapse would bring a calamitous response to the crisis .
 Washington wanted the British to leave voluntarily, believing that failure to do so invited another Iraq and Israeli intervention . For this reason, Washington believed failure to leave would invite another Iraq intervention .
 Unification with the UAR did not fit Qasim’s agenda, and triangular friction developed between Cairo, Baghdad, and Moscow . London and Washington struggled with the situation .
 Even in the worst of times, Eisenhowet’s policies reflected a conflicted relationship with Nasser, Nasser . Nasser was the prime minister of Egypt in the 1970s .
 Washington erred in ideologically linking Nasser’s Arab nationalism and need for arms from the Soviet Union to pro-Communist sympathies . Nasset's suppression of the Communists in Egypt and Syria brought a more sophisticated White House view .
 Iragi opposition to Nasser relieved many of the concerns about UAR regional hegemony . In addition, it also relieved many concerns about regional hegemony in the region .
 When proNasserist elements, led by Colonel Aref, fell from power in Baghdad, U.S. concern about Nassetism receded even more .
 The developing ties between Washington and Cairo and growing U.S. concern about ICP influence in Iraq complicated the British campaign to normalize relations with Baghdad and protect their interests in Iraqi oil .
 The U.S. intended to use Nasser to counterbalance increasing Communist influence . The United States used Nasser as a counterbalance to China's growing influence .
 The administration concluded that while Qasim might want to curtail Communist influence in Iraq, he was unable or unwilling to do so because of the Ba’thist and Nasserist threat .
 This clear focus on the Qasim regime and its Communist supporters promised nothing but complications for British attempts to keep the lid on its relationship with the Baghdad regime . The British government is trying to keep a tight eye on its relations with the Iraqi government .
 Communist-inspired riot greeted Assistant Secretary Rountree on his December 1958 visit to Baghdad . The riots were the result of a Communist-influenced visit to the capital .
 The riot also provided additional impetus to the increasingly pro-Nasserist U.S. tilt . The riot was sparked by an uprising in the West in the 1970s .
 For Washington, Communism posed a global problem; for Nasser, the revolutionary apostates in Baghdad threatened his view of Arab nationalism and unity . Nasser: Nasser was the leader of the Arab Spring in Egypt .
 Nasser and Eisenhower agreed on Qasim’s Iraq . For very different reasons, they agreed on Nasser's Iraq . Nasser, Eisenhower and Nasser agreed on the agreement .
 Cooperation with Nasser put the U.S. in bad stead in Baghdad . The Macmillan government had complicated relations with the MacMillan government on issues .
 The British concluded that, despite Communist influence, Qasim represented the best guarantee against an overt Communist takeover . By December 1958, the British concluded, “THE TEMPEST” 79, was “the best guarantee”
 Qasim had followed through on his commitments vis-a-vis the British-controlled IPC . The IPC is an important if not ‘vital’ British interest, an important and important British interest .
 The British sought to keep US-Iraqi relations on even keel . Wanting to avoid this extremity, the British tried to keep U.S. relations on an even keer .
 Eisenhower intended to take Macmillan’s concerns into consideration and coordinate with London to extent possible, but the President's perception of U.S. interests would be the driving force . Eisenhower planned to take the concerns of the British government into account .
 The Baghdad coup meant that the Qasim regime with its Communist supporters would face United States hostility and encouragement to Nasser . The U.S. supported Nasser's regime in the fall of the fall .
 Eisenhower administration intended to revitalize containment policy with increased for military, security, and economicsupport Iran and Pakistan . It also meant that the Eisenhower administration .
 The coup in Iraq confirmed the fractious uncertainties of Arab politics and the downward slide of British influence in the Middle East . It clearly demonstrated the interconnectivity of Cold War politics across the Greater Middle East, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The Iraqi coup had far-reaching consequences for U.S. policy in the region . The coup led to the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and the fall of the Iraqi government .
 U.S. relations with Iran and Pakistan have been strained in recent years . Relations with Pakistan and Iran have strained relations with the United States . Relations between the two countries have been at odds for years .
 Qasim’s coup set in motion a series of changes in U.S. policy that complicated relations with the United States for almost five decades . The coup set the stage for changes in United States policy .
 While policies toward Pakistan and Iran had similarities, each had own unique characteristics . Each country's policies toward each other had its own unique characteristic .
 The Baghdad coup fundamentally altered the relationship between Washington and Tehran . To understand these changes, one must examine the pre-1958 political context, the immediate reaction to the Baghdad coup .
 By the mid-1950s sites in Iran had become strategic assets in the Cold War . Washington had always viewed Iran as geopolitically critical to U.S. interests in the Mideast .
 U.S. installations overlooked Soviet missile development and test facilities at Turatom and Baiknour . In the mountains of northeastern Iran, United States installations overlooked the Soviet missile facilities .
 These sites provided direct signals and telemetry intelligence on Soviet missile tests and capabilities . These sites were used to provide direct signals to Soviet missile testing .
 Given the technologies of the 1950s and 1960s, they were irreplaceable . The technology of the '50s and '60s, the '80s and 60s were 'irreplaceable,' the author says .
 This situation dictated that the United States had to do everything in its power to maintain a pro-Western government in Tehran, says CNN's John Sutter . The U.S. has been trying to keep Iran under control, he says .
 Shah received military assistance and economic aid prior to 1958 . He was put under considerable pressure to enact fundamental reforms to stabilize his regime .
 Eisenhower administration emphasized economic development and reform while resolutely resisting the Shah’s demands for massive military aid .
 Washington adhered to the premise that only economic development could lay the foundation for the fundamental political, social, and economic reform which would produce long-term stability in Iran .
 Iran received limited military and security assistance to provide the Shah’s regime with the ability to maintain internal order and suppress any indigenous Communist or anti-Western threats to the regime . The Shah's regime was overthrown in 1958 .
 Shah's priority was to make Iran the dominant military power in the Persian Gulf and the military equal of Turkey . This policy ran directly counter to the Shah’s priority of making Iran the . dominant .
 The history of the Shah’s relationship with the Eisenhower administration is one of Iranian demands for more military aid . Washington's attempts to push the Peacock Throne toward economic growth and reform .
 From the Shah’s 1953 restoration, the Eisenhower administration pressed and chided the regime repeatedly about the lack of progress toward political, economic, and social reform . Containment through reform and economic development .
 This is not to say that Iranian military and secutity services did not receive their share of funding and aid . Iran's military and security services did receive funding from the government .
 Containment strategy in its Iranian context required a stable political and civil environment and sufficient military capability to maintain the border and deter internal threats . Containment strategies in Iran's case required the maintenance of a stable .
 Stability also required an efficient security apparatus to protect the regime . The regime's stability also required a strong security apparatus, analysts say .
 The United States plan never envisioned an Iranian military capable of stopping, or even significantly delaying, a full-scale Soviet invasion . The U.S. plan was never envisioned a . Iranian military would be able to stop or delay a Soviet invasion.
 The Shah convinced himself that the Eisenhower administration had promised exactly that as a quid pro quo for joining the Baghdad Pact . Unfortunately, the Shah convinced him that the latter was possible and that the . Eisenhower administration .
 Tehran-U.S. views differ sharply from Washington's view of Iran . Washington and Tehran have been at odds for years over the years .
 Early on, the U.S. desite for reform focused on land reform and redistribution as a method of solidifying the Shah’s rule .
 The Potomac was a two-edged sword in Persia . What seemed like a good idea on the Potomacs was a bad idea in Iran .
 Land reform attacked the prerogatives and livelihoods of the large landowners who supported the Shah against nationalist groups like the National Front and Musaddigists . It potentially undermined that support for the Shah .
 "At some level, he wanted to free himself from reliance on the traditional landowners and their influence," he says .
 Shah believed that this traditional source of political support curbed his ability to create a new, modern Iran in the image of Atattirk’s Turkey . The Shah believed this curbed him being able to create an image of Turkey .
 Conservative landowners blamed U.S. pressure on the Shah for his attempts to liberalize . Conservative landowners were linked by blood and marriage ties to bazarri and cherical classes .
 Landowners saw no practical difference between US-backed liberal land reform and a Communist revolution and collectivization . Landowners also saw no difference between U.S. and Communist revolution .
 This created a state of near political war between the Iranian patliament, the Majlis, and the throne . The Majlis is the Iranian parliament, the parliament and the Iranian government .
 Mote likely, this political maneuvering reflected growing self-confidence, and new-found leverage in resisting calls for reform by his foreign benefactors, Britain and America .
 The Shah’s move coincided with the Soviet arms deal for Egypt, and with entreaties by the U.S. and Britain for Iran to join the Baghdad Pact . The Shah moved to Iran in order to protect his country from invasion of Egypt .
 Shah used the tactics employed by neutralists like Nasser and Nehru to improve his situation . Having no illusions about the fate of the monarchy, the Shah threw his lot in with the West .
 Shah mixed professions of loyalty and friendship with the West with grousing about the paucity of U.S. aid and the rewards of neutralism . Pointing out that he had options, the Shah said: "I had options"
 Shah had his price, harping on his point that the pro-Western Middle East could not be defended without Iran . As for Iranian participation in the Baghdad Pact, the Shah had a price, he said .
 Shah exerted pressure to gain British assistance in acquiring the maximum American aid . Knowing that London considered Iranian participation in the Baghdad Pact critical, the Shah wanted British assistance .
 US, military and also budgetary aid in order that he might go ahead and adhere to Baghdad pact . U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to travel to Baghdad to meet with the Iraqi government .
 Shah used the specter of the Soviet threat and membership in the Baghdad Pact as leverage, the Shah believed he would get the aid he demanded . The Shah was using the use of the threat of the USSR as leverage to get aid .
 President Obama received free advice from Washington about how to use funds for direct budgetary and economic development . However, he did receive copious amounts of free advice about how funds should be used .
 Shah centralized economic development in a Central Plan Organization under a Shah loyalist, Abol Hassan Ebtehaj . In 1956, against the advice of the Eisenhower administration, the Shah centralized development .
 Iran rejects U.S. advice to pursue broad economic development objectives aimed at raising the standard of living of the Iranian people . He used the CPO to concentrate on infrastructure. Rejects U.N. advice that economic development aims broad economic goals .
 Tehran presented the CPO as a means to avoid graft and inefficiency by fostering foreign investment and development in Iran . The CPO was presented as a way to avoid inefficiency and avoid graft . Tehran says it aims to foster foreign investment by fostering development .
 Ebtehaj became the father of what would become massive foreign involvement in Iranian development . He became a key figure in the development of Iran .
 CPO policies, coupled with foreign oil concessions and membership in the Baghdad Pact, intensified xenophobic Iranian nationalism . Public perceptions that the Shah had perpetrated a ‘sell out’ to Western interests .
 The Shah gave the West cheap oil, supported the Baghdad Pact, and then handed more than 60 pet cent of Itran’s oil revenues back to Western firms . Western firms say the Shah gave them cheap oil and supported Baghdad Pact . They say he gave them access to large-
 Opposition groups felt betrayed by the lack of opportunities for Iranians to participate in the new economy, but fortunately for the Shah, the opposition groups distrusted each other more than the regime .
 The Eisenhower administration preferred a different approach to modernization . The Iranian monarch made it clear that he had his own ideas about the approach .
 Decisions about Iranian aid did not center solely upon a simple binary question of support for the military versus support for economic development . Support for Iran's military translated into stability needed for its economic development, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Decisions about Iran's aid did
 Pursuit of the ‘heavy model’ for industrial development generated a need to strengthen the coercive power of the state, says the author of the book . Pursuit was a need for the state to strengthen its coercive power, he says .
 In the administration’s view, the pay-off from the ‘heavy base’ approach would not come soon enough to prevent destabilization in Iran, the administration says .
 The Shah’s ‘despair’, no doubt sometimes teal, also developed into an art form for extracting more military and economic aid . The Shah's 'despair' was also used to extract more economic and military aid .
 The Shah was pressured to ‘broaden’ his base through controlled initiatives designed to foster political pluralism . Politically, the U.S. pressured the Shah to 'broaden' his base . The Shah's government is believed to be the strongest in the world .
 Political projects du jour, coupled with increasingly exorbitant demands for aid, have raised questions about the Shah’s political sophistication and, periodically, his hold on reality . The Shah has been criticized for his lack of political sophistication .
 As a result, serious questions arose concerning the viability of the regime . The regime has been described as 'morally flawed' by the West .
 Shah lies at the center of all problems in Iran and certainly is an extremely important factor in their solution . The Shah is a key figure in solving Iran's problems, says Iran's former president .
 Most Iranians recognize that the Shah has decided to rule personally as well as reign . The Shah has ruled personally as much as he reigns as a king .
 Shah gave up of a mere constitutional role in favor of the exercise of power to make policy decisions for Iran . The Shah was a national symbol for Iran, and his role in Iran has far reaching effects for Iran as a nation .
 He has deliberately removed himself from the apolitical tole of the constitutional monarch . The monarch has put himself in the scales of political survival in this country . The former president has been accused of putting himself at risk of losing power .
 Shah’s non-Iranian origins and close association with the U.S. and Britain fueled xenophobia . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The educated elite believed that in a meritocracy they would rule in place of the Shah’s entourage of sycophants . It was strongest among the educated elite, who believed in meritocratic rule .
 By 1957, predictions of chaos and severe damage to U.S. policy interests were the order of the day . The predictions were the day after the first Gulf War .
 Washington guaranteed the survival of an independent Iran and its territorial integrity, but pointedly refused to extend that promise to the Pahlavi dynasty . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran, who ruled the country for decades .
 Washington viewed the Iranian military as the most reliable pro-Western center of power . Seeing the potential for the Shah’s collapse, Washington viewed it as a reliable center of stability .
 The military became the guarantor of the Shah’s rule and the alternative to it, says Shah . The military also became the guarantor of the Shah's rule, writes Shah . Shah was the prime minister of Iran in the early 1980s .
 Shah had no illusions about his ability to rule without a loyal, coercive military, and security apparatus at his disposal . As for the Shah, he had to rely on loyal military and security forces .
 Requests for military aid had as much to do with ensuring loyalthy as actual need . Requests to military aid were as much as possible to ensure loythy as the actual need.
 Eisenhower administration pressed for reforms that incurred potentially serious risks to what remained of Shah’s popularity . Eisenhower administration believed the Shah faced a growing crisis .
 President Obama's remarks will certainly be unpopular in Iran, but they will be good for Iran . Actions along the lines of his remarks will be unpopular, but good for the country, he says .
 Shah is already unpopular among his people, it is most advisable for him to stop worrying about temporary political reactions . He should carry on as a strong man with military support, and give the nation the bitter medicine it needs .
 If he is to fall, this line might hasten his fall, but it also opens up the possibility that if he lasts a few years more, he will not fall at all . If he stays at all, he may not fall for a few more years .
 Given this kind of support, it is litthe wonder that the Shah wanted more weapons for the army and worried about U.S. commitment to his regime .
 Shah’s predisposition to paranoia and his inability to accept responsibility for his own actions, he had real problems . Despite his predisposition for paranoia, the Shah was not a successful leader .
 Concerns about ‘growing’ Soviet influence in Tehran came to the fore in December 1957 . In December 1957, concerns about 'growing' Soviet influence .
 Eisenhower and Dulles were pressured by rumors of a union between Egypt and Syria . The move placed additional pressure on them .
 British Ambassador to Iran, Sir Roger Bentham Stevens, reported on ‘excellent progress’ by the new Soviet Ambassador, Nikolai Mikhailovitch Pegov .
 British ambassador to Soviet Union calls it a 'good neighbor policy' Ambassador points to increased exchanges in trade and cultural delegations .
 British argued that given the ‘sensitive and suspicious’ nature of the Iranian people and the perceived lack of tangible results from Iran’s relationship with the West .
 The Soviet propaganda machine compared social and economic gains in the Soviet Central Asian republics to the relative lack thereof in Iran . The Soviet government compared social gains in Soviet Central Asia republics in the USSR to relative lack of Iran .
 While the Soviets were making inroads, Sir Roger and the British had an ulterior motive . Sir Roger had a hidden interest in the Soviet Union in the Middle East .
 They were pressing the United States to either join the Baghdad Pact or significantly increase military and economic aid to its members . The U.S. was pressing the U.K. to join the pact .
 Moscow wanted Iran to withdraw from the Pact, to support Soviet policies in the Middle East, and to declare neutrality . Moscow, of course, wanted Iran's withdrawal from the pact and to support its policies .
 The Soviets had altered their tactics from the stick to the carrot, with what the British termed ‘impressive’ results . To achieve these goals, the Soviets had changed their tactics .
 In late January 1958, on the eve of the formation of the UAR, a concerned Dulles visited Tehran for talks with the Shah . The UAR was formed in 1958 .
 In meetings with Dulles, Manuchehr Eqbal and Husain Ala raised the Soviet offers of aid and better relations .
 The Iranian leadership pointed out that Soviet largesse in Syria, Egypt, and Afghanistan had created a public, negative comparison with U.S. aid to Iran .
 The U.S. has given $250 million to non-aligned India, critics say . They wonder why Washington could not help its ally and why it should not help India .
 Eqbal told Dulles that the Soviets had offered to assist Iran in meeting its budget crisis . Dulles said the Soviets offered to help Iran meet its budget needs .
 He argued that given the Soviet danger, the U.S. needed to join and actively participate in the Baghdad Pact . He then argued that the United States needed to actively participate .
 Dulles blamed Congress for limiting aid to Iran and barring U.S. entry into the Baghdad Pact . Dulles was on the defensive, blaming Congress for limits on aid and Iraq Pact .
 Dulles point-blank refused to provide $100 million to balance Iran's budget . At one point, in a meeting with CPO Director Ebtehaj, Dulles said he would not provide the money .
 Noon claimed that only his personal intervention had prevented it from happening . Noon, of course, said that only he had intervened to prevent it . Noon: "It's a good thing that I was able to do so,"
 Dulles pushed economic development as the primary means of maintaining Iranian stability and containing the Soviet Union . Despite threats and pressure, Dulles continued to push economic development .
 Eisenhower felt obliged to put together another ‘limited’ military aid package in an attempt to appease the Shah . The risks of cutting the Shah off from military aid were too great, Eisenhower felt .
 The Shah took a proactive hand in his quest for additional military aid . During this period, the Shah took an active hand in seeking more military aid from the West .
 Rumors began to appear that the formation of a new Itanian cabinet, more friendly to the Soviet Union, might be in the offing .
 Any mention of improved relations between Iran and the Soviet Union caused concern . Although a transparent threat, any mention of improving relations with Iran was also a concern .
 Dulles warned Eisenhower that the Shah, unhappy with repeated rejections for military aid, might attempt to get a commitment in their one-on-one meetings .
 The U.S. tried to convince the Shah that regional security rested not on Iranian military power, but on the United States military deterrent . The Shah was convinced that the US military deterrent was the ultimate source of regional security .
 Shah addressed military matters only in generalities, allowing officials in his entourage to badger the State and Defense departments about specific Iranian requirements . Shrewdly, the Shah allowed officials to tell the State Department specific requirements .
 Had he been clairvoyant, the Shah could not have better timed his visit or his requests for additional military aid . The Shah's request for more military aid could have been timed perfectly .
 Iranians of all political persuasions had accepted the possibility, if not the probability, of a coup in Baghdad . The Baghdad coup and Iranians had all political . persuasions, Iranians of all . political. persuasions .
 The views of Iraqi instability and rumors of plots against the Baghdad regime mirrored similar rumblings in Iran . These views of Iraq instability and plots against Baghdad regime had mirrored similar .
 The ferocity and rapidity of the coup in Baghdad stunned everyone . Nevertheless, the ferocity of the sudden coup stunned everyone. Nevertheless, it was not the end of the Iraq crisis .
 Shah recognized opportunity when it knocked. Though truly frightened, he recognized opportunity . The Shah was truly frightened. He recognized opportunity.
 Shah predicted the collapse of the Baghdad Pact, leaving Iran ‘alone’ to face the Soviets and their allies . Argued that the Egyptians and the Russians now had Baghdad Pact defense plans, the Shah predicted its collapse .
 1958 89 emphasized the need for additional support in the field of internal security . The Iranian government said the country needed additional support for internal security.
 The coup in Iraq also brought disturbing reactions on the street in Iran . The coup is the first of its kind in Iraq since 2003 .
 The coup shook what little shaky confidence existed in the Pahlavi regime . It shook the confidence of the Iranian regime .
 Middleclass elements opposed to the regime were buoyed by the collapse of the Hashemites . Pro-Western supporters of the Shah feared the worst .
 Pro-Western elements optimistically awaited Western action to ‘reverse the situation in Iraq’ When it became apparent that there would no moves against the Baghdad regime, political supporters of the Shah predicted worsened relations with Iraq .
 Opponents of the Shah’s tule, classified as ‘Mosqueqist intellectuals and other representatives of the militant side of the urban middle class’, agreed that relations with Iraq would worsen significantly .
 Official observers in Iranian circles had expected the Hashemite regime’s collapse for some time . Despite some private misgivings, they recognized the new Iraqi government in relatively short order . Many Iranian conservatives are unhappy with the Iraqi government .
 Time seemed to increase the ‘concern and uncertainty’ of pro-Shah elements, according to the report . Anti-shah groups appeared increasingly confident, the report said . Time increased the 'concern' and ‘uncertainty’ over the outcome of
 Comments about the assassination of the Shah could be heard in street conversations . Comments were heard in the street conversations about the Shah's assassination .
 Palace security has been strengthened and arrests of army officers heightened tensions . Palace security had been strengthened in response to the arrests .
 The lack of immediate substantive reforms made ‘the overthrow of the monarchy likely’4> Washington redoubled its efforts to force the Shah to enact reforms .
 In December 1958, Ebtehaj, the Director of the CPO, began to argue for more economic and budgetary assistance . The Iranians had obtained the military assistance that Shah had sought for over five years, and now blamed it for Iranian budgetary problems and demanded more .
 The British analysis of the post-Baghdad-coup situation in Iran did nothing to alleviate the general alarm . The UK analysis of Iran's situation in the past has nothing to do with the current situation .
 Stevens made the interesting observation that the Shah had less in common with King Feisal II than with the hated Crown Prince, Abd-al-""[ah, the de facto Iraqi ruler .
 Abd-al‘Ilah’s lack of contact with the people of Iraq and corruption made him an unsympathetic figure, says CNN.com . ‘Abd-al-Ilah is a politician who lacks contact with people and corruption,’ says
 There is every reason why what happened in Iraq should also happen in Iran, says Iran's ambassador to Tehran . "There is no reason why this should not happen," he says .
 Iranian regime is more oppressive, less enlightened, and less efficient than its Iraqi counterpart . In practical terms, Iran is more repressive and less enlightened than its counterpart .
 If this regime does survive, it will not be due to its merits but to defects in the otganization of the opposition . The absence of any explosive force quite corresponding to Arab nationalism will be key to success, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Embassy stated that the events in Iraq had ‘palpably increased’ the danger to the Shah’s regime and encouraged more tadical opposition to his rule .
 Any competition for influence between Tehran and the new regime in Baghdad would occur in Kurdistan . It quickly became apparent that any competition between the two sides would begin with Kurdistan .
 The turmoil in Baghdad generated intensified interest in the Kurdish areas along the Iranian-Iraqi frontier . The area is located along the border with Iran .
 With an estimated 1. million Kurds in Iran, two million in Turkey, and another 800,000 in Iraq, the Kurds became a source of concern . The Kurds are estimated to have 1.5 million people in Iran .
 On the positive side, Kurdish unrest in Iraq constituted a potential lever to pressure good behavior from the Qasim government . On the negative side, Soviet support and the strong leftist influence among Kurdish groups potentially threatened Iranian territorial integrity .
 The Kurds in Iraq and Syria were far more affected by events than those in Iran . Fortunately for Washington and Tehran, the Kurds were not affected by the events .
 Despite leftist tendencies among some Kurdish groups, they generally viewed pan-Arab nationalism as a threat to Kurdish autonomy . Kurdistan is a more potent lever against Baghdad than Tehran, making it more potent .
 Eisenhower administration discouraged Tehran from attempting to use Kurdish nationalism against Baghdad . Such a policy might backfire in both Iran and Turkey, the Eisenhower administration feared .
 Iranian government sent General Timur Bakhtiar, Director of SAVAK, to Kurdistan . To counter Iraqi efforts to co-opt the Kurds, Iran has sent him to Iraq .
 The palace argued that the improvements served the dual purpose of providing tangible benefits to the local population and allowing better access to the region for Iranian security forces . The palace argues that these improvements will provide tangible benefits .
 In Iraq, Washington’s Kurdish efforts resulted in the closing of the United States Consulate in Kirkuk . The U.S. Consulate was closed by Kurdish efforts .
 Late 1958 found the Shah more dependent than ever on Western suppott, but ironically more in control of the relationship that at any previous point . A new relationship with Tehran .
 The ‘Bastille Day coup’ in Baghdad created new realities in the Shah’s relationship with the West .
 Shah had learned that utterances about withdrawing from defensive agreements and proposed trips to Moscow netted much more than quiet cooperation . Ever manipulative, the Shah learned that his words about withdrawing and visiting Moscow netted more cooperation .
 From 1958 onwards the Shah’s leverage in his relationship with the U.S. would steadily increase . Thanks to Qasim, from 1958 onwards, the Shah's leverage in the United States would steadily rise .
 Iraq irrevocably changed the nature of the AngloAmerican relationship with and over Iran . Iraq's Iraq war changed the way the U.S. relationship with Iran has evolved .
 British diplomatic efforts focused heavily on influencing Washington’s Iranian policy . As a result, British diplomats focused on influencing the U.S. policy .
 U.S. political and military support for the Pahlavi regime became the guarantor of British commercial and economic interests in Iran and the Gulf as well . The U.K. supported the regime in the 1960s .
 A symbiotic relationship developed between British policy recommendations to Washington and the Shah’s requests for economic and military aid .
 London wanted to keep the Shah happy and in power, and they wanted Washington to pay for it . London wanted the Shah to keep him happy and be power, but Washington wanted to pay .
 The British took the attitude that pushing reform in Persia was a waste of time and usually counter-productive as well . The British thought pushing reform was a wasted effort and counter productive .
 Washington would not give up pursuit of a long-term solution to Iran’s problems through reform and some form of political liberalization . The U.S. would not want to give up pursuing reform and liberalization, however .
 Eisenhower administration truly believed that it not only had to push reform, but that reform would work in the long run to stabilize Iran . Eisenhower administration believed it had an obligation to push Iran reform, and that it would work .
 London urged Washington to focus on specific policies that affected Iranian relations with the West . Washington was shaken by Iraq and fearing the same in Iran, London said .
 The shaken British believed that, just as liberalization may have played a role in the collapse in Iraq, in Iran liberalization would let the 'Djinn ... out of the bottle' and invite a Bastille Day in Tehran .
 As in Iran, the Baghdad coup altered the United States relationship with Pakistan . The U.S. changed the course of its relations with Pakistan in 1958 .
 Pakistan formed the lynchpin connecting Western defense organizations in Southeast Asia to those in the Middle East . Pakistan is now a key link between Southeast Asia and the Mideast region .
 Pakistan's adherence to a pro-Western orientation constituted a critical element in containment policy . A member of both SEATO and the Baghdad Pact, Pakistan’s adherence to the Western orientation was critical .
 U.S. intelligence sites near Peshawar provided critical data on Soviet military activities, including missile development and deployment . As in Iran, United States intelligence sites provided critical information on missile development .
 It also served as a base for U-2 flight operations over the Soviet Union . It was also used as a U.2 base for operations in the USSR .
 Eisenhower administration could not, under any circumstances, contemplate the loss of Pakistan as a member of the Western containment structure or as a physical platform for intelligence operations targeted against the Soviet Union . This reliance on Pakistan grew steadily during the 1950s .
 To a considerable degree, Pakistan’s policies vis-a-vis the United States mirrored those of Iran . Pakistan's policies with the U.S. mirrored those with Iran, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Karachi's primary bartering chip was its willingness to support Western strategic interests vis-a-vis the Soviet Union in return for military and economic aid . Karachi’s primary barter chip was support for Western interests in exchange for military aid .
 Karachi used U.S. aid to compete with nonaligned India, its real regional rival . Karachi then used United States aid to . compete with India, which is not the real rival .
 Pakistan extracted not only aid but also Western political and diplomatic support in its struggle with India over Kashmir . Using its leverage, Pakistan extracted aid and political support from the West . Pakistan's Kashmir campaign has been successful in Kashmir .
 As in Iran, so in Pakistan government officials speculated and debated the benefits and drawbacks of non-alignment or improved relations with Beijing or Moscow . In Pakistan, officials speculated about the benefits, drawbacks and benefits of the non-aligned policy .
 U.S. support for Pakistan complicated relations with India . Where Iran was a relatively isolated issue, it complicated India's relations with Pakistan .
 As the interdependency of the U.S. and Pakistan grew, Nehru became increasingly antagonistic toward both . Nehru's relationship with the United States and Pakistan increased .
 Nehru advocated non-alignment and UN membership for Beijing to goad the Eisenhower administration . Short of placing U.S. economic aid for India at risk, Nehru pushed for non-Alignment .
 During 1956 and 1957, increasing tensions between New Delhi and Karachi placed Washington in the increasingly difficult position of maintaining good relations with the world’s 94 GREATER MIDDLE EAST and the COLD WAR largest democracy on the one hand .
 Relations improved somewhat in 1956 as a result of the Suez crisis . Relations improved slightly in 1956 due to the crisis in Suez .
 Eisenhower administration sought Nehru’s assistance in attempting to settle the Suez controversy . Nehru and Eisenhower opposed Israeli, British, and French intervention in Suez .
 The administration wanted to explore futute areas of cooperation in the Middle East and Asia with Nehru . Nehru was the prime minister of India .
 Nehru was clearly concerned about the safety of the canal, given its importance as the principle trade route from India to Europe . The canal was important for India and Europe as a trade route .
 He downplayed concerns about Arab nationalists ‘responding to the whims of a Nasser’ and the need for a counterbalance like King Saud .
 Nehru argued that Nasser actually represented the lesser evil and served as a ‘brake’ on the more radical elements in the Egyptian military . Nehru: Nasser was the 'lesser evil' of the Egyptian army .
 He also proposed the idea that the U.S. should consider supporting the Egyptian ruler, with the goal of strengthening his position .
 Nehru underscored Indian concerns about the potential for a Pakistani attack using U.S. supplied weapons . Nehru raised the issue of the Baghdad Pact .
 Eisenhower attempted to find some basis for a mutually acceptable settlement of the issue . Argued that Pakistan and its stability were critical to the Western defensive posture in the Middle East .
 Nehru simply refused to discuss any solution except the status quo;> this unwillingness to entertain any compromise did not bode well for the future . Nehru’s refusal to accept any compromise bodes well for future .
 For internal political reasons, neither Pakistan nor India could afford to compromise . Pakistan and India could not compromise for internal reasons, say experts .
 Nehru: The risk of surrendering any Indian territory in a plebiscite invited demands from untold numbers of groups wanting to assert their own regional prerogatives . For Nehru, the risk was to surrender India's most populous territory to a referendum .
 The Indians interpreted the Pakistani move as a British-inspired attempt to embarrass the Indian government in retaliation for India’s support of Nasser during the Suez crisis in 1956 .
 The United States and Britain obtained a temporary compromise by sending the President of the Security Council, Gunar V Jarring, on a fact-finding mission to the region .
 Jatring had been the Swedish ambassador in New Delhi and knew Nehru well . He had been Swedish ambassador to New Delhi . Nehru was prime minister of India .
 The report called on Pakistan and India to adhere to the decisions of August 1948 and January 1949 . The report also called on the two countries to abide by the decisions .
 A ‘no war declaration’ by both governments was to be followed by a UN force in Pakistani Kashmir . The withdrawal of all but 6,000 of Azad Kashmir militia from the region was also to be made .
 Knowing that the outcome would be a Soviet veto, Washington and London delayed . London delayed. Washington and Washington delayed. London .
 India rejected calls for a plebiscite and labeled the Jarring report a pro-Pakistani document created by the British, Americans, and their allies . Pakistan made veiled threats about its relations with the US, India said .
 Pakistan agreed to delay until Jarring submitted his final report . Jarring's final report is due to be submitted by the end of the year .
 In October 1957, Jarring formally reported to the UN, stating that he had made no progress on a settlement over Kashmir because of the Indian argument that Pakistan was in violation of the ‘cease-fire’ agreement .
 Pakistani Foreign Minister Firoz Khan Noon presented the Pakistani position, and a proposed compromise resolution . Khan Noon also presented a proposal for a compromise resolution in Pakistan .
 During 1956 and 1957, the Indian central government faced an increasingly strong challenge from separatist groups, particularly in the south of the country . During the 1950s and 1960s, the government faced a growing separatist movement .
 Executive Director Phillips Talbot discussed Indian issues in a state-by-state format in a report to the American Universities Field Staff in May 1957 .
 '97 in free India’ showed just how far India and Nehru had to go . Nehru was assassinated in 1953 .
 In an article entitled Raising A Cry for Secession, he analyzed the ‘Ambitions of the Political Dravidians’ in South India .
 Talbot compared the Tamil DMK to the Muslim League of the 1930s . While noting the differences in context, Talbot said the DMK is not a Muslim League .
 The political platform, a potential political bombshell, included ‘full freedom to secede from the Indian Union’, nationalization of industry, readjustment of the five-year plans to industrialize South India, reductions in defense spending, and inclusion of all Tamil-speaking
 These help feed the fire of regionalism under our new democratic system . These are examples of how regionalism is being fed up under the democratic system, says David Cameron .
 DMK's threat from the DMK merely reinforced the determination of Congtess to resist any notion of a plebiscite on Kashmir and Jammu .
 The United States and Britain supported the Pakistani position on the plebiscite only to see it fall as predicted to Indian intransigence and the Soviet veto . Under pressure from Pakistan, the U.S. supported the Pakistan position .
 In October 1957, Suhrawardy’s government fell, in part because of the machinations of Pakistani President Iskander Mirza, a major-general, who had never been particularly happy with his policies . Pakistan and the search for stability in the country has been a
 The collapse of Suhrawardy’s government created a chaotic political situation . A multitude of political parties vied for advantage as a multitude of parties vie for advantage .
 Foreign Minister Firoz Khan Noon became Prime Minister, leading what the U.S. Embassy described as a ‘wobbly’ ruling coalition with ‘yet another political crisis’ in the wings .
 In Washington and London, a consensus existed on at least one aspect of Pakistan’s future, namely that the only real unifying factor was Pakistani fear of India . Pakistan has a long history of being ruled out of Pakistan by India .
 The split between East Pakistan, the Pashtun-Afghan areas, and West Pakistan created a significant hurdle for the government in Karachi . The split was significant for Karachi government .
 London worried that all the historical good will between Pakistan and Britain was potentially at risk due to instability and a lack of progress on Kashmir . London also worried that instability could potentially put the peace between the UK and Pakistan .
 In April 1958, the CRO official in Karachi, Sir Alexander Symon, stated that the perceived lack of clear-cut Anglo-American support for Pakistani with regard to Kashmir undermined relations with the U.S.
 He worried that faltering economic development would combine with estrangement from the Muslim world and further aggravate these problems . He worried economic development and estrangment from Muslim world would aggravate the problems .
 This rejection of UN efforts led directly to the personal involvement of President Eisenhower . Eisenhower personally rejected the UN efforts .
 On 17 April, Dulles sent a memorandum to Eisenhower suggesting that the U.S. attempt to facilitate a solution to the problem of Kashmir .
 The Secretary of State recognized that friction between Pakistan and India over Kashmir undermined the United States and opened the door for Soviet advances . The secretary of state said friction between India and Pakistan undermined the U.S.
 If the new approach were unsuccessful, the government would offer its good offices to assist them to reach agreement on all three questions . In this we would, in sttict secrecy and without prejudice to our present position, offer our good offices .
 Eisenhower believed that a solution to Kashmir would put U.S. relations with India and Pakistan on a sound footing . The solution would bring a focus to economic development, maintain Pakistan in the Western defense alliances, and preserve United States intelligence bases .
 Eisenhower wrote to Nehru in 1958, proposing that the U.S. send a ‘special representative’ to facilitate talks on Kashmir . On 14 May 1958, Eisenhower wrote .
 The President argued that perhaps the United States might be well-placed to provide ‘good offices’ because of its extensive aid and its good relations with both New Delhi and Karachi . The President said perhaps perhaps the U.S. might be best-placed .
 He stated that while he had problems with certain aspects of the proposal, it was interesting . He said he would discuss it with his cabinet .
 Bunker believed the Indians saw that the ‘negotiations would be a long-range operation’ and wanted to wait for the outcome of the Pakistani elections . Bunker believed that the Indians . saw that . ‘Negotiations . would be long-ranging operation,’
 As early as May 1958, General Mirza indicated to U.S. Ambassador Langley that the military were discussing a takeover to deal with the political instability . The takeover was planned for the country's political instability in 1958 .
 The generals wanted to suspend parliamentary elections scheduled for the fall . The elections are scheduled to be held in the fall. The generals want to suspend the elections .
 Langley informed the generals that such a step should only be taken as a last resort, but that ultimately it was a Pakistani decision . Officially, Langley told the generals such a move would only be a last-resort .
 Pakistani newspapers routinely published the list of visitors . Langley’s visits were drawing attention .
 Langley's access also became a conduit for Pakistani politicians to deliver messages to Mirza . Langley’s access to Pakistani politicians was also used as a conduit .
 In May 1958, the United States Consul in Dacca, the capital of East Pakistan, commented that Mirza had created a stir with talk of postponing the elections and cautioned strongly against supporting a coup . The U.S. Consul said Mirza 'created a stir'
 The fear of Communist gains in staunchly Muslim Pakistan seemed overblown, but the fear of a weak government opting for some form of non-aligned neutrality was a serious possibility . Pakistan is a member of the Taliban, but it has never been ruled out of Pakistan .
 Washington concluded that Pakistan needed at least temporary political stability as a basis for economic development, the key to long-term stability . The U.S. concluded that the political stability of Pakistan needed to be a key to economic development .
 The internal political situation, coupled with the Kashmir dispute, undermined both. The Kashmir dispute is a key issue in the Kashmir region, according to the report .
 There was also talk that the Karachi government might negotiate with the Soviet Union for economic assistance in the form of a steel mill . Karachi government may negotiate with Soviet Union to get economic assistance from the USSR .
 Soviet economic aid combined with the collapse of Iraq might undermine the commitment of the Pakistani government to the Western defense alliances and thus threaten containment . This combination of events created enormous alarm on the Potomac .
 The inability of the Pakistani political parties to act responsibly and work together to alleviate the economic crisis and political chaos heightened concerns in Washington . Pakistan's political parties have been unable to work together in Pakistan .
 Pakistani elections loomed as a source of even gteatet political instability . Rather than increasing stability, the elections loom as a potential source of instability . Pakistan's political instability has been a problem for years .
 Eisenhower and his advisors concluded that the benefits of a stable, pro-Western Pakistan took precedence over other considerations, including political democracy . The benefits of the pro-West Pakistan were paramount, Eisenhower said .
 In early October, President Mirza informed Ambassador Langley that the Pakistani military had decided to take over the government . The Pakistani military has taken control of the government, the ambassador says .
 Mirza wanted Langley to give him an idea of the United States reaction . Mirza: "I want to know what the U.S. reaction will be"
 Washington instructed Langley to tell Mirza that countries had the right to determine their own form of government based on what was best for the welfare of its peoples .
 In early October 1958, Mirza and the Army Chief of Staff, General Muhammad Ayub Khan, took over the government and canceled patliamentary elections . Mirza's government canceled the elections in October 1958 .
 An audible sigh of relief was heard in Washington following the Mirza-Ayub 7 October takeover of the White House .
 The lack of violence, the few arrests, and the crack-down on corruption boded well for the military regime . The military regime has been criticized for its crackdown on corruption .
 Eisenhower faced a dilemma between supporting a military dictatorship under General Ayub and support for democracy and representative government . The apparent contradiction created a real dilemma for the Eisenhower administration .
 No one in Washington wanted to take a chance with Pakistani instability . Viewed in the context of Iraq, no one in D.C. wanted to risk taking a chance .
 The State Department and the White House had hoped for a better option . Still, officials at the State Department said they were disappointed with the decision .
 In essence, security issues had dictated a compromise of fundamental principles . Security issues dictated a compromised compromise of principles, the author says .
 When the takeover took place so soon after the Iraq and Burmese ‘incidents’, I was very dispirited. When it happened so soon as Iraq and Myanmar 'incidents', I thought it was too soon to take over .
 It seemed to me that the takeover meant that in one more country, and a country which was a good friend of the United States, the light of the democratic ideal had been snuffed out . The takeover means that in . one more . country, . and a . country which .
 "Because of the larger issue of national freedom versus Kremlin hegemony, we were not in any position to protest. What made it worse, in my personal opinion, was that because of the . larger issue, I said, was because of . national freedom vs. Kremlin hegemony .
 India viewed the Communist threat to Pakistani as a ‘hoax’ to acquite arms for its confrontation with India . New Delhi saw U.S. support for a military dictatorship as the height of hypocrisy .
 Ambassador Bunker questioned the efficacy of new aid to the Pakistani regime shortly after Mirza and Ayub overthrew the parliamentary system . In New Delhi, Ambassador Bunker questions the effectiveness of the new aid .
 Bunker feared that support for Ayub’s dictatorship might strengthen the hand of Communists and leftists who were arguing for a nondemocratic solution . Bunker also feared that supporting Ayub's dictatorship might help the Communists and lefties argue for an authoritarian solution .
 Indians viewed U.S. support of a military dictatorship as a continuing trend to preserve authoritarian regimes that supported containment . The Indians viewed the United States support as continuing trend of authoritarian regimes .
 The embrace of Ayub and military rule in Pakistan increased Indian disappointment that improved US-Indian relations lacked a higher priority . U.S.-Pakistan relations have not been improved in recent years .
 This competition had existed from the moment India and Pakistan emerged as independent nations . This competition has existed since the moment the two countries became independent countries .
 Cold War imperatives and Indian insistence on non-alignment forced trade-offs . Eisenhower administration viewed as its immediate security interests and its long-term goal of economic development .
 In New Delhi, Ambassador Bunker stressed accommodation and economic development, the cornerstone of democratic development, a view shared by both Eisenhower and Dulles .
 Massive military aid to countries with a weak economic base is not in the long run a genuinely effective course of action, even from a military point of view . Massive aid to weaker countries with weak economic bases is not effective, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The tone of the exchanges between the Indian and U.S. governments was that of political equals . India and the United States were seen as political equals in India .
 Nehru believed the U.S. misread the events in Iraq and Lebanon, and reacted in a manner that threatened the gains made by Washington since the Suez crisis of 1956 . Nehru made it clear that he believed the United States misread events .
 Nehru disagreed with U.S. actions in Lebanon and evaluation of Nasser and Iraq . Nehru saw no linkage between coup in Iraq and any necessity to arm or support a Pakastani military dictatorship .
 Many question the U.S. judgment, but they have not questioned its motives or principles, she says . "One of the strengths of the United States throughout the world and also here in India," she said .
 Eisenhowet viewed support for the military government in Pakistan as an expediency necessitated by containment . He said support for Pakistan's military government was necessary to maintain containment .
 The administration pursued its preferred long-term strategy for stability, namely economic development and support for political democracy as a bulwark against Communism . As for India, the administration pursued their preferred long term strategy, which included economic development .
 There were debates in Washington over the amount of aid and financial policies for India . But the focus remained on economic development .
 This contrasts sharply with the situation in Pakistan, highlighting the contradiction between support for economic development through democratic means in India and that for the expediency of stability through military rule in Pakistan . India's support for democratic means is in stark contrast to that of Pakistan's military rule .
 Pakistan’s ‘Byzantine’ political milieu threatened vital U.S. interests . Therefore, the pragmatic requirement for pro-Western stability took precedence . The pragmatic requirement of pro-western stability took priority .
 If it required ‘temporary’ military rule to deliver these preconditions for success, then so be it, it would be OK . If it needed temporary military rule, it will be 'temporary' military rule .
 1959 marked the beginning of a significant shift in emphasis for U.S. foreign policy in the Greater Middle East . Revising Containment, 1959-1960 was a major shift in the United States foreign policy .
 Eisenhower administration moved toward more pragmatic policies driven by situational requirements . Eisenhower administration was more pragmatic than the Eisenhower administration .
 The goal was still containment, aimed at undermining Soviet influence and the potential for Communist gains in the region .
 United States policy continued to utilize military assistance, economic aid, and support for controlled reform, but the application became significantly more sophisticated .
 The change reflected the Eisenhower administration’s improved apprehension of the regional situation . The change was made in 1953 .
 The Baghdad coup also served to simplify, and focus Washington on, its pragmatic interests in the region . The coup was also meant to focus Washington .
 Eisenhower and his advisors were far more willing to provide military and security assistance than they had been prior to July 1958 . To prevent a repetition of the Iraq disaster, Eisenhower was more willing .
 Security aid has now become a prerequisite for economic development and reform in the country . Security aid is now a prerequisite to economic development, the government says .
 At the same time, Washington had become mote cautious in advocating reform .
 John Foster Dulles, the implementer of and lightning rod for Eisenhower’s foreign policy, was increasingly incapacitated by cancer and would die by early spring . Dulles was a lightning rod to Eisenhower's foreign policy .
 With Dulles’ passing, Eisenhower decided to enter the Cold War fray with his own brand of personal diplomacy . Eisenhower decided not to rely on Dulles' advice .
 In addition, the picture in the Middle East had altered radically for the British . In addition to the situation in the Mideast, the situation had also changed radically .
 With pretensions of imperial prerogatives now gone, the British, girding to defend what was left of their influence and economic interests in the region, played second fiddle .
 On the fringes of the Middle East, increasing competition and conflict between China and India placed Nehru on the diplomatic and ideological defensive . Nehru was placed on the ideological and diplomatic defensive .
 The emergence of an alternate center for Arab revolutionaty agitation in Baghdad, backed by Iraqi Communists, renewed the old courtship between Washington .
 Nasset’s attempts to teassert his authority as a revolutionary leader created strains between the UAR and much of the Arab world . At the same time, Nasset's attempts to . teassert . authority created strains . between the United Arab Republic and Arab world. Nasset
 Washington no longer feared monolithic Nasserism because it had encountered something worse — Communist-backed Iraq . Washington had encountered a worse situation when it encountered a Communist backed Iraq .
 For Nasser, Qasim’s dependence on the Communists created a different sort of ageravation . Nasser's dependence on Communists created an even more difficult task for him .
 Communist support allowed Qasim to curb pro-Nasserist and pro-Ba’thist elements . The Communist Party effectively rejected Nasser’s leadership .
 Washington and Caito now have a common problem, which overshadowed their chronic conflicts . In a nutshell, Washington and C.C. now had a common issue, Washington says .
 The negative reverberations of Washington’s anti-Iraqi, anti-Communist, and pro-Nasser stance were particularly strong in London and New Delhi, writes CNN.com .
 British government put unpleasantness of July 1958 behind it and came to a working agreement with Qasim government . Lubricated by Iraqi oil, the British government, with some alacrity, put the unpleasantness behind it .
 Qdasim’s Communist connection, although problematic, was secondary to securing the future of British oil interests in Iraq . ‘The Communist connection’ was not a deal breaker, but a deal was made to secure British interests .
 Growing hostility from Cairo, with the appearance of American backing, threatened the British arrangement . In this regard, the U.S. had become a liability, as the United States .
 The British viewed strengthening ties between Washington and Cairo as the latest round in the Eisenhower administration’s aggravating infatuation with Nasser . The British, with some justification, viewed strengthened ties between U.S. and Cairo .
 What the British viewed as a misbegotten relationship again reared its ugly head and threatened important interests in the region . Just as in 1954 and 1956, what the British looked at was again rearing its ugly heads .
 The British argued vehemently that Qasim was not a Communist and that pro-Nasserist and pro-Ba’thist pressure metely increased his reliance on CPI support .
 The Americans appear willing to accept the collapse of pro-Western Arab regimes with ones headed by more radical nationalists or by Nasserists . The U.S. appears to accept that the collapse is inevitable .
 The survival of the Pahlavi regime in Iran was critical to U.S. interests in the region . The Hashemite collapse in Baghdad made the survival of Iran critical to the Shah's regime critical to United States interests .
 Tehran demands from Tehran escalated, accompanied by the Shah’s comments about the benefits of neutrality . The demands from the Shah were met with the Shah's comments that he should not be allowed to be neutral .
 The administration’s push for reform continued, but placating the Shah and enlisting his support became the priority . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran .
 The size of the military assistance group in Tehran increased dramatically, as did the U.S. support for internal Iranian security organs . The United States also increased the size of its military assistance groups in Tehran .
 Eisenhower administration urged the Shah to give up direct rule . At the same time, the Eisenhower administration hoped to broaden his support .
 Washington continued to view the government in Tehran as critically unstable, and began a systematic program to shore up it up . Washington continued its view of Iran as a critically unstable government .
 To the British, Iran was simply Iran; any change in government in Tehran would be detrimental to Western interests . The British believed that any change to the government in Iran would be beneficial to the West . Iran is simply Iran .
 The British consistently warned Washington that attempts to tinker with reforming the Iranian system had the potential to bring about its collapse .
 The U.S. had to maintain its intelligence facilities at Peshawar .
 Pakistan, with its new military government under General Ayub Khan, had to be courted, even at the expense of relations with India . Thus, Pakistan had to have courted by the new government, even though it was a military government .
 The administration proposed to offer additional economic aid to encoutage an ‘inward focus’ away from the rivalry with Pakistan . To deal with the aggravation that was sure to follow in New Delhi .
 Washington worked with India in policy areas on which they agreed, but anticipated areas of sharp disagreement and minimal Indian support for U.S. diplomatic initiatives . Washington and India agreed on some areas of policy areas, but did not expect sharp disagreement .
 This period constitutes one of the most important and least examined periods of the history of the Arab Middle East . The Arab Mideast period is considered to be the most significant period of history .
 The United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union found their regional interests and strategic goals subordinated and often frustrated by the parochial interests of political leaders and states in the region . The U.S. and Britain, as well as Russia, often found their strategic goals and strategic
 The more their policies take regional issues into account, the greater their potential for some success . They also discovered that the more they took regional issues in account, they also found success possible .
 Eisenhower administration displayed a great deal of flexibility in adjusting containment policy to this reality . During this period, the Eisenhower administration showed a lot of flexibility . The Eisenhower administration was able to adjust containment policy .
 In terms of proWestern allied states, containment policy continued to focus on military assistance, economic aid, and reform . But in dealing with non-aligned and at times hostile neutrals, it added a new dimension .
 U.S. policy took an increasingly pragmatic view of the regional political situation and then calibrated how to employ aid or pressure to moderate anti-Western policies . United States policy took increasingly pragmatic views of the region's political situation .
 Eisenhower and his advisors learned that small amounts of economic aid, coupled with United States political support for Cairo in the Arab Cold War, netted more for U.S. containment strategy and influence in Cairo than all the threats and boycotts the past .
 Nasser could not be bought, but he could be temporarily leased or enlisted for tactical political gain . Nasser was not bought by the U.S. but could be used as a political pawn .
 It was not a strategic solution to U.S. problems in the region, but it was far superior to what had transpired between 1955 and 1958 . It was a far superior solution to the problems of the 1950s and 1960s .
 In late 1958, Nasser’s stature in the Greater Middle East and the non108 GREER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR . Nasser and the revolution in Iraq .
 Aref would be in prison, senternced to death for plotting with Nasser against Qasim . Within months, Aref was already in prison .
 Aref led the February 1963 coup against Qasim, who was captured, tried and executed within the first 48 hours . Ironically, his sentence was commuted, Aref would lead the coup . The emergence of an alternate revolutionary power center in Iraq forced a policy .
 Initially, Nasser worked cautiously and patiently to maintain the facade of Arab unity and civility . The Qasim regime adjusted to its new responsibilities .
 Nasset’s patience stemmed at least in part from the confidence generated by his phenomenal run of political good fortune . Nasset: ‘I’m confident that I’ll be able to get back on track in the next few years .
 Nasser had jumped to the same conclusion as everyone else, namely that the strong pto-Nasserist elements in the Qasim regime and broad support for Nasser in Iraq would translate into an alliance, or perhaps union .
 Qasim’s intentions were unclear but nevertheless, the Egyptian leader, his advisors, and his Syrian allies believed that he would ultimately embrace the Nasserist formula or succumb to those who did .
 It reflected what would turn out to be a misplaced confidence that the ultimate outcome was a foregone conclusion, it reflected .
 Nasser believed that he could afford to wait, and thus focused on his more immediate concern with Lebanon . Nasser: "I'm not going to wait. I'm going to go to Lebanon"
 Qasim claimed that his security forces had uncovered a conspiracy against the revolutionary government instigated by Rashid Ali al-Gaylani . The government was overthrown in 2009 . Qasam claimed that the government had been overthrown by the government .
 Gaylani was the former Iraqi colonel who had led the 1941 coup against the monarchy and British . He was a former colonel who led the coup against Iraq's monarchy and Britain .
 Pro-Nasserist Abd-al-Salaam Aref had been shipped off to Bonn as Iraqi Ambassador because of his Nasserist leanings . Aref returned to Baghdad without permission .
 He was summarily thrown into prison, and after a brief trial received a death sentence as well . He was sentenced to the death sentence after a trial .
 Nasser began to have second thoughts about his theory that patience with Qasim would pay off . Nasser had second thoughts of his theory of patience with Nasser . He began to think about his strategy .
 Qasim clearly had his own ideas about the future of Iraq . The discipline and organizational skills of his Communist allies now appeared to be a real threat to Nasset’s brand of Arab unity .
 Nasset: The United States Embassy shared Nasset’s concern about Communist discipline . Nasset says the U.S. Embassy is concerned about the Communist Party's discipline . The embassy says the United States is concerned that Communist discipline is being punished .
 Communist Arabs cannot be fit into the molds, which have become the clichés to describe Arabs . Communist Arabs can't fit into molds that have become clichés, they say . The Arab Spring has been the most successful Arab Spring movement in the world .
 "They are not lazy, are not lacking in ability to cooperate, coordinate, and they obviously are willing to follow directions," says CNN.com's chief executive .
 Their performance in action on an increasing number of newsworthy occasions is timely, doctrinaire and impressive . Their performance has been on the rise in recent years .
 Public attention is drawn to their rallies, parades, speeches and petitions whenever they occur . Public attention has been drawn to the rallies and parades .
 In Washington, officials became increasingly convinced that Qasim, in order to maintain power, had grown too reliant on the Iraqi Communists . The Iraqi Communist Party was now unable to control them .
 The Communists became the focus of Egyptian ire and Western concern for two somewhat different reasons . The Communists were the subject of much of Egypt's ire and concern for Western concerns .
 Nasser’s hostility stemmed from the fact that ICP support for Qasim allowed him to pursue a course independent of the UAR, and encouraged Communist and anti-UAR elements in Syria, he says .
 Cairo clash between Cairo and Baghdad produced another festering issue as well . This clash between the two cities produced another issue as also .
 Nasser’s neutralism and relations with the Soviet Union had made Egypt the center of diplomatic and non-aligned activity in Africa and the Arab Mideast . Nasser's neutralism made Egypt a center of diplomacy in the Middle East .
 All roads in the Arab and non-aligned world seemed to wind their way through Cairo . Cairo is a major hub for the Arab world .
 The situation between Nasser and Qasim complicated UAR relations with Moscow . Be that as it may, the situation between the two countries has complicated relations with Russia .
 Qasim's refusal to come to terms with Nasser threatened Cairo’s newfound political and diplomatic prominence, and potentially undermined his position with his Soviet benefactors . The refusal to accept Nasser's legitimacy threatened Cairo's newfound political prominence .
 Kremlin believed that a large, unified Arab and largely Muslim super-state in the Middle East might excite similar aspirations among the Soviet Union's Muslim minorities . The Kremlin hoped that a unified Arab super-State in the Mideast would excite its Muslim minority .
 Qasim relied on the ICP for his grip on power, and had close ties with Moscow . The ICP had ties with Russia, and Qasem relied on it for his power .
 The situation translated into more potential influence in Baghdad than in Cairo . For the Russians, this situation translates into more power in Baghdad .
 Nasser and Qasim were involved in an open conflict with the Soviet Union . On 23 December 1958, the Egyptian president and prime minister of Egypt was assassinated in Cairo .
 Nasser charged that the Syrian Communists had ‘rejected Arab nationalism and Arab unity’ and ‘called for separation’ of Syria from Egypt . In a speech at Port Said, Nasser said that the Communists had rejected Arab nationalism .
 Nasser also pointed out that the Arabs had resisted not only the crusaders from the West, but also the “Tartars’ from the East — a comparison not lost on the Soviets . Nasser: Arab resistance was resisted by both crusaders and the "Tart
 "We do not want this to be the cause of a quarrel with the Soviet Union," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to have a problem with Soviet Union"
 Muhammad Husayn Heikal launched a broadside in ALAhbram the next day . For added emphasis, he also launched an attack in the same day .
 Qasim had oil, and an economic alliance with his old enemy, the British . He had the support of the ICP and increasingly of the Soviet Union .
 Qasim was positioned to threaten Caito's Syrian adventure with Moscow’s apparent blessing . He was positioned as a threat to the Syrian regime, which is now in Syria .
 Those evil agents on the Potomac were increasingly pleased with the developments . They were growing increasingly confident with the progress of the project .
 In retaliation for UAR propaganda attacks, Qasim encouraged anti-Nasser agitation in Syria . The UAR had attacked Nasser's regime in retaliation for the attacks .
 He provided moral and material support to the Syrian Communists and fanned anti-UAR sentiment . He also provided moral support for the Syrian Communist Party .
 Baghdad calls for Syria to sever its ties with Cairo and enter into a union with Iraq . Baghdad called for Syria's ties with Egypt to sever ties with Syria and join Iraq .
 This agitation took advantage of rising discontent in Syria over Egyptian domination of the UAR governing apparatus . This agitation was taken advantage of the rising discontent with the Egyptian government .
 Dissatisfied Syrian groups became more than receptive to anti-Egyptian machinations . Dissatisfies Syrian groups were more receptive to the Egyptian government's intervention .
 The Ba’thists were disappointed in Nasser’s refusal to adopt their Arab socialist principles . They had a final falling-out with the Egyptian leader, and were eliminated from power . The Ba'thists are now in charge of the Egyptian government .
 He failed to understand that a strong, stubborn middle class, tied to every facet of Syrian life, including the military, existed in Syria . The Syrian military is fighting a civil war that began in 2011 .
 Sarraj, undoubtedly with Nasser's strategic if not tactical approval, set about planning the overthrow of Qasim’s regime . Nasser was undoubtedly behind the planning of the overthrow, but not necessarily in agreement .
 He recruited pro-Nasserist and pro-Ba’thist elements within the Iraqi military and government . The former Nasserist prime minister recruited elements of the Iraqi government and military .
 Sarraj had clearance from Nasser for a destabilization campaign against Qasim, says Nasser .
 Qasim spent February and March removing nationalist and pro-Nasserist ministers and officers from the government and army . Fearing just such a coup, he removed them from government, army and government .
 Communists called for a rally in Mosul, which sparked the premature revolt . Fighting broke out between Communists and local nationalists on 7 Match.
 On 8 Match, prominent leftists and proQasim elements in Mosul were arrested, and the coup was underway . The coup was launched on 8 Match . Pro-Qasims elements were arrested and pro-government elements were detained .
 Sartaj had supplied the Mosul coup leadership with material support, but also with Syrian and UAR manpower . SARTaj had also supplied the coup leadership, headed by Iraqi Colonel Abd-al-Wahhab al-Shawwaf .
 The Iraqi plotters had radio equipment that still bore their Syrian markings . Some of the infiltrators wore their Syrian uniforms .
 Communist organizations in Baghdad published a list of eight demands following the failed coup . The list includes demands for the government to step down from power .
 Those who proclaim pan-Arabism and raise Abdel Nasser to the rank of prophet have been exposed . The former president of Egypt has been accused of being a 'prophet' for pan Arabism .
 The Iraqis assert that they want to maintain ‘the most friendly relations’ with the members of the Pact, but without participation . The Iraqis asserted that they wanted to maintain 'most friendly relations' with the other members .
 Nasser launched a violent campaign in the UAR press against Qasim and redoubled his efforts to overthrow the Itaqi leader . Privately held Sarraj responsible for the failed coup .
 Egyptian leader also saw the hand of the British at work in Baghdad . The Egyptian leader visited the Iraqi capital for the first time .
 By attacking Qasim for his Communist support and the Russians for providing it, Nasser put the British in the position of having to maintain its position in Iraq with the IPC without conflict with the anti-Communist positions of the United States .
 Cairo partially succeeded in portraying the British as lukewarm anti-Communists . Cairo succeeded in . portraying the . British as . luke warm anti-communists. Cairo .
 London continued to supply the Iraqi army with weaponry and support . London even continued to send weapons and support to Iraq .
 He lashed out at Communists and then at the enemies of Arab unity, while simultaneously seeking more support from the United States . In response, he lashed out first at Communists, then at enemies of unity .
 Intelligence reports about growing Communist influence in the Soviet Union . This was dtiven to a large degree by the steady flow of intelligence reports about the growing influence .
 Some government circles, including those around Vice-President Richard Nixon, were openly discussing and advocating either overt or covert military intervention . Richard Nixon was President Nixon's first president .
 Report casts doubt on Qasim himself being a Communist, but offers bleak picture of continued Communist successes . Report cast doubt on his Communist status, but offered a bleak picture .
 The security services and Ministry of the Interior had remained in the hands of non-Communists . It noted that, fortunately, the security services had remained .
 Iraq would ‘come under pteponderantly Communist control,’ Washington searched for a stopgap solution . Iraq would be under ‘peponderant Communist control’
 William Lakeland, the same petson who had served as liaison between Nasser and the British in 1954, had become the head of the Iraqi desk at the State Department . Lakeland had been a liaison between the British and Nasser .
 Lakeland had had a close relationship with Nasser and Heikal the early 1950s . Lakeland strongly believed Nasser to be far preferable to Qasim . Nasser was a strong supporter of Nasser .
 He was receptive to policy based on fears of a Communist takeover in Iraq . As a result, he was receptive and supportive of policy . He was also supportive of policies based on fear of a communist takeover of Iraq .
 Eisenhower grumbled at one point that making a choice between Qasim and Nasser was like a ‘choice between Al Capone and John Dillinger’ The consistent reports supporting the position that a Communist takeover was likely sprang, at least in part, from three other issues that
 The failure to predict the Iraqi coup in July 1958 created an impetus at the CIA not to be wrong again . The CIA was criticised for not predicting the coup in Iraq in 1958 .
 To report that a Communist coup was possible or even probable and have it not occur was fat more acceptable than to report the opposite and then witness a Communist takeover . To report a possible or probable coup was reported but not seen as likely as the opposite, then saw a takeover .
 There was a very high degree of interest in the Iraq situation among policy-makers . Also there was very high interest in Iraq's situation, says CNN's John Defterios .
 This translated into a desire for as much information as possible on the situation there . This translated as a desire to know more about the situation in Syria .
 John Foster Dulles’ illness and the personal and professional effect that this had on his brother, CIA Director Allen Dulles, is difficult to assess .
 In early 1959, his brother Foster was dying of cancer and would resign his position as Secretary of State . Foster would resign from his position in early 1959 as he was dying .
 Allen Dulles faced the professional uncertainty of a world without Foster as Eisenhower’s ptincipal foreign policy advisor . Foster was the aide to Eisenhower . Foster died in 1953 at age 50 .
 Reporting on Iraq that emphasized the threat of a Communist takeover served two purposes . Report on Iraq served two purpose: to warn of a possible Communist takeover .
 President Nixon was a useful ally for those within the administration, particularly Vice-President Nixon, who advocated a more aggressive response to the Iraqi situation .
 The message that key administration officials wanted to hear also offered political protection to the Director. In short, the message was that the Director was protected .
 An experienced President would choose the ultimate course of action . Fortunately, President Obama would choose his own way of thinking .
 Washington initially believed that London shared a similar concern about the situation . Initially Washington believed that the U.S. shared a concern about Syria .
 In reality, the British were more concerned about UAR actions undermining the British IPC or the interruption of Iraqi oil flowing through UAR-controlled pipelines . The British were concerned about the UAR's influence in Iraq .
 U.S. mutterings about intervention in Iraq made London very nervous . London was very nervous about intervention by the United States .
 On 22 March 1959, Macmillan and Eisenhower met and discussed the Iraqi situation . The two leaders discussed the situation in Iraq .
 Eisenhower pushed for the formation of a joint workine-group to study contingencies for Iraq in the event of a civil war or a Communist takeover . The group was formed in response to the threat posed by the Communist Party .
 London welcomed the working-group because it provided a window on U.S. plans and an opportunity to influence United States policy . London actually welcomed the group because of its chance to influence the United States .
 Wasington would then decide whether or not to try to dissuade them .
 So long as Qasim remains in power and continues to give evidence of his intention to maintain the independence of Iraq we should not countenance, still less encourage, any designs against him from any quatter . We should 'not countenance' any plans against him, says Qas
 Eisenhower administration had not categorically endorsed non116 GREATER MIDDLE EAST AND THE COLD WAR . Meeting of British and Americans over Middle East was held in February 1959 .
 The cabinet recommended that the British and U.S. ‘clandestine services’ develop ‘contingency plans’ in the event of a civil war .
 The paper directed that Israel, Iran, Turkey, and Jordan be warned not to act against Iraq or the UAR without consulting the U.S. and Britain .
 The British warned Washington that the ‘Iraqi charge that Nasser acting as cat’s-paw for imperialist’ had gained wide acceptance in the Arab world .
 Selwyn Lloyd had already met with the Acting Secretary of State Christian A Herter at the British Embassy in Washington . Lloyd requested U.S. pressure on Nasser to restrain his current attacks on Qasim .
 Herter demurred, stating that Nasser might misinterpret such action as siding with Qasim, thus undermining the UAR’s current antiCommunist campaign . Herter says Nasser may misinterpret such a move .
 We think it would be serious error if UAR cut oil pipelines at this time, says UAR . UAR says it is serious error to cut pipelines in this time of year .
 Step would immeasurably exacerbate UAR/Itaq feud and would strengthen rather than weaken Qassim regime, says Qassam regime . Step would  exacerbate tensions between UAR and Itaq regime, he says . Qassan regime would be strengthened rather than weakened
 Iraq would no doubt demand large loan from IPC to tide it over fiscal emergency, under threat of nationalization . IPC loan would be needed to tide Iraq over fiscal crisis . Iraq would also need to be able to keep control of the country's finances under control .
 Jernegan was getting a reputation for being too much under British influence . He was being criticised for being 'too much' British influence in his career .
 Awate that his recommendations might not sit well, he apologized that his 'cogitation' resulted in a ‘generally negative reaction’ to Washington’s queries about what proactive action could be taken .
 Jernegan acknowledged London’s ‘deep aversion to Nasser’ and tried to distance himself from their views by commenting that the British ‘declare somewhat greater confidence’ in Qasim than was warranted, he said .
 The policy statement concluded that the U.S. should coordinate closely with the British and jointly examine the steps that might be required, if military intervention became unavoidable .
 Nixon believed the State Department position was too passive and that Iraq could not be allowed to go Communist . Nixon believed that the State Dept. position was . too passive .
 Nixon wanted a “Mossadegh type operation’ to overthrow Qasim and put pro-Western military officers in power . Nixon wanted “a Mossadegh-type operation” to overthrow ‘Qasim’s regime .
 The failure of the Mosul coup and resulting Communist gains had markedly increased fears of a Communist takeover . Failure of Mosul coup increased fears that the Communist takeover was imminent .
 He questioned Assistant Secretary Rountree at length on the State Department suggestion that the U.S. wait and see what would happen in Iraq before taking any aggressive action in that country .
 The revulsion against any government set up under aegis would be so gteat that it would probably be swept away . The government would be replaced by a Communist government in all likelihood .
 U.S. principles would be violated by what would be unprovoked United States aggression . The United States would inevitably portray us as being worse aggressors than the Communists . The U.N. cannot advocate this course, apart from long standing United States principles .
 The 1960 election was only 16 months away and he was trying to build his image as a substantive decision maker in the administration . The 1960s were 16 months before the 1960 election .
 John Foster Dulles was terminally ill with cancer and had just resigned . Eisenhower was in Georgia playing golf when Dulles died .
 Nixon was making a play for a bigger role in the administration by pushing an ageressive policy . Nixon was pushing for a larger role in his administration .
 Nixon also made it clear that he believed the traditional foreign-policy apparatus would never recommend military or covert action, no matter how grave the situation was . Nixon also said he believed that traditional foreign policy would not recommend military action .
 He made it clear he wanted to see more aggressive options, both covert and overt, to potentially deal with the problem in Baghdad . As a result, he made it plain to those present that he wanted more aggressive .
 Nixon’s effort to assert himself notwithstanding, the majority of those present at the meeting would only agree that plans might be necessary but that the situation required no immediate action . The majority of the meeting agreed that plans were necessary but not immediate action was necessary .
 Eisenhower sided with Rountree’s assessment that intervention would undermine other U.S. relationships in the region . Eisenhower reasoned that when United States forces departed the government it had put in place would be shortlived .
 Nasser responded with a predictable request for more aid to enable his program to continue . Nasser has asked for more money to continue his program .
 London pursued an accommodation with Qasim, lubricated by the flow of Iraqi oil . While the U.S. and UAR attempted to undermine the UAR, London sought an accommodation .
 London took the position that ‘Iraq will preserve an attitude of independence and neutrality’ The UK offered to continue arms shipments to Baghdad .
 London explained arms for Qasim and the army made both less dependent on the Communists and Soviet sponsors . London explained that arms for the Qasims made them less dependent upon the Communists . London said arms were made to make them less reliant on the Communist Party .
 Qasim may be pushing himself over the communist brink . It might indeed have the effect of just pushing him over the brink .
 Ambassador also pressed London for assistance in reducing the level of UAR attacks on Qasim by having a third party, perhaps Tito, go to Nasser with the suggestion .
 The British were convinced that the UAR attacks coupled with internal agitation was in fact dangerously increasing the leverage of the Communists over the regime . The British believed the attacks and internal agitation increased the leverage .
 This obsession with improving US-Iraqi relations constituted an on-going project for the British in Baghdad . The British obsession with Iraq-U.S. relations was an ongoing effort to improve relations between the two countries .
 The Eisenhower administration and Qasim regime lacked ‘practical issues to deal with’ together, Sir Humphrey seized upon dates . Decided that the Eisenhower . administration and . Qasims regime lacked 'practical . issues, he said .
 Failed coup in Mosul reignited UAR-Soviet disagreements . Failed coup reignited disagreements between the two countries .
 Nasser continued his attack on the threat that Communism presented to Arab unity . Nasser reopens the row with the Soviet Union, reopening the row .
 On 15 March 1959, from Damascus, Nasser delivered a speech accusing Qasim of handing Iraq over to Communists . Nasser was accused of handing over Iraq to the Communist Party .
 Allusion to the ‘subservience’ of Qasim to the Communists in Iraq got a quick reaction from Moscow . Moscow responded with a quick response .
 Khrushchev stated that the Soviet Union would not be ‘indifferent’ to the ‘situation emerging’ in Iraq . He chided Nasser for having put his personal view of Arab unity and the interests of the UAR above those of the people .
 Nasser also accused the Communists in Iraq of allying themselves with British agents . Nasser said the Communists had allied themselves with the British .
 "They are like wounded wolves out for revenge against me for having taken Suez away from them," says former president of Egypt .
 British want to continue flow of their petroleum company in Iraq and influence Kassem in favor of their vested interests . Additionally, British want the flow of its petroleum company into the country .
 Nasser’s emphasis may have been slightly off, but he certainly grasped the basics of Russian and British policy . Nasser's emphasis may be slightly off but he has grasped basics of British and Russian policy .
 Moscow pressured its erstwhile client in Cairo to cease and desist from its attacks on the Qasim regime . The spring of 1959 found London attempting to convince Washington to do the same thing .
 Nixon was on the mark when he commented that the British seemed to prefer working with Iraqi Communists to dealing with Nasser . Nixon was correct when he said the British preferred to work with the Iraqi Communists .
 Nasser understood the Eisenhower administration’s fixation on Communism . Nasser understands Eisenhower administration's fixation with Communism .
 The UAR position on Iraq, Communism, and, at that moment, complemented U.S. containment policy . UAR's position on Communism and Mideast influence in the Middle East complemented United States containment policy.
 Nasser’s suppression of Communists in Egypt and Syria resonated positively in Washington, D.C. Nasser's suppression of Communism in Egypt resonated positive in Washington .
 The friction between Cairo, Baghdad and Moscow was for the United States the first positive news out of the Arab Middle East in years . While the administration did not believe that Nasser had had a total change of heart, the friction between the U.S. and Cairo is for the first
 The next important question is whether Mr Khrushchev is willing to acknowledge the challenge implied in Nasser’s recent speeches and if so how he will respond . The next question is if Mr Khruschev acknowledges the challenge .
 It provided leverage against the Soviet Union, in his dealings with the British and with various Arab states, particularly Jordan and Saudi Arabia .
 He probably recognized them all along, leaving control of the security services and army in the hands of non-Communist nationalists who were loyal to him . He probably left control of security services, army in hands of loyal nationalists . He was probably recognized as a Communist nationalist .
 On 1 May 1959, massive Communist rallies in Baghdad called for the appointment of Communists to the government and for an elected representative assembly . The rallies were held in Baghdad .
 Then, he directly attacked the Communists for demanding positions in the government . Then he attacked the Communist Party for seeking positions in government .
 A Communist rally in Kirkuk exploded into two days of ethnic and class violence in May 1959 . Qasim arrested Communists and removed them from key positions in the peasants’ and trade unions .
 Nutting stated that Qasim’s suspension of all political activity was a real attempt to curb the power of the Communists . Nutting said that the suspension of political activity is an attempt at curbing the Communist Party's power .
 Nutting also reported that the Iraqi regime was highly suspicious of American activity . Nutting said that the regime was suspicious of U.S. activity .
 Communist demands for a purge of the foreign ministry failed in the face of determined resistance by Foreign Minister Jawad Jawad . The foreign ministry has been in the grip of the Communist Party for years .
 Rumors of a split in the Communist party over tactics and support for Qasim promised more problems for the left . The rumors of a rift in the party over the support of the Qasims are fueling more problems .
 The Communists are hoping to recapture their lost political momentum . The Communists were predictably vocal, hoping for a return to their lost momentum .
 Communist influence had been clearly on the decline since its height at the time of the March coup attempt in Mosul .
 They faced a bettet-organized, more active anti-Communist movement . They also faced an anti-communist movement.
 Baghdad newspaper A/Thawra had called for the establishment of new political party headed by Qasim himself .
 The logic of the trial was that because some Ba'thists had plotted against the regime, then all Ba’thists were guilty, he says . The logic was that some of the . regime’s members were guilty of plotting against . The . regime, he adds
 Disaffection with the trials and the regime spread, but there was no outspoken opposition . Disaffect against the trial and regime spread but there were no outspoken opponents .
 By early January 1960, the Communist influence and ministers in the Iraqi government brought open concern . The Communist influence in Iraq was growing in the country .
 The Shah of Iran stated that he did not believe that Qasim was a Communist but that Communist influence was certainly on the rise . The Shah said he didn't believe he was a communist but that influence was growing .
 No-one seemed able to adequately analyze the situation or provide accurate analysis of the future . No one seemed to be able to provide an accurate analysis or analysis of future .
 If Qassim is a split personality, so is Iraq and it is difficult to decide which affects the other more in the present circumstances . Iraq is in the midst of a major crisis in the Middle East and Iraq has a history of instability .
 The Indians were obviously operating slightly behind the actual course of events . The Indians had a good idea of the game, but the Indians were not in control .
 On 1 January 1960, Qasim ended the ban on political parties, giving the appearance of making good on his promise to allow the resumption of political-party life .
 In February, unfortunately for the Communists, Qasim decided that they had become too powerful and set about redressing the situation . In February he decided to take action against the Communist Party .
 For months, two rival wings of the Communist party had struggled for control . Two rival wings had been battling for control of the party .
 Both groups applied for licenses to operate as the sole Communist political party in Iraq . Now, both groups are seeking to be allowed to operate in Iraq as a Communist Party .
 This move diluted the power of the Communists in Iraq by creating a leadership crisis within its ranks . This move dilutioned the party's power by creating leadership crisis .
 In sentencing 76 of the 78 defendants, the court showed surprising leniency . The court sentenced 76 of 78 defendants to prison terms .
 The Qasim government presented itself as having curbed Communist influence . The government was accused of being a Communist Party .
 More Iraqi students were attending U.S. universities and technical schools . There seemed to be an increase in attempts to acquire Western technical assistance .
 While the regime, bolstered by oil revenue, looked stable in the short term, the longer view was an entirely different matter . The regime was bolstered by the short-term oil revenue but the longer term was a problem .
 Qasim was increasingly isolated and unable to deal with Iraq’s mounting economic and political difficulties, he says . He says he was ‘increasingly isolated’ and ‘unable to deal’ with the country's mounting political and economic difficulties .
 His only salvation appeared to be the weakness of any opposition and the lack of an alternative leadership . President Obama's only salvation was the strength of the opposition and lack of leadership .
 The Qasim regime found itself, in the words of The Guardian, ‘losing its gtip’ on the political and economic levers of power . As a result, the regime has lost its grip on power .
 Observers saw the lack of direction and focus of the once infamous Baghdad mobs as another indication of the malaise in the government . Obserators say the mobs are a sign of the government's failure to provide direction .
 Any Schadenfreude Nasset may have felt with regard to Qasim’s predicament was no doubt tempered by his own problems in Syria .
 In October 1959, Nasser sent his old confidant Marshal Amer to Damascus to function as viceroy . Nasser's old confidante Marshal Amer was sent to Syria in October 1959 . He was later sent back to the country to serve as the Syrian president .
 In December 1959, after returning to Damascus, they resigned in protest from the government . They returned to Damascus and returned to Syria .
 He concluded that Syrian politicians could not be trusted and removed them from key positions in the UAR government . The UAR administration in Syria has been undermined by this, he said .
 Nasser appointed Sarraj, his chosen head of the muhabbarat, to head the Syrian executive . At this juncture, Nasser appoints Sarrraj to head Syria's executive .
 The very Syrians who were planning a revolt against the Egyptians began to complain to Amer about Sarraj and his programs of suppression . Amer was the prime minister of the Arab Spring .
 President Barack Obama ordered an end to the arrests and interrogations of Sarraj . Amer sought to quell the unrest by quelling the unrest .
 In London and Washington, most observers doubted, despite the ‘mounting wave of discontent, that the Syrians would significantly assist or rise up to expel the Egyptians .
 Eisenhower administration allowed fractious nature of Iraqi politics to take its toll on Qasim regime . Eisenhower administration had resisted temptation to intervene in Iraq .
 Concerns about Communist influence mitigated by Qasim’s astute maneuver that split the party . Concerns over Communist influence were mitigated to a significant degree by the maneuver .
 Nasser’s problems in Syria now seem to portend limitations on UAR expansion . In addition, Nasser's problems in . Syria now seemed to . portend . limitations on the UAR .
 Eisenhower administration’s approach to the region was netting the same results that Vice-President Nixon and more radical advocates of a more aggressive policy had touted as the benefits of intervention . Eisenhower had done so without the potential expense in lives and dollars or the immeasurable damage to
 Increased aid to Cairo had temporarily improved U.S. influence with Nasser . Nasser was encouraged to pursue anti-Communist policies long sought by Eisenhower .
 Despite the fact that the fear of monolithic Nasserism had subsided, Washington continued to worty about the survivability of traditional regimes in the region . Now it appeared that whatever nationalist regime might replace the Hashemites in Jordan or the Saudis would most likely pursue a course
 Washington lacked the ability to engineer or impose a ‘strategic’ solution to the problems in the region . However, it could, and at times very effectively, take advantage of the inherent regional conflicts and political dynamics to further and protect the longer-term interests of the United States
 The Arab Cold War held clear benefits for Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Israel . Jordan and Saudi Arabia were bystanders in the Arab Middle East .
 Nasser's frustration with Qasim’s Iraq and the resulting fall-out in the Syrian UAR and with the Soviet Union diluted his ability to focus on other revolutionary opportunities . Nasser was frustrated with his obsession and obsession with Iraq and Syria .
 For Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Israel, the Arab Cold War brought a relative respite from political and subversive pressure that would further serve to ensure their sutvival . The Arab Spring was a period of tension between Israel and Jordan .
 From 1958 through 1960, Jordan and Saudi Arabia faced increasing political instability and financial problems which, coupled with focused subversion from the UAR, might have toppled both regimes .
 Jordan and Saudi Arabia were able to navigate this critical period of internal crisis and emerge stronger and more stable than at any time in the past . Because of the hostile relations between the UAR and Itaq, the two countries managed to navigate through the crisis .
 Amman and Riyadh regimes were clearly less vulnerable and better led than they had been in a decade . This did not mean that anyone in Washington, or for that matter London, would describe either monarchy as stable, but in a relative sense the regimes in Amman or Riyadh were less vulnerable
 By the early 1960s, the United States was committed to their survival . Even mote critical, the U.S. committed to the survival of the world .
 For Israelis, the Arab Cold War provided a diversion behind which they developed what Ben Gurion believed would be the ultimate assutance of survival — nucleat weapons . For Israelis it was a diversion for the Cold War, and for Israelis, it provided the ultimate survival .
 Each of the bystanders took advantage of the conflict between the UAR and Iraq in their own way . In the end they would find their positions enhanced and their positions significantly diminished .
 King Hussein faced Palestinian and pro-Nasserist plots in the government and military . Hussein faced pro-Palestinian and Palestinian plots in government, military .
 Eisenhower administration had little enthusiasm in the Eisenhower administration for supporting Jordan . Jordan was not even a part of the United States scheme for containment in the region .
 This aid did indeed represent an investment in containment, but only an indirect and somewhat unwilling one . This aid was an investment, but it was an indirect investment, not an unwilling one.
 U.S. support for King Hussein was, in large part, a contribution to relations with London . United States supported King Hussein in the 1980s .
 Eisenhower administration supported Jordan because the British viewed the collapse of the Amman regime as potentially disastrous to their remaining position in the Middle East . The Eisenhower administration backed Jordan because of the stability of the country .
 Washington supported a regime that it believed would soon succumb to radical Arab nationalism . Wanting to avoid further damage to the British position, the U.S. supported it .
 How this arrangement matured is instructive in understanding the British approach to protecting its regional interests by enlisting U.S. financial and political support .
 As the conflict with Qasim intensified, Nasser's frustration with King Hussein increased . Jordan became a major test of Nasset’s influence and a major affront to his prestige . The conflict with Nasser became a test of his influence .
 Jordan’s struggle to survive also highlighted a new level of complexity in telations between the Atlantic cousins . Jordan and Jordan's struggle for survival also highlighted new levels of complexity .
 Eisenhower's pro-Nasserist tilt and Macmillan’s continued antipathy toward the Egyptian leader created debate over Anglo-American policy toward Jordan .
 Johnston was the most colorful participant in this policy tug-of-war . Johnston: "Without a doubt, Johnston was a colorful participant"
 Sir Charles had an unabashed admiration for desert royalty and absolute disdain for Arab nationalists . He fought to preserve Britain’s commitment to the last Hashemite .
 Jordan became something of a test case for AngloAmerican cooperation and compromise in the post-1958 Arab world . Jordan was something of an AngloAmerican test case . Jordan is one of the most important countries in the Arab world to join the West .
 The Arab Cold War also benefited the Middle East odd couple — Saudi Arabia and Israel . Israel and Saudi Arabia were the two countries that were at odds during the Cold War .
 Nasser’s feud with Qasim, problems with the Soviet Union, difficulties in Syria, and the war of words with King Hussein necessitated good relations with other key Arab states in the region . Nasser had a good relationship with other Arab states .
 Conflict with Qasim caused Nasser to miss his best opportunity to undermine the Saudi regime . Nasser's best chance of undermining the regime was to have his best chance to do so, he says .
 In the middle of a dynastic crisis, Saudi Arabia found an anti-Communist alliance with Nasser useful as well . Nasser helped Saudi Arabia in the midst of a dynasty crisis .
 The alliance reduced the potential for Nasserist agitation and increased the Kingdom’s influence with Washington. The alliance also increased the influence of the United States in Syria .
 Crown Prince Feisal used the respite to improve relations with the UAR, while introducing reforms and undermining revolutionary groups at home . Crown prince Feisal also introduced reforms and undermined revolutionary groups .
 Economic aid was less an issue with the Saudis, but reform constituted a major issue, if Saudi Arabia were to develop a stable economy and society . Reform is a key issue for Saudi Arabia to develop its own stable society .
 Washington avoided actions that might stir up the Arab-Israeli conflict and damage its anti-Communist campaign . As for Israel, with Nasser finally involved in an anti-communist crusade, Washington avoided taking action .
 Eisenhower administration failed to confront signs of a growing nuclear weapons program . Eisenhower administration used economic aid as leverage to prevent Israeli schemes that might derail Nasset’s anti-Communist campaign .
 Israelis diverted aid into a nuclear weapons program . The U.S. preoccupation with maintaining UAR pressure on Iraq allowed the Israelis to divert aid . The distractions of the Arab Cold War and the United States .
 These issues and circumstances converged in 1959 and 1960 to form a critical chapter in the Cold War politics of the Greater Middle East . The events occurred in the Middle East during the 1960s and 1960s .
 Nasser’s attempt to bring Jordan to heel involved the operational skullduggery of the Syrian intelligence service and its chief, Colonel Satraj .
 The collapse of Hashemite Iraq, in July 1958, raised expectations that King Hussein would be next . King Hussein was expected to be the next king of Iraq .
 The young King had survived riots, plots, and assassination attempts, but his luck had run out . The King's luck ran out .
 After the crisis-tidden 1958, New Year in Jordan began on a shaky note . New Year began on shaky note. After crisis-ridden 1958, Jordan began with a shaky start .
 The warning added that U.S. aid should not be interpreted as an endorsement of a defiant Jordanian policy toward its more powerful neighbors . The warning was issued by the Jordanian government in a statement .
 Eisenhower met with the King to offer his encouragement if not the material support that the King wanted . Although convinced that Hussein’s regime would most likely fall, Eisenhower offered his encouragement .
 Eisenhower encouraged and offered to assist Jordan in improving its relations with Cairo . Eisenhower offered to help Jordan improve relations with Egypt .
 Whitehall strongly opposed any suggestion of ‘détente’ between Kine Hussein and Nasser .
 The subject gave Sir Charles Johnston, British Ambassador in Amman, near apoplectic seizures . The subject was subject to a series of near-panic seizures .
 Given what the British viewed as their interests, London had reason fot concern . London was given reason for concern .
 While King Hussein was away, the Jordanian security service uncovered a plot against him that implicated Shara . The plot was uncovered by the security service while the King was away .
 At one point, Rifai’ even argued that a Nasserist takeover in Iraq was mote serious than a Communist one .
 Johnston howled that the U.S. policy ‘seemed to mean’ that Jordan would keep its independence for a while but under a ‘Nasserist prime minister’ Johnston said that King Hussein would oversee the transition of Jordan into a republic .
 Johnston lambasted American Chareé Edwin M Wright, and blasted anyone in London who might be thinking about acquiescing to what he viewed as the American scheme . Never shy about expressing his views, Johnston blasted anyone who might think about acquiesceing to the scheme .
 Unlike Mr Wright, I had seen a pro-Nasserite Prime Minister in operation here . Mr Wright was not the Prime Minister of the Nasserite .
 His regime had simply opened the door to chaos and Communism, he said . "I saw no reason to think that the result would be different if the experiment was repeated again now," he added .
 If the American are in effect, letting Nasser take over Jordan while trying to build him up as an anti-Communist champion, they will have to pay him a subsidy comparable to what they pay the present Jordan Government . If they want to prevent him from being sunk by the Jordanian
 It seemed far more sensible to pay subsidy directly to a regime which, whatever its shortcomings, is at least robustly pro-western, rather than to an untrustworthy opportunist like Nasser .
 Johnston's close relations with the new Jordanian Prime Minister, Hazza al-Majali, euaranteed him the leverage of political access in both Jordan and London .
 In September 1959, Nasser and Saud announced a decision to put past differences aside and form a united Arab front against Zionism and Communism . Hussein dangles the Nasser card with a photo of the two men meeting in Cairo .
 Saud suggested another meeting in Riyadh or Jidda, and wanted to include King Hussein . Saud then suggested a meeting in Saudi Arabia or Saudi Arabia . Saud wanted to meet with King Hussein, but Hussein was not present .
 Saud invited Hussein to participate in a discussion of his recent visit to Cairo . Hussein was invited by Saud to discuss his recent trip to Egypt .
 Hussein said he would not consider a trip to Cairo, but that a meeting in Saudi Arabia was a different matter . Hussein said that, given his history with Nasser, he wouldn't consider a Cairo trip .
 Johnston made the obligatory statement that it was a Jordanian matter and then listed the negatives . Johnston said it was not the best thing to say about the situation in Jordan .
 Johnston told the King that his attendance would place him in the anti-Qasim camp . Jordan should seek neutrality in the IraqiUAR dispute, Johnston said . Johnston told Jordan's King that the King should seek neutral neutrality .
 British concerns about King Hussein’s safety might have been real, but a Jordanian alliance with Saudi Arabia and Egypt would have damaged British influence .
 It also had the potential to lead to a breach with Iraq, and thus threatened petroleum revenues . It also threatened to threaten petroleum revenues, according to a report .
 Johnston learned that King Hussein had asked the United States Ambassador Sheldon T Mills for advice on the meeting with Saud and Nasser .
 The British approach worked, and Hussein informed Saud that he could not attend . Saud was forced to turn down the invitation .
 The Iraqi reaction to the mere rumor of Hussein’s participation in a meeting with Saud and Nasser underscored the importance that the British attached to preventing the meeting . The British are still trying to prevent the meeting.
 Domestic perceptions of the political situation in Jordan did not help matters . Domestic perceptions in Jordan were also said to be a problem .
 Squabbling between key political figures reinforced the impression that the King could not keep his house in order . The King was forced to step down from the throne after a series of scandals .
 In public comments, former Prime Minister Rifai’ stated that the Jordanian attacks on the UAR were a sign of weakness .
 In January 1960, he convened a ‘secret parliamentary session’ to discuss whether or not Nasser was serious in his expressed desire to have better relations with Jordan . The session was held in Jordan in January 1960 .
 Majali believed that conflicts between UAR officials in Syria and the remaining Ba’thist ministers and politicians in Jordan had alienated the Ba'th in Jordan to the point that their cooperation in a conspiracy against King Hussein was highly unlikely . Majali said that the Ba‘th
 The possibility of better relations with the UAR predictably came to naught . The UAR had hoped to have a better relationship with the country .
 In the spring of 1960, the frustrated Jordanian regime embarked yet again on an anti-Nasser propaganda campaign . The frustrated regime embarked on a propaganda campaign against Nasser's regime .
 London raised the issue in Washington, but reported that the U.S. ‘showed no special enthusiasm’ about getting involved .
 He concluded that Jordanian meddling in Syria would only convince Nasser that Hussein had to go . Nasser concluded that Nasser would have to step down .
 Hussein named Bahjat Talhouni to replace Majali, paving the way for the security forces and the army to increase their role in Jordanian political life . Hussein named the new minister of state after Majali's resignation .
 The assassination highlights the differences in U.S. and British political preferences for Jordan . The assassination also highlights differences in United States and UK political preferences .
 American officials surmised that the British lament reflected the fact that Talhouni was close to Rifai’, an Ametican favorite .
 Talhouni was also more ‘closed mouthed’ and less friendly toward the British . Talhounis was also less friendly with the British.
 Washington viewed the Jordanian situation as an expensive aggravation and Majali as London’s man. Showing a studied lack of concern, Washington viewed it as a costly aggravation, Washington said .
 Eisenhower administration tired of King Hussein and his political entourage contributing to their own troubles by baiting Nasser and then crying wolf . Additionally, the Eisenhower administration had tired of the . King Hussein's political . entourage contributed to the . own troubles .
 Many believed that the Jordanians had gotten what they should have expected, if not deserved . Jordanians believed that they had received what they had expected .
 In Washington, there was an additional incentive to downplay any UAR responsibility for the assassination . The UAR has a strong incentive to play down any involvement in the killing .
 Nasser planned to attend the UNGA at the end of September . Efforts were underway to arrange a meeting between Nasser and President Eisenhower . Nasser was due to attend UNGA in September .
 Jordan had become a nuisance that threatened to get in the way of the U.S.’s real goal, namely using Cairo as a counterbalance to Communist influence in the region . The United States’ real goal is to use Cairo to counterbalance the influence of Communist influence
 U.S. officials argued Majali’s assassination was a tragic ‘act of terrorism’ with only limited tactical consequences . As a result, United States argued that Majali's assassination was an act of terrorism .
 Washington was more apprehensive that increased influence of the military would bring demands for more aid . In point of fact, Washington was worried about increased military influence .
 The Americans seemed almost pleased with Majali’s abrupt departure from the Jordanian political scene, because it held the promise of better American access to and influence with the Jordanian government .
 London and Washington agreed on one thing, namely that the Jordanians could not afford to overreact . Jordanians must not overreact, Washington and London agreed .
 The British feared that Jordanian demands for extradition from Syria of the two Jordanians involved in the assassination might spark an open conflict . The British were concerned that the extradition might spark a conflict .
 King Hussein stated that he had no intention of sending Jordanian forces into Syria unless the UN failed to ‘obtain any redress’ or if they were invited in by Sytia . The possibility that Bedouin elements in the Jordanian army might take direct action against Syria presented a
 The cousin of the slain Prime Minister was General Habis al-Majali, who happened to be Commander-in-Chief of the Jordanian armed forces . The cousin was also the Commander in Chief of the Jordanian armed forces.
 General Majali convinced himself that Jordan could take on the UAR militarily, despite the deficiencies of the Jordanian air force and the limited capability of the army . Majali: "I believe Jordan can take on UAR in spite of the deficiencies"
 Jordan believed that Jordan would win any war within 24 hours, through surprise and an ‘imminent revolt’ in Syria, he said . He added that the country would win the war within a 24-hour .
 Majali had by-passed key officers who held mote ‘realistic’ views of military operations to push his aggressive plans with the King . Majali's aggressive plans were pushed by the King to push aggressive plans .
 Prime Minister Macmillan reacted to Johnston's message by sending a message to King Hussein advising caution .
 The British were skeptical of the U.S. contention that even if UAR agents had assassinated Majali, Nasser may not have had any direct knowledge of either the planning or execution of Majali .
 Cairo press and Sawt al-Arab radio continued a ‘violent campaign’ against Jordan . Nasser was not directly involved in Majali’s demise, he says .
 Local Egyptian press ran articles stating that ‘the son of Talal’ was mad and listed British officers serving in Jordan by name on Cairo Radio and Sawt al-Arab .
 Damascus Radio warned Hussein that the people of Jordan would kill him, and called for an uprising . Damascus Radio called for uprising .
 Accusing Nasser of arranging the assassination would only damage Britain’s efforts at rapprochement with the UAR, further inflame the Jordanians, and perhaps provoke a border war between Syria and Jordan .
 Jordan and aid President Eisenhowet’s meetings at the UNGA underscored the fact that the administration viewed Jordan as adding an unwanted complication to higher priority objectives in the Middle East .
 Secretary of State Herter recommended that Eisenhower take the opportunity to meet with key AfroAsian leaders . Secretary of state Herter had recommended that . Eisenhower meet with . Afro Asian leaders .
 Eisenhower had a half-hour meeting with King Hussein at the White House . Eisenhower met with Hussein in October .
 President explained that he had raised the assassination of Majali with Nasser . Nasser denied any role in Majali's assassination . President said Nasser had denied role in the killing .
 Nasser had taken the position that if Israel wanted free passage through Suez, then they would have to recognize the right of return for all Palestinian refugees . The President also told Hussein that Nasser also took the position .
 Hussein expressed hope for more UN involvement and enhanced ‘peace prospects’ in the region . The meeting ended with Hussein expressing his hope for UN involvement .
 The Indians saw nothing to be gained by getting involved and said as much . The Indians said they didn't want to get involved in the situation .
 The Indians surmised that more pressing problems in other parts of the world, including the fact that ‘the British government wants to go nearer Nasser’, had created a strong desire to see “détente’ between Amman and Cairo .
 MEA questioned whether or not London and Washington had teally exercised any ‘restraining influence’ over the Jordanians . Officials in the MEA also questioned whether the UK and US had exercised any 'restraining' influence .
 The British did not want the Jordanian government to collapse . It simply could not afford the bill associated with maintaining its stability .
 The United States had confronted the British on the issue, stating that a fifty-fifty split on Jordan appeared mote realistic to Washington . U.S. had confronted British on issue .
 The United States provided 70 per cent of the funding for UNRWA to support the Palestinian refugees . In addition, the U.S. provided funding for the Palestinian refugee agency .
 There was a feeling in Washington that, if the British saw Jordan as strategically important, then they should be willing to foot more of the bill .
 Douglas Dillon told Selwyn Lloyd, now Chancellor of the Exchequer, that the U.S. would only provide budgetary support for Jordan through March 1961 . In London, Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon said that the United States would only support Jordan through 1961 .
 Dillon then flatly informed the British that they would have to increase their contribution . Dillon then told the British they would need to do more to help .
 Britain did not want to see Jordan collapse, and they now believed that Washington was on the hook to prevent it .
 London argues that because of commitments in Oman, parts of Africa, and the sub-continent, no additional money was available for Jordan . London argued that because . commitments in . parts of . Africa, parts . of Africa and parts of the sub .continent were also commitments in
 At that point, Dillon stated that as of 1 April 1961 direct budgetary aid to Jordan would have a shortfall of $6. million . Washington expected London to pick up the tab or to come up with another source of funding; whereupon the West Germans became the focus of that alternate source
 As Eisenhower administration came to a close, the Jordanian situation remained very much up in the air .
 Neither London nor Washington wanted to pay the bill to float the Hashemite regime . London and Washington did not want to pay for the regime's upkeep .
 The United States favored a Jordanian policy of working with Egypt and Nasser against Communist inroads in the region . The U.S. supported the Jordanian policy . The Jordanian policy was based on Nasser's anti-Communist efforts .
 In effect, Nasser had become the more desirable active partner in Washington’s containment strategy .
 Only British allusions to the negative effect of a Jordanian collapse on their position in the Gulf prevented the Eisenhower administration from leaving the Hashemites to their own devices .
 London had made the case that further damage to its position in the Middle East would hutt its ability to support the U.S. in other areas . In effect, London has made a case for further damage in the region .
 London’s point of view was that the U.S. should pay the lion's share of aid support to Jordan in order to protect broader Western interests in the region . The logic followed that the United States should pay for the support of Jordan, London says .
 Nasser viewed Saudi Arabia as the epitomy of a feudal state, and he was, in fact, not far from the mark . Nasser's view of Saudi Arabia was that he wanted to create a feudal society .
 Slavery was still legal there, and the traditional Saudi institutions could not manage a modern state . Slavery is still legal in Saudi Arabia .
 From Nasser’s perch in Cairo, the Saudi Kingdom looked like a rotten apple about to fall . The Saudi kingdom looked like the Saudi kingdom was about to topple .
 King Saud bungled an attempt to subvert Colonel Sarraj, the Syrian security chief . King Saud had voiced his support for the Eisenhower Doctrine in 1957 .
 Members of the royal family pressured Saud to step down as ruler and embrace a program of fundamental reforms . Saud was pressured by members of Saudi Arabia's royal family to embrace reforms .
 Knowing that he needed time, Feisal moved to neutralize Nasser, says Feisal . Feisal: "Knowing that he needs time, the shrewd Feisal moves to neutralise Nasser" Nasser .
 Nasser no doubt believed that this development, at the least, neutralized Saudi Arabia, and perhaps constituted the first step toward the end of the monarchy . Nasser believed this development would neutralize Saudi Arabia and perhaps constitute the end .
 The Kingdom sat on an ocean of oil but was virtually bankrupt due to the mismanagement, corruption, and incompetence of King Saud . King Saud was responsible for the collapse of the kingdom .
 Feisal understood that if the dynasty was to survive, he needed to buy time by following Nasser’s lead in pan-Arab affairs . Feisal believed that if he wanted to survive he would buy time .
 King Saud waged a dynastic and bureaucratic battle with Feisal, when the latter refused to recognize King Saud’s debts . In addition to attempting to regain power, King Saud tried to regain control of the kingdom .
 As the struggle intensified, the almost total lack of visibility into the inner workings of the royal family, and Feisal’s poor health, created rumors that sent shudders through the Washington foreign policy establishment . Feisal's poor health has created rumors .
 Saud cast about for political allies, embracing a group of young princes that had formed around Tallal ibn Abd-al-Aziz . Saud was chafing under Feisal’s fiscal restraints .
 Feisal’s assumption of power in 1958 would bring constitutional government to the kingdom . Feisal assumed power in 1957 . He was the first king to take power in the country since independence .
 Feisal proved that he had no intention of creating a constitutional monarchy . Tallal’s group went into open opposition . Feisal soon proved that Feisal had no intentions of creating constitutional monarchy, Tallal said .
 Historically, King Saud had opposed Tallal and his reformers, but now, Feisal controlling the purse strings, Saud courted the reformist opposition . Saud had previously opposed Talla and his reforms .
 In December 1960, reformers supported Saud’s successful bid to retake control of the Council of Ministers . Saud was the first member of the council of ministers to take control .
 Radio Riyadh announced on 25 December 1960 that a new constitution for Saudi Arabia would be written . New constitution was accompanied by other liberalizing reforms . Radio Riyadh said in 1960 that the country would be writing a constitution .
 The King ordered Radio Riyadh to announce that a constitution would not in fact be forthcoming . Four days later, the King ordered the announcement that he had not been forthcoming . The King then ordered Radio Saudi Arabia to announce it was not forthcoming .
 When Saud returned to his old ways, clashes ensued between him and the reformers . Saud's return to his former ways led to clashes between Saud and reformers.
 The King forced Tallal from office, leaving the Kingdom vulnerable and divided than ever before . Eventually, the King forced him from office .
 Saudi Arabia's window of vulnerability coincided with Nasser’s attempts to deal with problems in Syria and with Qasim in Iraq . Between 1958 and 1961, a serious attempt by Nasser to topple the regime might well have succeeded, but Saudi Arabia was vulnerable .
 Feisal gained a reputation as a proto-Nasserist, not by making pronouncements, but by spreading rumors about his Nasseristism . Feisal: Feisal's reputation in Washington was based on rumors of his adherence to Nasserism .
 Feisal also possessed solid anti-British credentials, having refused oil supplies for Jordan at the time of the British intervention in 1958 . Saudi Arabia also had no diplomatic relations with Britain because of the Buraimi Oasis dispute .
 As the Buraimi dispute simmered on, the Saudis began to make claims vis-avis Oman, which the Egyptians and even the Iraqis supported . The Egyptians and Iraqis supported the move .
 The Saudis sincerely sided with Nasser in his anti-Communist campaiens in Egypt and Syria, and against Iraq . The Saudis are proud of Nasser's efforts in Egypt, Syria and Iraq .
 Saudis were wary of the ultimate intentions of Cairo, but opposed the Communists . The Saudis actively opposed the Communist Party in Egypt .
 Feisal’s pro-Nasser policies, coupled with improved U.S. relations with Cairo, opened the way to even better relations between Riyadh and Washington . Feisal's pro- Nasser policies helped open the way for better relations with Washington .
 On 19 April 1959, the United States issued an intelligence estimate for Saudi Arabia . The estimate was issued by the U.S. government .
 Israel and the Arab Cold War were the two great beneficiaries of the Cold War . Ironically, the other great beneficiary of the Arab cold war was Israel . Israel was one of the great winners of the war .
 Eisenhower demonstrated his willingness to put real pressure on Israel . Eisenhower had demonstrated he was willing to put pressure on the Israeli government .
 The administration relaxed its pressure on Israel, when it might have forced a comptehensive peace plan for the region . Recognizing that there would be a political price to pay because of Zionists groups pressuring a Democratic Congress .
 This essentially precluded pressuring Egypt as well, and diverted Washineton’s attention away from the issue of an ArabIsraeli peace . The move effectively precluded pressure on Egypt as also, and diverged attention from a peace issue .
 Nasser had left Israel alone and put the 'Arab countries at the head of his list' The Israelis warned that any attempt to work with Nasser and ‘providing him the benefit of a truce’ was folly .
 While useful at times, there was always a high price associated with relations with Israel . Israel has a long history of diplomatic relations with the Middle East .
 During the Lebanese and Jordanian crises, overflights of Israel, by U.S. aircraft moving British troops and supplies to Jordan, had been critical .
 In return, the Israelis obtained something approaching a security guarantee from the Eisenhower administration . In return for the promise, the Israeli government agreed to provide security guarantees in return .
 When the press picked up the story, which the Israeli government may have planted, the Soviets felt that they had to react . The story was picked up by the press, which may have been planted by Israel .
 Dulles charged that Israel was caving in to Soviet blackmail . Israel pointed out that a long list of countries had received U.S. guarantees in the event of an attack by Moscow .
 President Eisenhower decided that the Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East covered Israel as well . Dulles replied that after discussions at the White House, President Eisenhower had decided that it covered Israel .
 In early 1959, the British began one of their periodic evaluations of the pros and cons of good relations between Jordan and Israel . The British began evaluating the relationship between the two countries in 1959 .
 British Embassies in Tel Aviv and Amman argued that good relations between Jordan and Israel dampen down problems in the region in general .
 Israel's fortunes were tied to the United States. No matter what London's position, Israel’s fortunes had to be linked to the U.S. Israel was always dependent on the United.
 Almost every Israeli policy decision included a discussion of how the U.S. would react . Almost every policy decision was based on how the United States would react to Israel's actions .
 In the early months of 1959 John Foster Dulles’ illness, resignation, and death highlighted the trepidation with which the Israeli government viewed changes .
 Byroade attempted to make Egypt the principal U.S. partner in the region . He said Egypt would be the principal United States partner .
 The United States is not always popular here, but whatever happens it remains the rich uncle . The imagined prospect of Israel’s worst enemy becoming the new favourite nephew is not, from any point of view, a welcome one .
 This turmoil occurred simultaneously with negotiations to end its grant-in-aid program for Israel . This is the first time the U.S. has withdrawn its aid to Israel from Israel .
 Golda Meir stood up in the Knesset and criticized the ‘insanity’ of the State Department’s pro-Nasser policies . Meir: ‘The State Department's pro- Nasser policies are insane’
 This speech resulted in a routine rebuke from Washington and copious amounts of hand-wringing in Israel . This speech was greeted by Washington and by Israel with a withering reaction .
 The State Department viewed the commotion as the price for doing business with Israel . State Department views the move as the cost of doing business in Israel .
 U.S. relations with Israel have improved in recent years, says State Department . Relations with Israel are "much more smoothly than they had been," says State Dept. John Kerry .
 In 1955, David Ben-Gurion made the secret acquisition of nuclear weapons an absolute priority . In 1956, Israel became the first country in Israel to have nuclear weapons .
 U.S. intelligence resources focused on France and other industrialized states, placing Israel in the “Third Category Priority’ list of those countties not considered a proliferation risk . Israel was placed in the Third Category Priority list .
 In 1957, Israel shifted from a pool-type research reactor to a ‘real’ production reactor . Israel shifted to a 'real' production reactor in 1957 . Israel's first production reactor was built in 1959 .
 Washington approved technology transfers and monetary grants for research . This triggered no alarms, and Washington approved no alarms . Washington also approved money transfers and technology transfers .
 Israel quietly proceeded with a baseline weapons program . Hiding behind what seemed to be a sensible move toward nuclear power, the Israelis quietly proceeded to a baseline program .
 Israeli shifts in priorities appear to reflect inexperience and budgetary concerns, more than an ulterior motive . Israeli shifts of priorities appeared to reflect inexperienced, budgetary concerns more than a motive .
 Herter's relationship with Chester Bowles eased the transition from the Eisenhower to Kennedy administration . Herter’s relationship with Bowles helped the Israeli government with the perfect screen for its weapons program .
 In early 1958, at the time of the Soreq deal, the National Photographic Intelligence Center discovered largescale construction in the Negev desert during a routine flight .
 The CIA Program Director, Arthur C Lundahl, and his deputy, Dino A Brugioni, briefed President Eisenhower and Atomic Energy Commission Chaitman Lewis Strauss on the facility .
 The lack of questions from Eisenhower or Strauss led Lundahl and Brugioni to conclude that the administration wanted Israel to acquite nuclear weapons . Lundahl: "The lack of a question" from Strauss led the authors to conclude .
 Eisenhower sent a list of specific questions to the Ambassador in Tel Aviv, who in turn, presented them to Ernst David Bergmann, the head of Israel’s nuclear program . In fact, Eisenhower immediately sent .
 Bergmann admitted that Israel had decided to build a reactor but no firm decision had been taken on exactly what kind it would be . Bergmann was disconcerted by the decision .
 Dan Tolkovsky resigned as head of the Development Department in Israeli defense in 1959 . Evidence of French-Israeli cooperation in the nuclear weapons field led to the May 1959 resignation of Dan Tolkovsky . Tolkovsky resigned from his post in May 1959 .
 In June, there were rumored heavy-water agreements with Norway, indicating that something beyond research and peaceful development might be going on . The agreements are believed to be related to heavy water .
 Eisenhower administration showed commitment to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons . Eisenhower administration had shown particular commitment to the creation of an international agency dedicated to nuclear disarmament .
 The IAEA was slated to take over monitoring and safeguarding functions . The agency is slated to become a permanent body of the U.N. agency .
 The United States wanted to change its nuclear agreements such that non-compliance with IAEA regulations would be grounds for terminating cooperation with that nation on nuclear energy . The U.S. wanted to get rid of the nuclear agreement .
 The administration had no intention of undermining, through making an exception of Israel, the very agency whose creation it had sponsored . The administration did not intend to undermine the agency's creation .
 Israelis argued that if the IAEA center were in Caito then the Israelis would not be allowed access to the site . They argued that the Israeli would not have been allowed access .
 The IAEA might give the Egyptians access to the Israeli reactors . In addition, the Egyptian government might also give them access to Israeli nuclear facilities .
 Israel wanted 90-per-cent enriched uranium-235 as opposed to the 20-per cent enriched allowed under IAEA guidelines . Israel said they could not comply with the IAEaA strictures because they wanted 90 per cent enriched uranium . Israel provided another hint about their real
 Israel wanted assurances that the U.S. would not terminate bilateral agreements based on IAEA findings . Israel wanted reassurances that the United States would not end bilateral agreements .
 Washington also insisted that the agreements be modified to include the termination clause, but offered to study the matter further . Washington insisted that it would not be changed to include termination clause .
 Whether intentional or inadvertent, this resumption of business-as-usual requests for aid and arms further screened the nuclear program . Whether intentional, inadvertent or accidental, it further screened nuclear program, experts say .
 In a meeting with Secretary Herter, Golda Meir, the Israeli Foreign Minister, introduced a new request for conventional weapons . Meir introduced the new request .
 Israelis argue they had to keep up, in 'quality if not in quantity' with Cairo . Citing recent shipments of Soviet arms to Nasset as the justification .
 Herter mentioned to Herter that Israel was out of money . In the same breath, she mentioned that Israel is out of funds .
 Officials at the State Department called the new weapons requests “depressing to face’, since another round of Israeli security demands had been completed only four months before . Another round of Israel security demands was completed only 4 months before.
 In 1960, the U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv reported rumors that the French were assisting the Israelis in the construction of a major nuclear facility neat Beersheba in the Negev .
 Israelis called it a metallurgical research facility and offered no additional information . Under renewed pressure, the Israelis have offered no more information about the facility .
 In October 1960, the British informed Washington that the Beersheba site was indeed a nuclear installation . The British informed the U.S. in October 1960 that the site had been built .
 Both British and American Military Attachés got pictures of it, and confirmed that it was a nuclear reactor site . The site is located in the UK and USA .
 French denied assisting the Israelis with the reactor or even knowing anything about it . When confronted, the French denied any knowledge of the reactor .
 Eisenhower administration concluded that Israel was building a nuclear reactor capable of producing weapons-grade plutonium . Two weeks after John Kennedy won the presidential election, the Eisenhower administration said it was Israel's nuclear reactor .
 United States intelligence sources now believed that the site was definitely a nuclear weapons facility and that it would be operational within a year . U.S. intelligence sources said it was likely to be operational in a year or more .
 The United States strongly suggested that, in addition to Ben-Gurion’s promise not to develop nuclear weapons, Israel should open the facility to IAEA inspection, the U.S. suggested . Israel should also open it to inspection .
 On 12 January 1961, President Eisenhower held a senior level conference to discuss the Istreali nuclear issue . The conference was held in Moscow, Russia, in 1961 .
 The outgoing administration decided to take the position that the U.S. government did not know the source of the funding for the facility and to issue a statement calling for complete IAEA inspection and monitoring of the facility .
 It would take the new administration time to organize itself to deal with the nuclear issue . Kennedy had been heavily dependent on the Jewish votes to get elected .
 Israel expected some questioning, but, quite correctly, did not expect any action from Washington on this issue . Israel expected no action from the U.S. from the White House .
 In 1959 and 1960, Iran and Pakistan adjusted to new teality in the Greater Middle East by first recognizing and then utilizing their new-found leverage with the U.S. In 1960s and 1960s, the two countries took advantage of their new leverage .
 Washington and London placed a premium on preventing the fall of mote allied regimes in the region . The collapse of the Baghdad regime had severely shaken Washington, London .
 Iraq was not even a part of the original concept of the ‘northern tier’, but Iran and Pakistan were keys . In fact, as Secretary Dulles pointed out in the days immediately following the Baghdad coup, Iraq wasn't even part of his original concept .
 Eisnehower feared a repeat in either Iran or Pakistan would undo its containment or encirclement of the Soviet Union . Be that as it may, the collapse in Baghdad frightened the administration .
 Musaddiq, a nationalist leader in Iran, forced the Shah to flee the country, and the United States and Britain by the narrowest of margins had overthrown the Shah and placed the Shah back on the throne . Only five years early, the Shah had fled the country and the
 In the intervening time, the Shah had not led Iran’s government, economy, or society to anything that approached the level of stability that Washington desired . The Shah had led Iran to nothing that resembled stability, Washington said .
 Eisenhower feared the situation in Iran might bring about a repeat of that in Iraq the year before . At the beginning of 1959, Eisenhower feared, and with justification, that the situation was different . In 1959, the Iranian government was overthrown in Iraq .
 Shah recognized the opportunity presented by Washington’s concern . He pressed for aid, particularly military aid, arguing that had the U.S. been less nigeardly prior to July 1958, the coup in Baghdad might never have happened .
 The administration believed instability and possible collapse had only been averted in October 1958 by the military takeover led by General Ayub Khan . The government believed instability was averted by the takeover of the country .
 Because of Ayub’s firm grip on power and personal aura of no-nonsense competence, Washington was not on edge as it was about Iran . Washington was concerned about Pakistan, but not about Iran, historian says .
 Always a soutce of concern, Iran’s stability following the Baghdad coup emerged as a major preoccupation in Washington .
 Shah employed Washington’s fears of neutral Iran and accommodation with the Soviet Union to transform demands for aid into tangible results . With increasing sophistication, the Shah employed . Washington's fears of a neutral Iran .
 The Shah blunted attempts by the Eisenhower administration to pressure his regime toward political and economic reform . At the same time, the Shah blundered attempts to pressure him to reform his regime . The Shah's regime was overthrown in 1953 .
 Eisenhower administration pressed for reform and economic development as the only sure path to Iranian stability . After Baghdad coup, Washington feared rapid reform could destabilize the regime .
 Reform could not be undertaken at the risk of a Pahlavi collapse; therefore, it had to be controlled reform . Reform was not possible at risk of collapse, so it was controlled reform, says Iranian diplomat .
 The stability and survival of a friendly regime in Tehran was the first priority . The stability of the Iranian regime was first priority for the Iranian government, says Iran's president .
 Ayub Khan, the President of Pakistan, and the Shah of Iran frequently compared notes on the status of aid and support coming from the United States . Pakistan found itself in a very similar position, and undoubtedly .
 Nasset’s 1953 rebuff of MEDO led to US-sponsored defense alliances in the ‘northern tier’, the Iraqi coup and the prominent Communist influence in Baghdad brought renewed efforts to ensure the containment of the Soviet Union .
 In Pakistan, this led to U.S. support for military rule, which in turn strained ties with India . In Pakistan it led to United States support for the military rule . This led to further strained relations between Pakistan and India .
 Eisenhower administration came to view Pakistan’s government as the most stable since independence . By early 1959, the Eisenhower administration had viewed Pakistan as the country's most stable government . Eisenhower administration viewed Pakistan's government as stable .
 General Ayub Khan, now President, had Washington’s confidence and particularly that of President Eisenhower . Khan was President of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Ayub’s government had transformed a chaotic political and economic situation into something that was reasonably stable and efficient . Ayub's government transformed the chaotic situation into a reasonably stable state .
 By curbing corruption and instilling order, Ayub impressed the White House . Ayub was President of the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
 Pakistan was the lone bright spot in the Western alliance system in the entire Greater Middle East . Pakistan was one of the few bright spots in the alliance system .
 Ayub renewed his demands for modern weapons . Now, with the U.S. reeling from Iraq, Ayub renews his demand for weapons .
 Ayub began to explore the possibility of better relations with Beijing . Ayub: "To demonstrate his options, Ayub started to explore his options"
 India is trying to establish an indigenous, modern, weapons program . With Krishna Menon at the helm in the Ministry of Defense, the answer was obvious — call Moscow . India’s efforts to establish a modern weapons program began in 2009 .
 U.S. military aid to Pakistan forced a reappraisal after the Iraqi coup . Neutral India pursued the focus on economic development and reform most advocated by Eisenhower administration .
 In the 1959 to 1960 timeframe, Washington viewed Iran as more unstable than Pakistan; therefore, its role was examined first . Iran was viewed as more stable than Pakistan .
 Iranian requests for more military and security aid to combat growing threats from the Soviet Union . U.S.-Iranian relations began with Iran seeking more military aid in response to Soviet Union threats .
 Iran's annual budgetary cycle for Tehran began in March . The annual budget cycle for Iran began March, therefore, pleas for additional military and economic aid started appearing in November and December .
 These aid requests usually touched off a series of U.S. national security assessments of Iran and the Shah . The Shah's request for aid from the United States was rejected by the Shah's government .
 The 1959 budget cycle differed only because of an increased sense of urgency generated by the Iraqi coup . The budget cycle was the same year as the 1959 budget year .
 Iran was the only nonCommunist country in the world which shared a long border with the Soviet Union but with which the U.S. had no defensive alliance . Iran was also one of only non-Communist countries with no alliance with the United States .
 Eisenhower administration recognized that problems of corruption, incompetence, and the personal instability of the Shah contributed to the instability in Iran . Eisenhower administration saw no alternative to continued support for his regime .
 Washington would have preferred an alternative to the Shah, but no acceptable option existed . The Shah was the Shah of Iran, but the Shah had to be replaced by the Shah in order to survive .
 Washington feared that under pressure the Shah might lose control of the ‘precarious’ political situation or stampede into an accommodation with the Soviet Union . Washington feared under pressure under pressure .
 Shah believed that ‘meaningful political, social, and economic reforms designed to increase popular support’ were in the best interests of the Shah and the West, but that possibilities for reform were tied to the Shah’s personal security .
 Eisenhower concluded that military aid was required to get the Shah to reform his regime . Despite misgivings, Eisenhower concluded military aid needed to get him to reform .
 Shah assumed, probably correctly so, that he understood Iran better than experts in Washington . The Shah assumed that he knew more than Washington experts in Iran .
 The progression of events in 1959 and 1960 takes on a significantly different interpretation . Making this assumption, the progression of this year's events in the 1960s and 1960s takes on an entirely different interpretation.
 Shah had a set of reasonably clearly-defined goals from his reinstatement in 1953 . The Shah was re-elected to the throne in 1953, but he was not allowed to leave the country . He was the prime minister of India's first state of the Shah's rule .
 President Obama wanted to transform Iran into the primary strategic partner for the West in the region . He wanted to achieve regional political, military, and economic preeminence, he said .
 Shah believed that with U.S. assistance, he could emulate Mustafa Kemal — Atatiirk — and transform Iran into a modern, secular society . The Shah believed with United States assistance, Iran could become a modern society .
 The Shah immediately understood and acted on his newly-acquited leverage . The Shah is now the prime minister of the Shah's government .
 On 6 December 1958, Washington got its first real taste of what the future would hold for Iranian-American relations .
 CPO Director appealed for dramatically-expanded military aid . Citing the threat to Iran from the Soviet Union and Soviet-supplied Afghanistan, Abol Hassan Ebtehaj, CPO director, appealed .
 Ebtehaj complained that new military requirements levied by the U.S. had resulted in financial difficulties . He said Iran required additional economic aid to compensate for the economic difficulties .
 Seeing a looming financial pit, the administration tried to defer the Iranian requests . The U.S. has been trying to avoid a financial crisis .
 Washington explained that Tehran needed better accounting practices and distribution of oil revenues . Washington said it needed better accounts practices and a better distribution of revenues .
 Twining, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, visited Tehran and then sent a letter to the Secretary of Defense Neil McElroy on 23 December 1958 . The letter strongly recommended that the United States join the Baghdad Pact and shift aid programs to support Pact members .
 Shah argued that Washington had not lived up to its Baghdad Pact commitments and had shown a decided insensitivity to Iran's security situation . The Shah argued Washington had shown an insensitivity .
 Neither was particularly happy with the situation, but neither could afford the consequences of a messy divorce . Neither could afford to afford to have a messy marriage .
 The State Department informed the Department of Defense that while it supported the military-assistance goals of Iran, military support for the Baghdad Pact could not undermine aid to other critical nations in the region .
 It seems evident that in his frustration as to how to strengthen his position he has grossly underestimated U.S. contribution to Iranian security and indeed to stability of his own regime . Iran's president has "grossly underestimated United States contribution to Iran security"
 Shah no doubt has taken this line in belief it would precipitate grater U.S. willingness to accede to his desites, but we cannot discount possibility that in his present apparent frame of mind he might take some action, which he and we would later regret .
 Rountree described the scale of the U.S. commitment to Iran . He pointed to the London Declaration of July 1958 and Joint Resolution on the Middle East as examples of security commitments .
 Rountree told Wailes to remind the Shah that Soviet ‘multi-lateral guarantees’, based on the adoption of a ‘neutralist foreign policy, had proven untiable in the past .
 Secretary Dulles told the NSC on 22 January that the Shah’s demand for a bilateral agreement that promised United States intervention against all enemies, including domestic ones, was simply unacceptable to the administration and certainly to the Senate .
 The ailing Secretary of State warned that the Shah, in frustration, might actually resort to a ‘flirtation’ with the Soviet Union .
 The Ambassador reiterated that the Shah’s problems were internal, not external, and that emphasis on military aid merely exacerbated the domestic situation . The ambassador said that the military aid only exacerbated the problems of the Shah .
 The situation in Iran had begun to affect other sensitive relationships as well . The situation began to affect the relationship between Iran and other countries .
 In Iran, the U.S. Embassy believed that it might push the Shah over the brink in his negotiations with the Soviets . The embassy believed that the United States Embassy may have pushed the Shah to the brink .
 The collapse of the negotiations was so acrimonious that watning flags once again sutfaced vis-a-vis the possibility of Soviet retaliation against Iran .
 Foy D Kohler, in the European Bureau at State, warned Rountree in NEA that the Soviets were doubly chagrined . The Shah almost immediately announced his intention to sign a bilateral security agreement with the United States .
 Moscow’s reaction would be ‘surcharged by their indignation and resentment of the Iranian conduct of the talks with them.’ London Embassy reported that Moscow would react by their ‘indignant and resentment’ of Iranian conduct .
 The Soviet experts at the State Department believed that the Soviets saw the potential for a repeat of the Iraqi coup, only this time in Iran, as the natural progression following a Communist consolidation of power in Iraq . The State Department said that the Soviet experts believed that .
 They predicted personal attacks on the Shah and trouble in Kurdistan and Azerbaijan . They also predicted new personal attacks against the Shah .
 The report expressed concern that the Soviet reaction might include a Soviet occupation of Azerbaijan . The Soviet Premier had authorized the negotiations at the personal instigation of the Shah .
 We cannot know the extent to which the Soviet statements ate bluff, and thus cannot be certain that they will not take action vis-a-vis Iran which would pose a serious dilemma for us . We can't know whether Russia will take action against Iran, which could pose a real dilemma
 The failure to consummate the bilateral agreements would constitute a major setback for the United States, Herter said . Herter went to state that despite the dangers, the failure of the agreements would not be a setback .
 Fears of the worst proved unfounded, but the incessant attacks of the Soviet propaganda machine on the Shah had their effect . Fears that the worst would happen proved unfounded .
 The Shah could now point to his sacrifice for the Western alliance and complain that he had not been properly rewarded . The Shah was able to claim that he was not properly rewarded for his sacrifice .
 He now had a bilateral security agreement, albeit one not totally to his satisfaction . He now has a bilateral agreement, but not totally satisfied .
 Iranian military and economic aid had increased, although not to the levels that the Shah desired . The Shah's government had increased military aid to Iran .
 President Obama would renew, more forcefully, battle for dramatically increased military and economic aid . Within a matter of months, he would renew the battle for significantly increased aid .
 Shah’s dissatisfaction with the amount of U.S. aid mounted over the summer and fall of 1959 . Despite increases, the Shah was unhappy with the increased amount of United States aid . The Shah was assassinated in September 1959 .
 Since the collapse of the talks with the Soviet Union early in the year, the Soviets had brought considerable propaganda and economic pressure to bear on the regime .
 The Soviets forced Tehran to make up the difference by clamping down on cross-border transit and stopping trade in foodstuffs to border regions .
 Soviet radio stations beamed into Iran more than 70 hours per week of Persian-language broadcasts . The broadcasts were broadcast by Soviet-run radio stations in Iran .
 From the Shah’s point of view, he had maintained his relationship with the West despite the considerable tisk . Additional broadcasts alluded to the fate of the ‘tyrant’ and ‘traitor’
 As the Shah exerted more pressure, Washington received all manner of advice . Washington received advice from the Shah, including advice from Washington .
 He stated that without a command structure and mote economic aid the Pact would wither on the vine . He said that without the aid of economic aid, the Pact will wither .
 In the past Ayub had ridiculed the Shah, but now the collapse of Iraq and the instability in Iran bolstered Pakistan’s importance to U.S. containment policy, and he wanted to take full advantage .
 Ben-Gurion suggested that more military assistance and ‘psychological’ support to Iran might also influence the government of Afghanistan to ‘turn away more from Russia, more towatd the West’ Even Dag Hammerskjold, UN Secretary General, expressed concern about
 Khrushchev and Gromyko made it clear that attacks on Iran would not cease unless the Shah agreed a non-aggression treaty with the U.S.
 The Shah really felt that the U.S. and Britain had let Iran down in the propaganda war . Hammserskjold added that the Shah felt that both the United States and Britain let Iran .
 Alaa bombarded Russell with a long list of complaints about everything from Britain’s ‘pro-Iraqi policies’ to the lack of substantive support for the Tehran regime . Alaa also complained about Britain's 'pro- Iraqi policies'
 Two days later the Shah summoned Russell to the palace for a discussion . Russell was invited to meet with the Shah to discuss his role in the country .
 The Shah requested that the British and Americans provide open-handed support to his regime . The Shah exuded confidence and requested that he was supported by the UK and Americans .
 The Shah thanked the British Ambassador for the ‘moral and diplomatic support’ but then asked about ‘what practical support would be forthcoming’ The Shah said: ‘What practical support will be forthcoming?'
 The Shah raised his concerns about the lack of a clear statement on the defense of Iran in the event of a Soviet attack . The Shah also expressed his concern about the paucity of military assistance provided to Iran .
 Shah confidently added that he ‘attached not the slightest importance to the Soviet propaganda campaign’ against him . The Shah said he was not concerned about the Soviet campaign .
 In the area of reform, he stated that he was carefully studying the issue of land reform . Despite its unpopularity with many of his 'friends, he intended to pursue it .
 Iranian politicians repeated their gloomy views on the political situation . Political instability and increased Soviet pressure increased the pressure on Iran .
 Sardar Fakher Hekmat, the Speaker of the Majlis, complained about rampant corruption in the government and army . He also noted rising dissatisfaction among the population among those who want to change .
 Inflation put enormous pressure on the working classes, and the government had refused to invoke price controls . The government refused to impose price controls on food and housing .
 Inflation also drove corruption, as government officials, the police, and the military turned to graft to maintain their standard of living . Inflation was also a factor in corruption in the country .
 Hekmat argued that the Shah hesitated to deal with the problem because of the fear induced by the current Soviet propaganda campaign . The Shah was afraid of the current propaganda campaign, he said .
 Washington feared that the Shah might lose control of the armed forces . With Iraq fresh on their minds, Washington . feared that . Washington feared . that . the Shah may lose control .
 Increased military funding provided new weapons and created an additional soutce of graft that tied the key army officers more closely to the regime . Although not very comforting, the increased military funding provides new weapons .
 Iranian Ambassador in Moscow, Masud Ansati, met with Chaitman Khrushchev to discuss propaganda campaign .
 Khrushchev bluntly stated that propaganda attacks on the Shah would cease only when Iran embarked on a neutralist foreign policy and sharply reduced its cooperation with the U.S. The attacks would only stop only if Iran cut ties with the United States, he said . The attacks were aimed at
 The Soviet leader went on to say that given his personal involvement, the Shah should not anticipate any changes until these conditions were met . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran in the early 1980s .
 Khrushchev then pointed out the benefits of neutralism, citing the UAR, Afghanistan, and India as examples . The UAR and India were examples of neutralization .
 Soviet Ambassador Pegov met with the Shah prior to the Camp David meeting . He expressed his hope that Iran would see that the advantages of ‘neutralism’, convincing the Shah that the worst had passed .
 The Shah took the lack of a discussion at Camp David with surprising equanimity . As a result, the Shah took his absence of a meeting with the US President Barack Obama with surprising ease .
 President Eisenhower scheduled a December 1959 visit to Tehran on his world peace tour . Eisenhower scheduled the visit to Iran in December 1959 to further mollify the Shah .
 On 14 December, in a meeting with President Eisenhower, the Shah launched into his plans for a major military buildup . The Shah met with Eisenhower on 14 December in Tehran .
 This included five new air bases, one medium-bomber base, and a Nike missile system to defend Iran against a Soviet-inspited invasion from Afghanistan and Iraq . The Nike system was designed to protect Iran from a Soviet invasion .
 The President told the Iranian ruler that he would have his people look at the issue . The Iranian ruler said he would be looking at the matter .
 Eisenhower focused on economic concerns, and suggested that a better relationship with Afghanistan might be in the offing if a solution to the Helman River issue could be found . Eisenhower: "A better relationship" with Afghanistan could be possible .
 The Shah agreed, and promised to have the Iranian Foreign Minister look into it . The Shah promised to look into the matter .
 The Shah tasked the American military assistance group to begin formalizing the planning for the bases . After Eisenhower’s departure, the Shah tasked them to formalize the planning . The Shah was the Shah's first president .
 Secretary of State Herter requested that the President write a letter to the Shah to ‘make clear’ that local warts, ie. with Afghanistan and Iraq, were not included under the mutual defense agreement .
 Herter suggested that Iran’s real problems lay in economic development, not the military field . Herter also suggested that the letter point out that Iran's real problems are economic development .
 The goal of modernizing Iran’s forces was laudable, but excessive spending on the military could be catastrophic for the economy, the state-run news agency says .
 The Iranian government had mote revenues than expected to meet its budgetary requirements . Iran had to raise more than $1 billion in a year to meet budget requirements .
 The United States administration hoped that this would reduce demands from Tehran for assistance . The U.S. administration hoped it would reduce Iran's demands for assistance from Tehran .
 Shah would resume direct rule if either the government or parliament failed to carry out its duties . The Shah would be dismissed if the government failed to do its duties, he said .
 On the surface, the formation of political parties and elections looked like political reform . But they are not all about political reform, they say. They say they are only about political parties .
 The parties were designed to function as safety valves, not political institutions . The parties have been designed as safety valve, rather than political institutions, the president says .
 Shah now pointed to them as examples of political liberalization and representative government . The actual possibility that the parties might survive as popular, independent political entities was remote . However, the actual possibility of the parties surviving was remote, but the Shah now said they had been successful .
 Amini, the former Ambassador to Washington, stated that until the parties, the Majlis, and the Shah dealt with inflation and corruption, all would lack credibility . Amini: Until the parties deal with inflation, corruption, they would have credibility .
 Shah’s land reform, in its final form, was meaningless, due to concessions to the large landowners . The only value of the land reform was as propaganda, says Shah .
 The CIA believed that army and security forces might join an uprising if there were election irregularities . CIA believed the government might join a uprising if the election irregularities were irregularities . The U.S. government believed that the vote was illegitimate .
 The 'fiasco' of the 1960 Majlis elections dealt political liberalization a critical blow . The ‘fiasco’ of the '60 Majlis election was a major blow to the country’s political freedom .
 The situation was so severe that the Shah intervened and voided the election . This action bought some time to reassess the situation and come up with an alternate plan, but there was little hope that a real solution to the situation could be found .
 Both of the approved political parties, the Mardom and the Melliyn, had participated in the political shenanigans and were discredited . In addition, both of these parties were discredited, according to CNN.com.com .
 Prime Minister Manuchehr Eqbal resigned with his cabinet on 29 August 1960 . The Shah publicly blamed Prime Minister for the election mess, and blamed him for it .
 Jafar Sharif Emami replaced Eqbal and formed a new cabinet on 31 August . The new cabinet was formed after the death of the former prime minister .
 The Shah instructed the new cabinet to conduct new ‘free’ Majlis elections, improve relations with the Soviet Union, and implement an economic stabilization program . The Shah also instructed them to conduct 'free Majlis' elections and improve relations .
 Despite removal of all of the recognized pro-American ministers, the Emami government looked much like that of Eqbal . Despite the removal of the pro-U.S. ministers, it looked like a government of the old government .
 Eisenhower continued to press the Shah on the issuse of political, economic, and social reform . Despite increased military and security aid, Eisenhower continued pressing the Shah for reform .
 The President is convinced that only real reform could bring stability to Iran . Iran's President is firmly convinced that real reform is needed to bring stability .
 Interior Minister Alavi-Moghadam maintained palace control of the police . He is a member of the Shah’s inner circle .
 Shah made certain that the security apparatus reported directly to him . The Shah made sure that he had the highest level of security in the country .
 NSC report pointed out that the Shah tended to react badly to criticism . In addition to the report, the Shah was said to have reacted badly to critics .
 If pressured too strongly, he might seek an accommodation with the Soviet Union . He might seek a compromise with the West .
 Washington concluded that if the regime appeared to face problems of setious instability, the U.S. would have to ‘dissociate itself to the extent feasible’
 Any move toward reform would alienate his supporters and place his rule in jeopardy . Any precipitous move toward reforming the White House could alienate some of his supporters .
 The United States concluded that most Iranians probably did not aspire to a truly democratic political system . The U.S. concluded in a policy assessment that most Iranian people probably don't aspire to such a system .
 They wanted their economic and social grievances addressed by the government . Instead of addressing them, they wanted them to address their economic, social grievances .
 'reformers' themselves would not permit political freedom because in the fractured cultural and ethnic environment of Iran, true political freedom constituted a recipe for chaos . Once in power, the ‘reformsers’ themselves would never allow political freedom . True political freedom would constitute a recipe
 No clear alternatives existed, and the Shah’s departure would create a huge unknown . The Shah would have to deal with his departure, and his departure would be an unknown .
 The second Seven-Year Plan projected a deficit of over $130 million by 1962 . In addition, the second seven-year Plan projected an additional $130million deficit .
 The dual problem of an increased deficit, coupled with the balance of payments problems, raised the possibility of economic collapse . The dual problems of the increased deficit and the balance-of-payments problems raise the possibility .
 Analysts say delaying IMF loan repayments and providing a $70 million U.S. loan could 'probably' be averted . Analysts determined that by delaying IMF repayments, the economic and potential political crisis could ‘probably’ be avoided .
 The Shah used the move to use Soviet leverage against the Shah . The Shah was the prime prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 In September, the Iranian monarch let it be known that he was once again reexamining his relations with the Soviet Union . The Iranian monarch said he was re-evaluating relations with Russia due to the lack of material support from his allies .
 Western allies were so concerned about the Shah's reaction that they chose not to present him with assessments of Iran’s military needs that ran counter to his views . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran in the early 1950s .
 No doubt someone in Washington noticed the correlation between the Shah’s bouts of insecurity and his pique at not getting what he wanted, but no-one wanted to challenge him either .
 Washington restated its support for the regime, and amended the military arms package with regard to specific requests from Tehran . Washington also amended the arms package in response to requests from Iran .
 The Shah’s perceived insecurity and instability was real is impossible to tell, but clearly the perception alone paid off . To what degree the Shah's perceived insecurity or instability were real was real .
 Eisenhower administration allowed the Shah to believe that he would receive massive amounts of military aid . Eisenhower administration had allowed Shah to think he would get massive military aid, he says .
 A key factor in his decision to join the Baghdad Pact had been Turkish persuasion that membership would mean military parity between Turkey and Iran .
 Washington knew about the ‘misunderstanding’ and had not bothered to correct it, it was revealed .
 President Eisenhower offered to bring 95 per cent of the units in the Iranian Army up to full strength . Eisenhower had offered to consider activation of additional units to compensate for the strain .
 Iran committed 55 per cent of its oil revenues to the military and security services . This resulted in continued commitments to military, security services totaling 55% of Iran's oil revenues .
 As a result, the rising educated middle class felt woefully short-changed . The rise of the educated middle-class felt undervalued, the government has said .
 Several memoranda from the Iran Desk circulated on the eve of the Kennedy administration taking power . The memoranda was circulated in the days before Kennedy took power .
 Revisionist views stated that United States policy had made it possible for the Shah to ‘resist Soviet pressures’ but that any relief was temporary . These revisionist views said that U.S. policy to date had made the Shah’s ability to resist Soviet pressures was temporary
 The U.S. faced the challenges of Soviet influence, the Shah’s resentment over his alleged lack of Western support, and Washington's growing identification with the Pahlavi regime .
 The proposal stated that if the new administration did not give into to the ‘importuning’ by the Iranians, they could probably get the 'Shah’s grumbling’ agreement on the fundamental points .
 These points included a commitment to the ‘trip line’ defensive approach, increased internal security assistance, and improved morale and reliability in the military .
 The theory was that the Kennedy administration could then obtain an agreement on the strategies to improve the political and economic situations . The Kennedy administration was hoping to get an agreement .
 Ayub Khan appeared to have found an approach that worked so efficiently that the system imposed in Karachi emerged as Washington’s preferred model for the region .
 Eisenhower administration supported democracy in theory in theory . But the practical exigencies of the security situation in Pakistan made strong pro-Western military rule a very attractive ‘temporary’ option . Pakistan is now a major ally of the West .
 The White House came to view a petiod of authoritarian rule as the only realistic path to stable, responsible, pro-Western democracy . White House views authoritarian rule only as a way to stable and responsible democracy in the U.S.
 Pakistan survived as a result of economic aid and its important strategic position within the U.S. concept of containment . From independence, Pakistan has been a key ally of the United States . Pakistan is now a major ally of Pakistan in the West .
 Ambassador Langley’s contradictory description illustrated Washington's conflicted attitude . American ambassador Langley described the situation as ‘conflicting’.
 In 1957, chronic political instability and corruption had undermined confidence in civilian democratic rule . By 1957, the situation had reached such a low point .
 Despite significant economic and military support, political and economic paralysis threatened total collapse . The U.S. government was unable to prevent the collapse of the Soviet Union from collapse .
 While Communism was not a teal threat (Pakistan was 98 per cent Muslim) Washington feared non-alignment and an accommodation with the Soviet Union or China .
 Key U.S. officials privately recognized that requests for arms were in fact a ‘hoax’ to acquire arms to control the Pashtun tribes and to confront India . The need for a continued pro-Western political stance in Karachi forced them to look the other way .
 To provide additional justification for its ‘wink and nod’ toward Ayub’s coup, Washington employed some creative logic . Washington employed a creative logic.
 Through the ascendancy of Ayub, the military would feel politically secure enough to reduce its budgetary share . The military would have been able to cut its budget share .
 One fundamental problem is squaring a military coup and thinly veiled dictatorship, albeit benevolent, with U.S. principles of support for democracy and economic development . The coup was overthrown by a coup, but it was not a coup .
 Eisenhower administration constructed a model in which stability, rather than a chaotic democracy, created the conditions for economic development, social progress, and finally stable democratic political reform . Blending various elements of containment theory, the Eisenhower administration .
 It was a question of whether Washington wanted to deal with hostile or friendly authoritarian governments, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It's not clear whether Washington wants to engage with hostile governments .
 Stable democratic governments aligned with the West did not appear to be viable . If there was a choice between authoritarian regimes, Washington naturally preferred pro-Western ones . Washington naturally prefers pro-West ones .
 Ayub's ‘temporary bridge’ on Pakistan’s road to democracy provided a realistic way to avoid chaos . Ayub was a 'Temporary bridge' on the road to democratic Pakistan . He provided a way to escape chaos .
 In February 1959 Muhammad Khurshid chaired a meeting of the Pakistani general staff and senior U.S. military and State Department officials . In February Khurzid chaired the meeting of Pakistan's general staff .
 Economic assistance, military aid, and budgetary expenditures were at issue . Economic assistance and military aid was the focus of debate .
 Pakistanis wanted new weapons to replace the ‘old junk’ from World War I, some of which was still in the U.S. inventory . Some of the weapons still remain in the United States inventory . The Pakistanis are seeking new weapons from the 'old junk'
 Pakistanis wanted '395 jet airplanes' but would settle for '35 high performance fighters' armed with advanced missiles . Pakistanis also wanted ‘395 jet planes’, but said they would settle with 35 fighters armed with missiles .
 Containment and U.S. intelligence installations provided Pakistan with a trump card . Containment gave Pakistan the upper hand . Pakistan's intelligence was key to its success .
 First, they hit U.S. officials over Kashmir, knowing that Washington wanted to stay out of the dispute . Washington wants to stay away from the Pakistani-Indian dispute . First, the United States hit out at Pakistan over Kashmir .
 Pakistanis argued that the alliance with the U.S. netted nothing on the critical issue of Kashmir . Therefore, the United States could provide more aid to Pakistan .
 Eisenhower administration campaigned to make the Pakistani dictator democratically presentable . General Ayub’s personality, Sandhurst education, and manners were admired by the Eisenhower administration .
 Washington parlayed these statements into a rehabilitation program for Ayub, which included press and academic coverage of the new regime in Karachi . The program included press coverage of Ayub's new regime .
 The first intelligence estimate published after the coup stated that the political and economic situation in Pakistan had improved and, for the next year or two, no threat to military rule appeared likely . The first estimate said that the situation had improved .
 Washington continued to push for more economic development and reduced tensions with India . Washington continues to push economic development .
 Ayub could hardly minimize calls for military hardware since this would undermine the support of the military who put him in power . Ayub's call for hardware would undermine his support for the military, he says .
 Ayub stated that he only wanted to modernize the forces currently under arms . Ayub was well aware that this clever position echoed the very advice being giving to Iran .
 He also offered to make these troops available for joint duty with the U.S. in the region .
 Ayub accompanied every request for weapons with an emphasis on the need for Pakistan’s economic development . Knowing what Washington wanted, Ayub said, ‘Every request was accompanied by a need for economic development'
 Ayub proposed that India and Pakistan create a common defensive policy in May 1959 . In May 1959, he proposed that the two countries create a joint defensive policy . Ayub's proposal was rejected by both countries .
 Ayub in particular seemed to believe that some common ground might be found with Nehru . Ayub seemed to think he could find common ground with the Indian leader .
 The Pakistani leader attempted to enlist the Australians to broach the topic of bilateral talks . Pakistani leader tried to enlist them to discuss bilateral talks with the Australians .
 Nehru's sensitivity stemmed from an article written by Ayub’s personal secretary, Qudratullah Shahab, concerning the Ayub-Nehru meeting in New Delhi . In part, Nehru said the article was ‘extraordinarily stupid and apparently quite incorrect
 The article indicated that Nehru wanted to compromise on Kashmir, and it drew harsh criticism in Nehru’s speech on 12 September in the Indian Parliament .
 This article, coupled with the ‘considerable strain’ resulting from the failure of Nehtu’s goodwill policy, left the Indian Prime Minister in no mood for compromise with anyone, much less Ayub Ayub .
 Nehru only indicated an interest in the Indus waters issue . In response, Nehru said he was interested in the issue . Nehru: "Indus waters is a matter of national interest"
 Ayub knew that if he played his cards correctly military aid, perhaps including advanced fighters, would be forthcoming . If he played the cards correctly, military aid would likely be forthcoming, Ayub said .
 President Eisenhower embarked on a world ‘peace mission’ in December 1959 . In a sweeping effort at personal diplomacy focused on developing countries, he visited developing countries .
 The trip included a four-day visit to India, the ‘leading non-committed country of the world’ and 36 hours in Pakistan . The trip also provided an opportunity to stress to both nations the importance of economic development and the need for a Kashmir settlement .
 Eisenhower wanted Pakistan and India to focus on economic development, social reform, and the Communist threat . Eisenhower wanted both countries to turn away from their confrontation over Kashmir .
 He also reiterated that until the Kashmir issue is resolved, relations with India would continue to fester . The Kashmir issue will be resolved, he said .
 Ayub complained about U.S. Congressional support for India and opposition to military aid to Pakistan . Ayub pointedly named Senator Kennedy, Senator Fulbright, and Congressman Bowles as culprits .
 Ayub repeatedly redirected the conversation to new military hardware for Pakistan . F-104 Starfighters, Sidewinder missiles, and Nike-Hercules anti-aircraft missiles were among the items Ayub wanted .
 Ayub relegated discussions of economic development to Minister of Finance Muhammad Shoaib in another meeting . Ayub said economic development was a priority for the meeting .
 President accepted Ayub’s view that ‘in some decades’ the improvement in education would allow the Pakistani people to vote for their leaders . Ayub's anti-Communist stance impressed the President .
 Eisenhower summoned Walt Rostow to the White House to discuss the need for greater U.S. efforts in the developing world . Rostow was the president of the United States' most successful foreign policy efforts .
 The trip solidified a policy direction that emphasized the Communist Chinese threat against India and the need for both India and Pakistan to focus on economic development, as opposed to their territorial disputes .
 Ayub obtained much of what he wanted, including an extension of military aid beyond the levels of the 1954 agreement . Ayub got most of the deal, including extension of the agreement .
 The package included Sidewinder missiles, B-57 aircraft, and an evaluation of an F-104 purchase . The package also included a evaluation of a possible F-103 purchase .
 On 3 March 1960, Eisenhower’s personal intervention gained approval for the Starfighter sale . The Starfighter was the first Starfighter to be sold in the US .
 Eisenhower had concluded that no real alternative existed but to provide Ayub with the weapons he had requested . Ayub had requested the weapons, but Eisenhower had decided to give him them .
 Pakistan was a key member of CENTO and SEATO, and hosted critical U.S. intelligence sites . Pakistan hosted critical United States intelligence sites during the Cold War .
 At the Badaber site, Pakistan monitored Soviet missile tests in Central Asia . Peshawar supported U-2 operations .
 Nehru avoided political compromise over Kashmir on Nehru’s terms without angering Eisenhower . Nehru had avoided compromise on Kashmir on his terms with Eisenhower . He had avoided political compromises on Kashmir in Kashmir on the terms .
 Ayub had increased his value to the U.S. as well, and yet he continued to support Arab issues, like Algeria and Palestine, in return for Arab support on Kashmir .
 Ayub also appeared to be on the way to a successful implementation of land reform, something long advocated by Washington . Ayub: "Land reform is not only possible, but it's also possible that it will be successful"
 The collapse of Iraq, the weaknesses of Iran, and Soviet influence in Afghanistan had played into his hands . Washington happily embraced him, says President Obama .
 Following the U.S. presidential election in November 1960, the only question remained was whether ot not a new administration would honor the Eisenhowet commitments .
 Ayub and the Pakistani leadership preferred the election of Vice-President Nixon . For this reason, Ayub's election of Nixon was not considered a success .
 Ayub Ayub summoned Ambassador Rountree to his office following MKennedy’s November victory . Ayub called Rountrees to his . office to discuss the situation .
 President Hussain Hussain made the remarks to the U.S. in Pakistan . He said his rule had brought stability to Pakistan . Hussain said he wanted reassurance that the defense atrangements with the United States would continue .
 President Eisenhower arrived in New Delhi on his good-will trip, he received a hero’s welcome . Pakistan and China are the two countries that have been at odds with each other for decades .
 Indian Prime Minister faced a direct military and diplomatic challenge from the Chinese . Beset by chronic domestic political and economic problems and the nagging dispute over Kashmir, the Indian PM now faces a direct challenge from China .
 In his first meeting with Nehtu on 10 December, discussions focused on Pakistan . Pakistan. Pakistan.
 Nehru was circumspect in his criticisms of Pakistan, but he wanted U.S. assurances that they would control Ayub Ayub . Nehru wanted United States assurances that the Pakistani government would control him .
 He told Eisenhower that he feared a Pakistani ‘stab in the back’ while India confronted the Chinese on the border . Eisenhower feared a 'stab in back' when he told Eisenhower he feared it .
 On 13 December, after touring India, Eisenhower returned to New Delhi and held additional meetings with Nehru . Eisenhower toured India and met Nehru in New Delhi .
 Prime Minister wanted Eisenhower to pressure Ayub into an agreement renouncing military force . In an effort to secure the Pakistani front, the Prime Minister tried to get Ayub to withdraw forces .
 Nehru argued that it would reduce Indian fears of Paksitani military modernization . Nehru said the move would reduce India's fears of modernization . The decision was made in 1947 .
 President Obama instructed the United States Embassy in Karachi to explore the possibility of an agreement with Ayub Ayub .
 Rountree warned that Nehru had proposed this approach in the past, beginning with Pakistani PM Liaquat Ali Khan in New Delhi on 22 December 1949 .
 When presented with the suggestion, Ayub stated that this was an old Indian ploy that would commit New Delhi to nothing and allow them to consolidate their position in Kashmir . Ayub said this was a ploy to commit India to nothing .
 Ayub stated that Pakistan could only agree to such a proposition if the process for a Kashmir agreement were firmly established and adhered to by both parties . Ayub said Pakistan would only agree if process for Kashmir agreement was firmly established . He added that both parties would have to agree to a
 New Delhi believed that the U.S. would continue to be India’s principal economic partner, and treated aid as a virtual entitlement . New Delhi thought that the United States would continue its economic partner .
 The aid failed to garner much pro-US sentiment in India . The Indians saw it as an obligation of a rich country like the United States .
 The lack of a clearly-agreed-upon border between China and India had been a potential problem for some time . India and China have been at odds for years over a border dispute .
 Chinese patrols found Chinese sutvey parties penetrating deep into the disputed areas .
 Additional patrols in 1957 confirmed a Chinese presence as much as 70 miles inside the disputed zone . Additional patrols confirmed the presence of Chinese troops in 1957 .
 From November 1956 to February 1957, the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso, visited India . The Dalai Lama visited India from 1956 to 1957 . The visit was part of a tour of India by the Tibetan Lama .
 Dalai Lama ‘showed some independence’ vis-a-vis the Chinese on his return . Dalai Lama was apparently encouraged by the visit, according to the Dalai Lama .
 Tibet reached a flashpoint, and the angry Chinese cancelled a visit Nehru had planned to make there . The angry Chinese canceled a visit to Tibet after the visit .
 Beijing feared that Nehru would encoutage calls for greater independence from India . Beijing feared it would encourage calls for more independence .
 A conflict with China also ran counter to the spirit of his commitment to bring China into the world community, he said . A conflict between China and the U.S. would have run counter to his pledge to bring the country into the global community .
 It would prove the U.S. right and justify the Pakistani adherence to defensive military pacts . Worse, it would prove it would justify Pakistan's adherence to military agreements .
 Nehru ignored growing warnings from the West and rejected Ayub’s call for a joint India-Pakistan approach to defense in facing the Chinese . Ayub's call was rejected by Nehru and rejected the idea .
 Nehru began to cultivate a Soviet relationship with the Soviet Union . Nehru was impressed by the success of the Soviet option .
 In February 1960, Khrushchev stopped in New Delhi twice on his trip to Indonesia . The visit was part of a visit to India by the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet leader did not specifically mention the dispute with China . He assured India of support .
 Nehru gave a speech in the Lok Sabha flatly rejecting any compromise with China . Perhaps encouraged by Khrushchev’s presence, Nehru rejected any compromise . Nehru: ‘I will not accept any compromise’
 At this point, the Indians decided to establish permanent military posts in the border region to prevent further Chinese encroachments .
 The United States included advanced supersonic aircraft in its modernization of the Pakistani armed forces . New Delhi learned that the U.S. had included the aircraft in Pakistan's modernization .
 Nehru believed that the shipment of supersonic aircraft to Pakistan would not materialize . Nehru had hoped that the shipments of the aircraft would never materialize. Nehru was disappointed by the news .
 As a result, the actual announcement of the agreement came as more of a shock than it should have . The announcement came as a result of the announcement .
 They quickly followed this with a request to purchase Sidewinders and F-104 aircraft . The request was quickly followed by a request for the F-105 aircraft .
 Washington dodged the request and referred the Indians to the British for a ‘similar’ weapon . The British referred the request to Washington for a similar weapon .
 In August 1960, India began to negotiate not only for the purchase of transport aircraft and helicopters from the Soviet Union, but also for a manufacturing agreement . India began the negotiations with the Soviets in August 1960 . The two countries were negotiating an agreement to buy transport planes and helicopters .
 In a 26 September 1960 meeting with Eisenhower at the UNGA, Nehru stated that he saw little hope for resolution of the border issue with China . Nehru: "Icydissure of border dispute with China is unlikely"
 U.S. foreign policy in Iran and Pakistan retained a decided preference for economic development as the basis for creating stable pro-Western states . But the realities of the security situation dictated support for authoritarian or military regimes .
 Washington feared that a failure to act in this way or too much pressure to reform would result in the adoption of neutralist policies that would undermine the strategic interests of the U.S.
 Intelligence assets in Iran and Pakistan were of increasing importance to the U.S. U.N. intelligence assets in Pakistan and Iran are important to the nation's interests, officials say .
 In the case of Pakistan, these sites had to be maintained, at the tisk of alienating India . Pakistan had to maintain the sites at the risk of being alienated .
 Military aid programs ran counter to Eisenhower’s own best judgment about how best to serve the long-term interests of their allies . But immediate strategic security interests took precedence .
 Iran saw little option but to placate the Shah with military assistance while pressing for economic and political reform . In the case of Iran, the administration had little choice but to appease the Shah .
 At the end of the Eisenhower administration, containment strategy and Iran’s role in it resembled the situation of December 1954 . Iran's role in containment strategy resembles the situation in December 1954, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Shah was obsessed with acquiring military hardware at the expense of economic development and modernization . Shah was still obsessed with acquisition of military hardware . The Shah's obsession with military hardware was the focus of modernization .
 Washington continues to fear the Shah’s moods and his vacillating leadership . Washington continued to fear him and his moods, writes Shah .
 Eisenhower was convinced that only economic development and social and political reform could ultimately save Iran for the West . Eisenhower and his advisors feared that pressure to reform might very well set in motion events that would mirror Baghdad in 1958 .
 Eisenhower wanted a stable alternative to the Shah’s regime, but one simply did not exist . Eisenhower wanted to find an alternative to Shah's regime, and it simply didn't exist .
 Ayub Khan had stabilized the regime and appeared to be making headway in pursuing controlled reform . He was ousted from the country in 1991 .
 The fact remained that India had refused to commit to Western defense arrangements . India was pursuing a new military-assistance relationship with the Soviet Union .
 Ayub gave every appearance of being a stable, solid ally, and as such had to be valued . As such had been valued, Ayub was valued, he said .
 Eisenhower administration saw no real alternative to supporting the Shah and Ayub and their demands . Eisenhower administration, quite simply, saw no choice but to back Ayub, says historian .
 The experience of Iraq and the fragility and instability of democratic and pro-Western regimes in the region dictated a decided preference for authoritarian control, and if necessary iron-fisted stability . The fragility of democratic . and proWestern regimes dictated that authoritarian control was preferred .
 Kennedy administration now had to decide if it would follow Eisenhower’s lead . Kennedy administration would have to decide whether to follow Eisenhower's lead .
 Chester Bowles, former Ambassador to India and critic of both the Shah and Ayub, was a Kennedy advisor . Bowles was a critic of Ayub and Shah .
 The events in the Middle East and South Asia found their way into domestic U.S. politics . Nixon, Nixon, and the Greater Middle East are key issues in American politics .
 The candidates in the 1960 presidential election used the turmoil in the region in an attempt to gain political advantage, in what would turn out to be a close election .
 Democrats pointed to the gains that the Soviet Union had made in the region . Republicans argued that because of their experience they had been able to manage a complex, difficult situation . The country could not risk the inexperienced leadership of Massachusetts senator from Massachusetts .
 The events were cast in terms of the Cold War and the effectiveness of the containment policy under Eisenhower . These events were invariably cast in . terms of . the effectiveness . under Eisenhower under . Eisenhower's containment policy .
 The Kennedy campaign played on the uncertainty and chaos of the 1955-1958 period . Eisenhower foreign policy was defined in those terms .
 The Democratic challenger made Dulles’ foreign policy a major negative campaign issue . Dulles' foreign policy was a major issue in the 1960s .
 The Suez crisis, problems with Nasser, strained ties with India, the coup in Iraq, and Soviet regional influence contributed to the view that the Eisenhower administration represented the moribund policies of the past . Eisenhower administration represents the past.
 The U.S. has fallen behind the Communist bloc in the contest for world influence . It added to a growing sense that the United States had fallen behind China in world power .
 It also provided a rallying point for much of the intellectual and academic community . It was also provided an opportunity for many of the world's top thinkers .
 The Democrats gained valuable and articulate allies among those with whom Dulles had had a long and prickly relationship with . Dulles gained valuable allies with whom he had had long been with .
 Kennedy tapped into both the hostility toward policies and the personal animosity of those who had viewed Eisenhowet’s policy under Dulles as simplistic and moralizing . Kennedy tapped . into both .
 The election appeared to have the potential to become a political watershed .
 The consensus view assumed that the election of VicePresident Nixon would see the continuation of conservative, anti-Communist policies that favored traditional Western allies in the Middle East .
 We will use our economic resources, public and private, to assist others in their quest for progress with freedom and for national selfdetermination, free of all outside domination, we say .
 The Vice-President’s advisors, like Attorney General William P Rogers, reinforced the conservative, anti-Communist bent of his campaign . Attorney General Williams P Rogers was a key figure .
 Countries like India and Egypt saw signs that fundamental change might result from a Democratic administration .
 The 1960 presidential campaign began in earnest for the Kennedy camp in 1958 . Kennedy's campaign for the 1960 presidential election began in 1958 in New York .
 Kennedy and his advisors focused on series of setbacks associated with Soviet gains in the developing and non-aligned world, and systematically created ‘facts’ to differentiate his party from the Republicans .
 Eisenhower administration accused of ignoring the necessity of economic development . Eisenhower had repeatedly tried to pursue modernization policies recommended by advisors like Walt Rostow .
 The Democrats took every opportunity to emphasize the forward-looking nature of their programs and Moscow’s successes .
 In effect, the Kennedy campaign transformed the Eisenhower administration’s own focus on Communism into a political opportunity . The Kennedy campaign turned the Eisenhower's focus on communism into an opportunity for political gain .
 Kennedy found himself using the domino theory to attack Republican policy . Kennedy was known for his anti-Communist rhetoric and anti-Republican rhetoric .
 Kennedy’s pronouncements, particularly those in the fall of 1960, reflected a growing sense of urgency in the campaign . Kennedy's pronouncements in 1960 reflect a growing urgency in campaign .
 His polling numbers were sliding, and the opposition attacked his lack of experience in foreign affairs . His poll numbers have been sliding, but his polling numbers are still rising .
 He was doing everything possible possible to distance himself from Eisenhower policies and present his candidacy as something fresh and with new ideas . He was trying to present himself as a candidate for president .
 Almost all the issues and ideas concerning aid and economic development focused on the competition between the U.S. and the Communist bloc . First, almost all of the issues were about the competition .
 Kennedy exaggerated the level of neglect on the part of Eisenhower, and ignored the fact that the Democrats’ arguments had been the basis for Eisenhowet’s policies in India since 1953 .
 Pakistan received little or no attention from Kennedy during the campaign . Pakistan was not mentioned in Kennedy's visit .
 He ignored the coup in Pakistan, and did not criticize Eisenhower over Ayub because he, like Eisenhower and Dulles, saw no alternative to supporting the Pakistani regime . Ayub was the prime minister of the late Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Rostow, Bowles, and John K Galbraith on the Kennedy foreign policy team made economic development the focus of Kennedy's campaign rhetoric .
 Eisenhower administration had consistently pursued this type of effort, not only in India and Pakistan but also in Iran and Egypt, since 1953 . The press and others viewed this as new policy, but it was not new policy .
 Kennedy team also had another subtle advantage in playing the India card . Kennedy team had a subtle advantage playing India card in the match .
 Prior to58, maintaining economic funding for India had been a difficult task because of India’s non-aligned stance . Prior to1958, keeping economic funding from India was difficult due to India's stance .
 Nehru found it politically more useful to assign Menon abroad rather than have him create political problems for the Prime Minister in New Delhi . Nehru decided to assign him abroad instead of having him create problems for him .
 Menon went out of his way to antagonize the United States and praise the Soviet Union and Communist bloc . Unfortunately, Menon failed to address the U.S.
 Moscow could not have hoped for more consistent support had Menon been an agent of influence . Moscow could have hoped to have supported Menon if Menon had been a Russian agent .
 His attacks on the West and his obvious pro-Soviet leanings, coupled with a love of the limelight, made Krishna Menon ‘Mr India’ in the eyes of the media and political groups in the US . His close and well-publicized telationship with
 The Eisenhower administration had two salient effects on the Eisenhower administration, both of which made their way into the presidential campaign . With respect to U.S. domestic politics, this process had two significant effects .
 Eisenhower administration found it difficult to maintain the current level of aid to India, let alone to increase it . First, the Eisenhower administration had difficulty maintaining the current aid .
 The considerable aid that was forthcoming served as a lightning tod for right-wing criticism of ‘foreign aid’ in general, and of India in particular, in particular . Second, the considerable aid .
 By bringing Menon back to India, Nehru might as well have sent him to the moon . Menon had no understanding of or real backing within the Indian political structure .
 With Menon gone and aid to India understated, Kennedy campaign pounced on the political opportunity . Kennedy campaign seized the opportunity to win support for India .
 Pakistan was mote important than ever to U.S. interests in the Middle East and to containment . Pakistan was important to the United States in the Mideast and to the West, says President Obama .
 Ayub had scored a major victory in obtaining new advanced weapons from the Eisenhower administration . Ayub's victory was a major success in obtaining weapons from Eisenhower administration.
 President Ayub had serious misgivings about the possibility of a Kennedy victory . Ayub was not impressed with Kennedy's popularity in Washington .
 Pakistanis conclude that Kennedy win might reverse their gains and jeopardize their economic and mnilitary-aid packages .
 Pakistan was a key U.S. ally, and perhaps with Ayub in control, the most stable in the region . Pakistan is now a key United States ally, but perhaps the most unstable region .
 Averell Harriman, a key Kennedy advisor, exacerbated concerns when he told The Times of India that Kennedy's plans for the White House will be limited to a limited time period .
 Unhappily U.S. policies have aggravated rather than eased the situation, and contributed to an arms trace detrimental to both countries . The United States has contributed to the situation in Syria .
 The coup in Iraq and rising Communist influence had shifted the nature of Iranian-U.S. relations, and placed Tehran in a much stronger position, says Iran's president .
 Feat of a coup in Tehran or a declaration of neutrality from the Shah had their desired effect on Washington . Washington had hoped the Shah would be neutralizing Iran . The Shah's government declared neutrality from Iran .
 The growing U.S. association with the Shah and his authoritarian regime was unfortunate but, at least for now, unavoidable . The growing United States association with Iran's regime is unfortunate but unavoidable .
 With the loss of Iraq, stabilizing and strengthening the Shah’s regime had become a priority . The Shah's regime has been weakened since the fall of Iraq in 2003 . The regime was weakened by Iraq's fall of Saddam Hussein .
 The Shah’s regime faced internal pressure from Washington for political and economic reform in Iran . The Shah's regime was heavily dependent on the Shah's support for reform .
 Iraqi tegime had fallen during a period when reform and economic development appeared to be transforming Iraq into a more open, pluralistic society .
 Shah enjoyed more leverage in Washington than at any previous time . As for the Shah, he enjoyed more . than ever previous time.
 Shah supported the status quo in the form of a Nixon victory . Understandably, the Shah supported Nixon's victory in the White House .
 The situation in Iran was considered so volatile that, like the Arab-Israeli dispute, both campaigns adopted a virtual hands-off policy . The situation was seen as so volatile both campaigns adopt a hands-on policy .
 Such a debate could well have encouraged the Shah’s opponents and further threatened the regime, says the author . Such an open debate could have helped the Shah's opponents, he says .
 Shah might also have pushed the Shah toward an arrangement with the Soviet Union . The Shah's relationship with the Soviets may have helped push the Shah closer to Moscow .
 Eisenhower administration and foreign-policy experts of the Kennedy campaign united in their desire to see a program of controlled reform from above, backed by a strong, loyal military and security apparatus .
 Only by splitting hairs could any observer discern a real difference between the policies of the Eisenhower administration and those proposed by Kennedy toward Iran . Kennedy's proposed Iran policy would be different from that of Eisenhower's administration .
 JFK also developed a campaign to differentiate himself from the Eisenhower administration, by employing a thoroughly jaundiced interpretation of the events of 1956-1960 . With regard to the Arab Middle East, Kennedy also developed . JFK and peace in the Arab Mideast was JFK's attempt to distinguish himself
 Between 1955 and 1958, President Eisenhower and his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, faced a series of foreign-policy crises in the Middle East unlike anything experienced before .
 Even the Iranian crisis of 1953 paled in comparison with the turbulence and fluidity of the Arab world during those years, whose ups and downs gave the impression that the West had completely lost the initiative in the region .
 Eisenhower's demand that the British and French withdraw from Suez caused a serious rift with America’s closest allies, just as forcing the Israelis to withdraw from the Sinai infuriated Israel .
 Eisenhower administration performed decently in dealing with this series of changes, but political reality and perception diverged more significantly than usual . Arguably, the Eisenhower administration did well .
 The Aswan imbroglio, the Suez crisis, the Iraqi coup, problems in Syria, and the intervention in Lebanon gave the appearance of a rudderless policy, benefiting the Soviet Union and radical Arab regimes . As a result, the Aswan and Suez crises, the
 The ensuing cacophony of criticism from the Democrats, the Zionist community, Israel, and allies reinforced the notion that U.S. policy was badly mismanaged . Israel, Israel and allies have been critical of the Obama administration .
 The Soviets were portrayed as controlling the initiative through their radical Arab clients . Political and media criticism further reinforced this image by portraying the Soviets as controlling .
 In a ‘what went wrong’ environment, the Arab Middle East became a campaign issue in which Kennedy’s style triumphed over both substance and reality . The Arab Mideast became an issue that became an 'Arab Middle East' issue .
 Kennedy depicted himself as having the ability to control Middle East events through a new policy . Kennedy’s confident manner served him well, as he depicted himself .
 The evidence suggests that Kennedy and his advisors convinced themselves that they could control events by applying hardheaded policy-planning and by focusing on economic development and personal diplomacy .
 The Arab Cold War of 1959-1960 also assisted Kennedy by ushering in a lull in the Arab-Israeli dispute . The Arab cold war also helped Kennedy usher in a quiet period of peace .
 Eisenhowet’s and Dulles’ initiatives to improve relations with Nasser allowed Kennedy to advocate economic aid without fear of backlash .
 The manner in which the Kennedy campaign employed the situation in the Arab Middle East is a lesson in style and communication skills . Kennedy's use of the situation is a valuable lesson in how to communicate with the Arab world .
 Eisenhower criticized for having simplistic view of Communism and Arab nationalism . Reassessments now criticized Eisenhower for having a simplistic view . Eisenhower's view of communism and nationalism has been criticized .
 Kennedy had begun to build this cause in closed sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1957 . He grilled Admiral Arthur W Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on the issue of Nasser .
 Kennedy pointed out that it was likely that Egypt’s relationship with the US was simply a ‘matter of convenience’ ‘when he could not receive arms from us [the US] after the Gaza raid of 1955 .
 The guarantee proposed by the President had the potential to make Iraq more vulnerable . Kennedy raised questions about Iraq, stating that in fact the guarantee .
 The Eisenhower administration had come to this conclusion about Nasser and Communism, but the Kennedy campaign ignored these aggravating details . Of course, by the following year, the Kennedy administration had .
 Kennedy claimed the Eisenhower administration had driven the nonaligned world, including Nasser, toward the Soviet Union . Kennedy claimed that the unenlightened policies of the Eisenhower . administration had led the non-aligned world to Soviet Russia .
 A vote against it would have undermined the U.S. position abroad . The vote against the measure was a crucial vote for the United States . The U.N. Security Council voted overwhelmingly to approve the measure .
 Kennedy got credit for supporting the President, and put himself in a position to criticize the administration if things did not go well . Kennedy was credited for his support of the President .
 Kennedy's policies reflected the same optimism as Eisenhower's had in the 1953-1955 period, and ignored the hardlearned lessons of 1955-1958 . Thus Kennedy’s policies mirror the optimism of 1953-55 period .
 Kennedy’s ideas were a reversion to the economically-driven policies in which Eisenhower and Dulles originally had so much faith, Rostow had been a part . Rostow was Rostow's partner in the original Eisenhower-Dulles administration .
 At this juncture, economic development would replace militarism and confrontation . Economic development would reduce Soviet influence and enhance that of the West . The U.S. should not engage in confrontation with the Soviet Union .
 The fact that this policy substantially mirrored the early policies of Eisenhower, Dulles, and Herter was ignored was ignored . The policy was ignored by the White House .
 Dulles foreign policy in respect of non-alignment had been seriously mishandled . Chester Bowles, Averell Harriman, and Rostow believed that under Dulls foreign policy had been badly mishandled by the U.S.
 Israel and the American Zionists, Kennedy’s supporters, had more than a little to do with the Egyptian request for arms and with the subsequent U.S. rebuff . They managed to conveniently overlook the fact that Israel and . the American . Zionists had more to do
 These ideas meshed well with Kennedy’s view of himself and of what kind of an administration he would head . These ideas also meshed with Kennedy's view of the administration, he says .
 He wanted to shake up the foreign-policy community with new blood and ideas, he said . He said: "I want to shake-up the foreign policy community with . new blood"
 Nasser cut a much more progressive and impressive figure than the Jordanian or Saudi monarchies . Nasser was a far more progressive figure than Jordan, Jordan and Saudi monarchs .
 The message of secular nationalism and social and economic development roughly paralleled Kennedy’s view of himself . Kennedy's view of secularism and social development roughly matched that of himself. Kennedy's message was secular nationalism .
 Kennedy believed these elements offered the promise of a comprehensive settlement of the ArabIsraeli dispute . Kennedy believed that these elements, combined with the ideas of economic development, offered the . promise of an ArabIsraeli settlement .
 Kennedy campaign sought and received support from Jewish and pro-Zionist groups . Kennedy campaign attacked Eisenhower administration for its poor handling of Egypt .
 During the 1960 presidential campaign, these policy elements appeared repeatedly in Kennedy speeches, particularly those addressed to Jewish groups . Kennedy's speeches were often addressed to groups of Jewish people .
 Kennedy focused on the Israeli and Zionist unhappiness with Eisenhower over his even-handed policy in the Middle East . Kennedy focused .
 Myer Feldman, a Washington lawyer, became Kennedy’s ‘de facto ambassador to American Jewry’, a position that did not exist in Eisenhower's White House . Feldman was a lawyer from Washington, DC, who later became a prominent Jewry lawyer .
 Kennedy pressed the boundaries by focusing on the Cold War and the issue of Soviet influence . Despite a tacit agreement with the Nixon campaign to avoid the Arab-Israeli dispute as a campaign issue, Kennedy focused on Cold War issues .
 Eisenhower plan funded Eisenhower plan, but also allowed discretion to the administration on how the money would be used . This vote allowed significant discretion on how much of the plan would be spent .
 Feldman was disliked by some senior administration officials who felt that advocacy of Israeli interests and warnings about electoral consequences of pursuing pro-Arab policies prevented a balanced Middle East policy .
 He outlined a plan that called for the U.S. to reaffirm its friendship to nations in the region regardless of race, religion or politics .
 Obama administration would focus American diplomacy on ending the 'state of war' between Israel and the Arab states .
 The White House should use the authority and prestige of the White House to call the leaders of Istael and the Arab States to consider privately their common problems, he says .
 The speech presented an overview of his goal for his administration — comptehensive peace and the use of economic development to achieve it . The speech was presented by President Obama .
 Both the British and Americans had failed since 1918 to achieve an ArabIsraeli settlement . Kennedy believed that he could make it happen and made this aspiration the centerpiece of his policies .
 Kennedy foreign-policy team believed their approach was different from that of Eisenhower . Kennedy foreign policy team believed that their approach would be different from Eisenhower's . Despite all the similarities, including the advisors in some cases, some of the Kennedy team believed .
 In effect his charm and style would allay Nasser's concerns about U.S. intentions . Kennedy believed that personal diplomacy would remove personal animosities that had poisoned Egyptian-American relations .
 Phillips Talbot, head of the NEA Bureau, shared this view to 1960 JFK vs. 1960 JFK . Talbot: JFK was the only president in the world .
 In effect, the primacy of Nasser and the ultimate goal of a comprehensive peace created a policy policy . Komer, Talbot, and Ambassador Badeau worked together, coordinating information for the President .
 He believed that by focusing on Nasset’s self esteem, he could improve the chances for US-UAR cooperation, undermine the Soviets, and advance the cause of a peace settlement with Israel, he said .
 President Kennedy intended to use economic aid as a lever to influence Egyptian policy . Second, like the previous administration, Kennedy wanted economic aid to influence Egypt's policy .
 He believed that the technocrats in his administration were more sophisticated than those in Eisenhowet’s . He said that they would be able to place aid more precisely in order to bring Egypt to the ‘take-off point’
 The new administration believed that it would succeed where Eisenhower had failed . Interestingly enough, there was relatively little additional funding, and yet the new administration .
 Kennedy brought specialists from outside the government into the policy-making tent . Kennedy brought experts from outside of government into his team of experts .
 This gave the White House the option of excluding all but a few professional Foreign Service officers from the process when desired . The White House had the option to exclude all but the few professional foreign Service officers .
 These two appointments go a long way towards explaining Kennedy's thought processes in relation to the Greater Middle East in general and to the UAR and the Arab-Israeli dispute .
 Talbot was executive director of the American Universities Field Staff for ten years . Talbot had been the executive director for 10 years . He has been in charge of the field staff at American Universities for ten .
 AUFS consisted of a loose collection of academics who spent half their time in a particular region and half in the US, teaching or lecturing . AUFS was a loose group of academics from around the world .
 Talbot’s field had been India and Pakistan, under his direction AUFS produced a number of studies of Arab nationalism and the non-aligned movement .
 He understood the issues, but was not tainted by either the proZionist or the Arabist label . He understood issues but not tainted with either pro- or anti-Arabist labels .
 Talbot possessed solid academic-type expertise in the region . Nasset’s connections with the non-aligned movement and with India, he said .
 Many of the opinions expressed in the AUFS reports agreed with notions that Kennedy held about the situation in the Middle East . In addition, many of the views expressed in these reports agree with Kennedy's notions .
 Administration officials thought that John Badeau’s appointment would send a message of sensitivity to Nasser . The appointment of John Badesau was thought to be a signal of sensitivity .
 U.S.-UAR difficulties were rooted in an unfortunate misunderstanding, says Nasser . Once it was rectified, there would follow numerous possibilities, including an Arab-Israeli peace, he says .
 The President had stated his policy priorities, the economic experts were in place, and he had taken control of the diplomatic process by placing appointees like Talbot and Badeau, who depended on his patronage, in key positions . The President's policy priorities were stated, the President had
 Kennedy’s plan to engage the UAR appeared ill-conceived at best at best . Viewed through the Middle Eastern prism, Kennedy's plan for engagement with UAR was not good enough . The UAR is a key ally in the Middle East .
 The idea that Nasser and the UAR leadership were merely expressing nationalist sentiments in terms of revolutionary ideology constituted a basic tenet of the Kennedy Middle East plan . Nasser’s commitment to revolutionary ideals was largely rhetorical, and that his actions rarely matched his words .
 In reality, Nasser had for decades been a revolutionary driven by ideas of class struggle and anti-colonialism in any form . Nasser was for decades driven by class struggle, anti-colonialism, he says .
 It was not a theoretically structured, clearly articulated approach; instead, he believed in a loose collection of ideas and theories . "It's not a theory, but it's a collection of theories," he said .
 Nasset's early attempts to express this ideological bent would have alerted Kennedy to the more revolutionary aspects of his thought . Nasset’s tendency to pursue less than well conceived policies, which made him somewhat unpredictable .
 Nasset’s attempt to express an ideological basis for his views and actions . A vague, metaphysical rambling about the ‘permanent revolutionary struggle’, it nevertheless gives an insight into Nasset's attempts to express his ideological views .
 The result was the result of an eclectic political, social, and economic ideology . The result is an eclectic mix of political and social ideology .
 Nasset's insistence that all political parties disband at the time of the Sytian-Eeyptian unification in 1958 constituted an ideological motivation to create a society with one creed and no organized political parties . Nasset’s insistence that . all political . parties disband constituted an
 Nasset's ideas were crude and lacked clear articulation, but they were real . Nasset’s ideas lacked articulation but were real. Nasset: “I’m not sure what I’ve done, but it was real.” Nasset
 Kennedy administration missed the significance of this component in the situation, for two basic reasons . The Kennedy administration did not realize the significance in the crisis, for example .
 First, the new administration understood ideological motivations largely in terms of materialist economic factors . The new administration understands ideological motivations, but not ideological ones .
 Kennedy’s view of economic development followed virtually the same paradigm as that of Eisenhower and Dulles when they arrived in office in 1953 . Kennedy's economic development was the same as those of the two presidents .
 Kennedy advisors believed apparent ideological differences expressed frustration with the West and nationalist rhetoric, not differences of substance . Key Kennedy advisors who were dealing with Nasser, particularly Badeau, believed ideological differences were expressed by Nasser .
 The idea that Nasser held some fundamental revolutionary views was foreign to the Kennedy establishment . Nasser's views were foreign to Kennedy establishment, he said .
 Third, pragmatically, Nasser intended to benefit no matter which patty won the election, he says . Nasser wanted to benefit regardless of who won the vote .
 Eisenhower administration understood and applauded Nasser’s consistent anti-Communist stand, but also understood that he was a revolutionary with his own vision for the Middle East . Nasser's anti-communist stand was consistent, but he was revolutionary with own vision .
 The degree of revolutionary and ideological motivations within the Egyptian regime would only become undeniably apparent well after the new administration had taken office . It would be the first time the regime had taken control of the country .
 Kennedy and his advisors believed that the region had stabilized and that the Arab-Israeli situation had improved . Kennedy believed that that the situation in the region was stable and improved .
 They failed to understand that the union with Syria and the conflict with Iraq had monopolized Nasset’s attention, he says . Nasset: “They failed to realize that the . union with . Syria and Iraq had . monopolized the attention of Nasset,’
 Nasset: "The misunderstanding served an important purpose. From Nasset’s point of view, the misunderstanding served a purpose" Nasset says he hopes the misunderstanding serves an important part of the story .
 He projected himself as a nationalist and anti-Communist by suppressing the Communist parties in the UAR and by working with the U.S. on Iraq .
 President Obama's improved relationship with the U.S. gave him added respectability with conservative Arab states . Also, improved relations with the United States helped him gain respectability .
 The messages coning out of the U.S. presidential election sounded positive on the subject of ‘North-South’ divisions and the efficacy of non-alignment .
 When considering the chase for Arab-Israeli peace, Kennedy failed to consider the broader context . Kennedy should have been more careful about Arab-Israel peace, he says .
 The leverage of economic aid constituted another area in which the Kennedy administration appeared threadbare . Economic aid was another area where the administration was lacking .
 The United States had attempted to use economic leverage to influence Nasser from as eatly as 1954 . The U.S. had attempted economic leverage from 1954 to 1954 .
 Funding for the Aswan Dam, a huge sum, did not deflect Nasser from arms deals with the Soviets or attacks on those Western policies with which he disagreed . Kennedy advisors would have realized that funding for the dam did not divert Nasser's attention to arms deals .
 The prospects for an Arab-Israeli peace as laid out in the campaign appeared to lack any basis in reality . Finally, the prospects for peace in the Arab world appear to be lacking any basis .
 Had Nasser been personally predisposed to such a possibility, and in 1960 he would not have survived the preliminary discussions . Nasser would have not survived the initial discussions .
 U.S. aid, political support, and goodwill counted for little in the Arab world's internecine wars for leadership in the region . United States aid and political support for Arab leaders counted for very little in Arab world, U.N. says .
 Nasser understood that he had come to power at least in part because of the preceding regime’s total impotence during the 1948 war . Nasser believed that he came to power because the previous regime was impotent .
 Nasser had become the embodiment of Arab nationalism and unity for most of the Arab world . He believed that Israel represented the last physical vestige of colonialism in the region . More fundamentally, Nasser believed Israel was the last vestige .
 Any economic aid and political accommodation is better than none, but to actually participate in peace discussion was not possible . Any economic assistance and political assistance is better .
 At the highest levels, the administration failed to view the issue from Nasset’s perspective, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Administration failed to draw on experience and caution of the Eisenhower State Department .
 Eisenhowet’s success in weathering the events of the mid-1950s enabled Kennedy to selectively use those issues to advantage . In a way, he was able to weather the events in mid-50s .
 Eisenhower administration had unnecessarily alienated the leaders of the non-aligned world, Nehru and Nasser . It contributed to the view that the Eisenhower administration .
 Indian complaints about arms for Pakistan lend credibility to Democratic assertions that Eisenhower had done nothing in India’s capitalist competition with its Communist neighbors . At the same time, the lack of publicity for pre-1958 economic aid to New Delhi .
 These issues allowed Kennedy to ‘muddy the water’ with regard to Eisenhower foreign policy . Kennedy’s actions allowed him to 'muddy' the water with regards to foreign policy, he says .
 Change-oriented elements in the U.S. foreign-policy community united on the side of the Democratic challenger . They also united change-oriented parts of the American foreign policy community on the .
 Eisenhower-Dulles foreign-policy goals and tactics have long been criticized . They brought the support of key media elements, many of which had long criticized them . They also brought support from the media .
 This combination contributed to the perception that something was fundamentally wrong with the direction in which the U.S. was headed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 By focusing on the trials and tribulations of 1955-1958, Kennedy managed to get the public to overlook the differences between his proposed policies and those of Eisenhower .
 His assessment of problems has been, in most instances, moderate . His criticisms have concerned American methods and diplomatic inadequacies . JFK vs. 1960 JFK: "America's problems have been, most often, moderate"
 As the new Kennedy administration relearns the lessons taught to Eisenhower and Dulles during the early and mid-1950s, we will see just how accurate this observation was . We will see how accurate it was .
 As 1961 began, one interpretation of the situation in the Middle East appeared to bode well for non-aligned states . Another perspective indicated that authoritarian regimes were holding their own, or in some cases learning to manage the revolutionary climate .
 In particular, conservative military elements were taking an increasing proactive role in the political life of the Greater Middle East . Conservative military elements have taken an increasing role in political life .
 Turkey underwent a coup in 1960, and although the military stated that they had no desire for a permanent governing role, the generals made it clear that they intended to be the guardians of political stability . Turkey's military said they wanted to be guardians of stability .
 Iran seems to be headed for another of its periodic convulsions, with unforeseeable results . Iran seemed to be heading for another convulsion, but it was not foreseeable .
 Whatever stability existed in Pakistan was due to a military dictatorship . The country's stability existed due to the military dictatorship, it has been ruled out .
 India refused to deal with Pakistan on Kashmir, and faced a growing Chinese threat in the north . India also faced growing Chinese presence in the region .
 Jordan and Saudi Arabia survived the deluge of 1958, but the prognosis for both regimes remained uncertain . In the Arab Mideast, the situation remains uncertain .
 Sudan and Yemen had maintained their independence but charted courses decidedly accommodating to Nasser . Nasser ruled Nasser's regime in the Arab Spring .
 Istael appeared unwilling to make any real compromises with the Arabs, even in return for security guarantees and sophisticated arms . The deal was made with the Arab state in exchange for security assurances and arms .
 CIA believed Tel Aviv’s ‘peaceful’ nuclear program was a weapons facility . Then there was the problem of Tel Aviv's 'peaceful' nuclear program, which the CIA believed was a weapon facility .
 Kennedy and his advisors sincerely believed that they were poised to make great diplomatic gains where Eisenhower, Dulles, and Herter had failed . Despite all of this, Kennedy's advisors said they were prepared to succeed where they had failed.
 Nasser, Nehru, and Qasim, with more to lose, had problems assessing future developments . Kennedy administration had difficulty in calibrating the political climate and coming up with a more progressive strategy .
 In Washington, several contradictory views existed concerning the potential for U.S. and Western gains in the Middle East . In Washington. In Washington .
 This group focused on the events of 1954 to 1957 the Czech arms deal, Suez, and hostility toward the Eisenhower Doctrine . This group focuses on the Czech weapons deal and the Eisenhower doctrine .
 They argued that by treating emerging nationalist regimes with respect and by providing non-military aid, revolutionary fervor would continue to diminish as they increasingly focused on economic development . They said by treating them with respect, they would be able to provide non military aid .
 They failed to grasp, or ignored, the simple fact that their proposed solution reflected the exact wording of the Eisenhower administration's policy pronouncements in 1953 .
 Eisenhower and Dulles had pursued from 1953 to 1954 in their quest to correct what they viewed as the bungling of the Truman administration . It was precisely the policy that they had pursued in their bid to correct .
 The policy myopia that afflicted Kennedy and his advisors when it came to the Greater Middle East resulted from the fact that these more proactive policy advisors, who wanted to see dramatic change, initially held the upper hand .
 The Kennedy administration would take a somewhat contradictory position on the legacy of the Eisenhower administration . Because of this, the Kennedy administration took a contradictory position .
 Eisenhower and his team had bungled policy from 1954 through 1957, but on the other, they viewed administration policy as having ‘improved situation’ in the region since 1958 .
 They also used their often skewed perceptions of Eisenhower, to heavily influence their projections of what new policy initiatives might work in the future . They also use their skewed perceptions to help them predict what new policies might work .
 US-UAR cooperation heralded the end of the UAR’s revolutionary phase and portended progress toward better relations in the future, they say . Strikingly, they believed that UAR cooperation would end the revolutionary phase .
 The UAR, as it had in the Eisenhower administration, remained the centerpiece of U.S. policy, including renewed optimism with respect to a possible settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict .
 In South Asia, increasing problems between India and China appeared to promise progress on multiple fronts . India, China are the two most populous countries in the world .
 Kennedy believed that the Chinese threat could mutate into Indian support for U.S. policies in Southeast Asia . Kennedy held out hope of a major proWestern reorientation of Indian foreign policy .
 Washington hoped that India would reconsider its neutralist stance and move into a pro-Western and antiCommunist alignment . Washington hopes that India's stance would change to be pro-West and anti-Communist .
 The new administration believed friction with China would shift the focus of Indian foreign policy concerns away from Pakistan and allow a compromise settlement on Kashmit .
 Kennedy and his more proactive advisors hoped to push traditional regimes toward more liberal, if not democratic, policies . In parallel, Kennedy's advisors wanted to push the traditional regimes to more liberal policies .
 They believed that the gradual introduction of reforms would result in a pro-Western political stance . They said they believed that gradual reform will result in an improved government .
 Reforms were intended to co-opt dissident elements and broaden the base of popular support for the regimes . Reforms intended to 'co-opt dissidents' and 'broaden base' of support for regimes .
 The process would allow traditional regimes to develop more representative political institutions . In theory, this would allow them to form more representative institutions .
 An important part of encouraging and providing an atmosphere conducive to reform was to reinforce the progressive but non-tevolutionary model in regimes that had already dispatched, in one way or another, traditional rule .
 By incentivizing moderate policies in states like the UAR and solving key regional conflicts over Palestine and Kashmir, Kennedy and his advisors believed that they could reduce the threat posed to the traditional regimes, making political reform significantly less risky .
 A move to the political center would also increase the influence of the West and lessen the opportunity for Soviet meddling in the region . The move would also lessen the chance for Soviet interference in the area .
 The new President concluded that the only way to achieve these goals was through aggressive activism and his own personal involvement in diplomacy . Mr. Obama concluded that . The only way of achieving these goals would be aggressive activism .
 During 1961- 1962, a series of situations unfolded that completely undermined these plans . During 1961 and 1962, the plans were put in place .
 What emerged in 1961 and 1962 was the education of the Kennedy administration about the limitations of U.S. power and influence in the Greater Middle East . The Kennedy administration was learning about the limits of its power in the region .
 In January 1961, the new administration made improving relations with Nasser an immediate priority . Nasser was the prime minister of Egypt's first government .
 Kennedy and his advisors believed that the UAR lay at the heart of almost every issue in the Arab Mideast .
 It threatened the traditional and pro-Western regimes across the region . It played an increasingly important role in Africa, was a ranking member of the non-aligned movement .
 There was also belief that Nasser had entered a post-revolutionary stage and was progressing toward a more consetvative stance on several key issues . Nasser was also believed to be progressing toward more pro-Arab stances .
 The new U.S. administration could not have been more mistaken . Unfortunately, the new United States administration has been mistaken .
 He still believed in the ‘permanent revolutionary struggle’ described in Philosophy of Revolution . He still believes in the philosophy of the revolution .
 Nasser still thought that Egypt belonged to, and had an obligation to bring revolutionary progress to, ‘three circles’ — the Arab, the African and the Islamic . Nasser said Egypt had to bring revolution to, 'three circles'
 Eisenhower administration recognized that the U.S. could only successfully work with Nasser on a case-bycase basis . Eisenhower administration had become very familiar with the troubling ideological element in Nasserist thought and actions .
 In reality, Nasser was consumed by problems with Iraq and Syria, as well as the continuing confrontation with Israel and disputes with traditional Arab regimes . He was simply busy, consumed by issues such as Iraq, Syria, and the conflict with Israel, he says .
 Nasser initially, for Nasser, Kennedy’s misunderstanding served a useful purpose . Nasser: "Initially, for [Kennedy's] misunderstanding served [Nasser's] useful purpose. Initially, for
 His stature in Washington made him respectable in the view of some conservative Arab states, mainly Saudi Arabia, and provided leverage against others .
 By 1961, political, economic, and regional problems brought new pressures to bear on Nasser’s regime . Nasser's regime was in full control of the Egyptian government .
 Nasset’s revolutionary vision for the Arab world tarnished by his failure to subdue Iraq, Habib Bourgiba and King Hussein . Nasset's revolutionary vision had tarnished his vision for Arab world .
 Many believed Nasser’s focus on Africa and the Congo conflict reflected the failure of his Arab policies, an attempt to maintain Egypt's revolutionary impetus . Many believed that Nasser's focus on African conflict reflected failure of Arab policies .
 The stage appeared set for a radicalization of UAR foreign policy and greater cooperation with the Soviet Union . The stage was set to be set for an increased cooperation with Russia .
 The Egyptian lower middle classes began to examine the benefits of Nasser’s revolution, creating additional pressure for internal change . Simultaneously, the lower middle class began examining the benefits .
 This trend is particularly pronounced in economic ateas long dominated by the minorities . This trend has been especially pronounced in areas of the U.S.
 The Egyptian government nationalized the National Bank of Egypt and the pharmaceutical industry . Both moves were a blow to foreign and traditional Egyptian commercial interests .
 Minorities felt more economic pressure, backed up by the ever-present security services . With their foreign commercial ties, minorities felt more pressure .
 In addition, the UAR government used the Congo situation as a pretext for the expropriation of Belgian property and commercial interests . The Congo situation was also a pretext to expropriate Belgian property .
 Nationalization provided some short-term political gains and relief from acute economic problems, but it created long-term problems . Nationalization is a problem for the future of the U.S.
 Capital flight further constricted the availability of foreign exchange . Capital flight also constrained the amount of foreign currency in the country .
 UAR foreign exchange, already low, faced further depletion from the economic situation in Syria . The country's foreign currency reserves are already low .
 Three years of drought and crop failure had drained the coffers in Damascus . Syria unable to feed itself . Syria has been hit hard by drought, crop failure .
 This, in turn, would open the door to a peace treaty with Israel, closer U.S. economic ties, closer ties, anti-Communist front, and perhaps an end to Soviet influence . This would also lead to closer economic ties with Israel and closer ties with the U
 In the Middle East experts took note of Kennedy’s ideas . In the State Department, experts took notice of Kennedy's ideas .
 Kennedy intended to focus on ‘helping people instead of regimes’ in the region, Jones said . Jones underlined that Kennedy wanted to help people not regimes .
 The memo also signaled the beginning of the traditional dance between the new administration and foreign-policy establishment .
 "To a significant degree, this bulk mailing was a screen for sending a very focused letter to Nasser," says Nasser .
 Kennedy listed American contributions to Egypt from George Washington to Franklin Roosevelt . Kennedy invoked the ‘concepts of independence and non-interference expressed by Americans from Washington to Roosevelt .
 Eisenhower administration provided aid during the Suez crisis of 1956 and other forms of assistance . Eisenhower administration also provided support during the crisis of Suez in 1956 .
 According to Heikal, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer told Nasser that West Germany had come under pressure from the Kennedy administration to sell arms to Israel . The U.S. wanted to avoid the stigma of doing so, according to the report . The United States was under pressure to
 "Without a doubt, he knew more about Kennedy than Kennedy knew about him," he said . "He knew more than Kennedy than he did about him"
 Nasser believed that Eisenhower had a stature and political independence that Kennedy did not . Nasser's cautious response reflected that belief, he said .
 Nasser reviewed the history of US-UAR telations and pointed to the improvement since 1958 . Nasser said the improvement has been made since the beginning of the series .
 Egyptian President also made his position plain on the Palestinian issue . But he also made clear of his position on the issue .
 Kennedy administration missed the significance of this trend for two basic reasons . The Kennedy administration did not realize the importance of the change in the country .
 Badeau, for example, recognized the ‘schizophrenic fears of neocolonialism’, but this was manageable . He thought that this is manageable .
 Both wanted improved relations and cooperation on issues of mutual agreement . Both wanted better relations .
 Talbot, Komer, and Badeau worked to control and coordinate information that would place much of the tactical decision-making in President Kennedy’s hands . Talbot and Komer worked to coordinate information in order to ensure President Kennedy's success .
 With relatively little additional funding, the new administration believed that it would succeed where Eisenhower had failed . The new administration had relatively little extra funding .
 Kennedy believed that the traditional Foreign Service was an obstacle to progress, and that he could avoid the bureaucracy by bringing specialists and technocrats from outside the government into the policy-making tent .
 Nasser fails in Jordan . Kennedy courted Nasser as he courted the Egyptian president . Nasser failed in Jordan.
 Because of his anti-Communist campaign and Iraqi propaganda, Nasser found himself being closely identified with the US . As a result, he found his revolutionary credentials coming into question .
 In April 1961, the U.S. and Britain had to make some critical decisions about the extent of their support for the Hashemite monarchy . The United States and Britain decided to prop up the monarchy in 1961 .
 Reduced aid and support would weaken King Hussein and likely lead to collapse, says King Hussein . Reduced aid would weaken the king and would likely lead him to collapse .
 Washington had either to support King Hussein or allow events to take their course . Washington had to back Hussein or let events take its course .
 Both courses of actions had supporters, but the pro-Hussein element had gained an edge . Both of the courses had supporters .
 Even the financially-strapped British, came up with additional funding for the project . The project was funded by the British government .
 In effect, Washington had dealt a serious blow to Nasserist ambitions in Jordan . Washington dealt with serious blow in effect, says Washington .
 Every spring the British and American would negotiate a new aid arrangement for Jordan . From this point on, every spring the two countries would negotiate new aid arrangements .
 British interests in Jordan have waned as London focused on the Gulf . With Jordan more or less secure, British interests waned in Jordan .
 King Hussein and the new Prime Minister called U.S. Ambassador Macomber to the palace to make an ‘urgent appeal for full restoration’ of United States budget support . As a result, on 3 February, King Hussein .
 On 6 March, Macomber learned that the British would not teverse their decision about support for Jordan . The British government will not discuss their decision to support Jordan .
 In 1958, what happened in Baghdad in 1958 as a 12th-hour situation and what is going on in Iran at this time as an 11-hour effort to stave off such a situation . I have felt we were roughly at the 8th ot 9th hour of a similar
 Reforms in the vatious ministries and the civil service reduced corruption but seriously alienated many of his supporters, including to some degtee the army .
 General Habis Majali was the Jordanian Chief of Staff and brother of slain Prime Minister Hazza Majali . Majali is the brother of the slain prime minister . He was killed by the Jordanian army in 2009 .
 In Cairo, Nasser understood that the lack of an appropriate accommodation from Hussein was linked directly to U.S. policy . The lack of a suitable accommodation was linked to the United States policy, he says .
 The UAR propaganda campaign against Jordan continued unabated . Amman tetaliated in a way that undermined Kennedy’s initiatives with Nasser .
 In 1961 the UAR feud with Iraq took an unusual turn . Siding with feudalism and colonialism . Also, in 1961, the United Arab Republic sided with Iraq .
 Qasim revived Nuri Sa’id’s claim to Kuwait . Facing escalating political and economic difficulties, Qasims revived Nurai Sa'id's claim to the country .
 Iraq’s IPC negotiations with the British had become increasingly difficult, sources say . Iraq's IPC talks with British have been increasingly difficult since 2003 .
 The British used their oil interests in Kuwait to leverage new concessions from Baghdad . The British were able to use their interests to gain concessions from Iraq .
 Qasim had made periodic threats that he would launch an anti-imperialist campaign over Oman, Palestine, and Arab oil . He made the threats in the past .
 From left to right, Charles Bohlen, Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy and Harold Caccia, British Ambassador, and Macmillan. From left, Kennedy was Kennedy, Bundy, Bundy and MacMillan.
 Qasim began moving troops and tanks to the Kuwaiti border in late June . The exact decision-making process remains a mystery, but it is a mystery .
 The British immediately dispatched marines and air units from Bahrain . Following a request for support from the Kuwaiti ruling family, the British dispatched marines .
 Qasim’s unpredictability placed Nasser in a very difficult position . Once again, Nasser was placed in a difficult position. Nasser: “Once again, the unpredictability of Qasims’ unpredictability places Nasser .
 As the self-appointed leader of Arab nationalism and unity, Nasser could either support the ‘feudal’ Kuwaiti regime, or stand by and allow the colonial British to do it .
 Nasser simply could not countenance his Iraqi nemesis taking control of Kuwait, be it through occupation or intimidation . Nasser refused to allow Iraqi forces to take over Kuwait .
 The UAR had systematically opposed the admission of Kuwait to the Arab League . It argued that it was a British colonial possession of Kuwait .
 British, followed closely by Saudi Arabia, had also moved troops to the Kuwaiti-Iragi border . Now, not only had Qasim threatened Kuwait, but the British had moved troops .
 If the Egyptian leader wanted to have any pretense of leadership in the Arab world, a quick response was in order . A quick response is in order to the situation in Egypt .
 Cairo feared that ‘feudal’ Saudi Arabia might actually grab part of the mantel of Arab leadership . Cairo now feared that 'feudual’ Saudis might actually grabbed part of a leadership mantle .
 Nasser cast his lot with ‘feudalism’ and ‘colonialism,’ to protect another Arab state against revolutionary Iraq . Nasser’s 'colonialism' was a form of 'feudism' to protect his own state from revolutionary Iraq
 Nasser made every effort to give the appearance of having a key role in the defense of Kuwait and of making the defense an Arab affair . Nasser, of course, tried to make the defense appear to be a major Arab affair.
 Cairo blustered and made threats about UAR moves from Syria against Qasim . To this end, Cairo made threats to Syria . The UAR has been in Syria since 2011 .
 Nasser also improved the UAR relationship with Saudi Arabia . Nasser acquired Riyadh’s contingency approval to base fighter aircraft at Dhahran in the event of another Iraqi move .
 The British predicted the long-term reliance of the Kuwaiti ruling family on British arms . The dependency protected British oil interests in Kuwait and counterbalanced IPC problems in Iraq .
 In no small measure, this explains Cairo’s shift in focus from the Middle East to Africa . Cairo has shifted its focus to Africa in recent years . Cairo's focus has been on the continent since then .
 Nasser believed that Africa, the last bastion of colonialism, presented an alternative to the stalemate on the Arab front . Nasser: Africa was the best way to get around the Arab crisis .
 Nasser supported the Algerian liberation movement, but in places like Guinea, Mali, Somalia, and the Congo . Nasser saw potential for political and economic gain in supporting anti-Western nationalist elements .
 The UAR also needed markets for the manufactured goods of its developing industry, the UAR said . The country is also developing its own manufacturing industry .
 The assassination of leftist Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba by pro-Western elements became a specific rallying point . Then, in the Congo, the assassination of the assassinated prime minister became a rallying point for the opposition .
 Nasset’s African thrust may have been ideologically consistent, but it carried little domestic weight, increasing his need for an Arab success . Nasset needs to find success in his Arab success in the Arab world .
 The Kennedy administration was becoming more aware that its obligation to proZionist voting blocs made improved relations with the UAR problematic .
 The new potential political reality that it represented was part of the Eisenhower legacy, and formed a key element in Kennedy’s perception of and policy toward the region . Kennedy's view of the region was key to Kennedy's policy .
 It drove the President’s personal focus on the relationship with Nasser, he said . It drove him to focus on his relationship with the Egyptian leader .
 The UAR meant that Nasser controlled two of the three confrontation states, and the third, Jordan, was expected to fall under UAR direct or indirect control . Nasser's control of Jordan meant Jordan would fall under the UAR .
 Given the competition with Qasim in Iraq and his uneasy relationships with the more conservative Arab states, the Syrian coup was a bitter disappointment . The Syrian coup is a disappointment for the country, especially in Syria .
 The Syrians and Ba’thists countered, stating Nasser had caused the split by threatening Arab unity, nationalism, and socialism . Syria and Ba'thists said Nasser threatened Arab unity by threatening national unity .
 Nasser correctly identified the principal opposition to his socialization of Sytia as the entrenched middle class and the wealthy . The opposition to Nasser's socialization was the wealthy and entrenched middle-class .
 He believed that they had organized and financed the coup, and that he should have dealt harshly with them from the beginning, he said . He said he believed that he had to deal with them .
 He concluded that the only way to preserve the revolution in Egypt was to follow a policy of ‘no appeasement’ in dealing with reactionary elements . He concluded .
 He ordered the ‘socialist measures’ passed during the previous summer to be put into full effect . The 'socialist' measures were passed in the summer of 2013 .
 The various newspapers began printing lists of wealthy individuals, along with editorials describing the impact that these ‘parasitic’ elements had on society . The list was printed in newspapers across the world .
 On 22 October, Zakariya Mohieddin, Vice-President and Minister of the Interior, made additional arrests and initiated the sequestration of property and assets belonging to the wealthy .
 Nasser had long considered internal radicalization long considered by Nasser . Syrian situation made it serve the dual purposes of neutralizing the rich and diverting the attention of the masses .
 The British took some delight in Nasser’s Syrian come-uppance but could not fully savor the moment . The British were not able to savor their victory in Syria .
 London fretted that any attempt by the Egyptians to recoup the position in Syria might involve Jordanian intervention . The Egyptian government is trying to regain control of Syria .
 Such a move would create great risks for King Hussein, says King Hussein . Jordanian troops were serving as a deterrent to possible Iraqi adventures, he says .
 In Washington, this Arab eruption came as a surprise, and presented the Kennedy administration with a problem . The Kennedy administration was faced with a growing problem .
 Administration faced the delicate problem of preserving the ‘personal relationship’ with Nasser while dealing with the new government of Syria . The administration faced the issue of preserving Nasser's 'personal relationship'
 Badeau met with Nasser, prior to U.S. recognition of Syria, to deliver a personal message from the President . President Obama met with President Nasser to soften the blow, to explain the United States position .
 In response, INR at State warned that Nasser would continue ‘building up his own position’ vis-a-vis East and West and providing little or no pro quo .
 Meetings in October with Senator Hubert Humphrey offered some encouragement to this view .
 He also strongly defended African socialist leaders whom the U.S. had branded as Communist . The United States had branded them Communist .
 Borrowed almost in its entirety from Talbot’s memorandum of 3 January, it argued that systematic aid to the UAR should continue in order to ‘encourage orderly economic development’ to prevent the Soviet bloc dependence .
 Ball believed the visit would modify Nasset’s ‘radical domestic policies directed toward “social justice’ and his belief that the Zionist lobby directed U.S. policy . Ball believed that the visit to Israel would modify the policies of Nasset .
 Kennedy administration received another warning that it had misjudged the fundamentally revolutionary nature of Nassetist politics . Almost simultaneously, the Kennedy administration got another warning .
 The White House was not yet ready to acknowledge the ideological warning implicit in Bowles’ telegram . Bowles' telegram was sent to the White House from Washington D.C.
 As a political appointee, he discreetly put the best face on an embarrassing situation . He supported the Nasser visit and agreed with the chiefs of missions from around the Arab world, but as a political .
 Nasser decided to use President Kennedy’s correspondence to counter Arab criticism over his cooperation with Washington . Nasser saw little to be lost .
 Muhammad Heikal informed Ambassador Badeau that Nasser had decided to publish portions of his letters to President Kennedy in the newspaper the following day . Nasser published portions of the letters to the President Kennedy .
 Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria tried to undermine Egypt by claiming that Nasser had sold out the Palestinians in return for U.S. aid . Heikal explained that this resulted from attempts by Jordan and Saudi Arabia to undermine Nasser's government .
 UAR radio station used parts of Kennedy cotrespondence, not previously published in A/Ahram, to criticize Kennedy personally .
 Nasser would shortly make the independence of his policies even more apparent . Nasser was shortly made to make his independence from his government apparent .
 Nasser’s frustrations with the Kennedy administration increased in other areas, including Israeli complications . Nasser was frustrated with the JFK administration's handling of Israeli affairs .
 During the later years of the Eisenhower administration, Israel had attempted to obtain Hawk anti-aircraft missiles . Israel had tried to obtain the missiles in the 1960s .
 Tel Aviv always received the standard answer that the U.S. government did not want to contribute to an arms race in the region by supplying advanced weapons to anyone . Tel Aviv was always told that the United States did not .
 In the spring of 1962, Kennedy offered, via Shimon Peres, to provide the Hawks to Israel . Kennedy offered to Israel in the spring 1962, via Peres .
 Kennedy’s offer was to demonstrate support for Israel with one eye on the upcoming presidential campaign in 1964 . In this case, Kennedy's offer was aimed at demonstrating support for the Israeli nation .
 Secretary Rusk argued that the U.S. should not be the first to introduce such sophisticated weaponry into the region . Rusk argues that the United States shouldn't be first introduced to such weaponry .
 A week later, Bill Bundy at Defense undermined State by taking the position that the Hawk would not ‘shift the balance of military power’ in the region . A week after the Hawk was announced, Defense Secretary Bill Bundy said it would not shift the 'balance' of power in
 In August, Secretary of State Rusk recommended that the Hawks be sold to Israel after getting Nasser’s reaction . Secretary Rusk changed his position and recommended the sale of the Hawks .
 Rusk submitted the Johnson Plan for an Arab-Israeli peace to Kennedy . That same day Rusk submitted the plan to Kennedy, the same day he submitted the plan .
 Talbot wrote to Myer Feldman, Kennedy’s counselor for Israeli and Jewish affairs . Talbot argued that the Hawk offer should only be made with the proviso that Ben-Gurion made progress on disarmament issues with Nasser and supported the Johnson Plan .
 Ben-Gurion undoubtedly knew the specifics of the Feldman mission well before the latter arrived in Tel Aviv, given Feldman’s contacts at the Israeli Embassy, given his contacts .
 Nasset: U.S. decision to supply Hawks showed growing Israeli influence with Kennedy . Nasset’s perspective: UAR leadership removed inhibition to resume its export of revolutionary Arab nationalism . The United States decided to supply Kennedy with Hawks, Nasset says .
 Revolutionary Arab nationalism reborn Egyptian ties to Yemen dated from the 19th century and Muhammad Ali’s campaign . Muhammad Ali's campaign in Yemen was the inspiration for revolutionary Arab nationalism .
 By the mid-20th century, various Yemeni Imams had made some half-hearted attempts to modernize the country . By the end of the century, the country had been in a state of crisis .
 Most of the teachers were Egyptian . One of these efforts was to introduce new educational opportunities, and most of them were .
 The Egyptians were providing military advisors and training, and the Soviet Union had also begun to supply arms and some advisors . The Egyptians provided military advisors, training and arms .
 Nasserist support for Yemeni claims to Aden and the Protectorate was popular . Soviet aid programs had ‘earned much greater good will’ in the Imamate than U.S. aid .
 Mutawakkalites were at odds with Saudi Arabia and the British in Aden . They needed friends with the British and Saudi Arabia in Aden, Aden .
 Eisenhower administration even changed representational responsibility for Yemen from the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to that in Cairo .
 Kennedy administration believed Nasser and Egypt represented a progressive, anti-Communist middle way . Nasser represented a 'feudal despotism' of the Imam and Communist penetration .
 Both administrations came down squately on the side of reform and change . President Obama and President Obama both came down on the right side of change .
 Neither wanted significant commitments in southern Arabia, nor direct involvement . Saudi Arabia has long been reluctant to engage in the region .
 U.S. policy has ‘played into the Russian hands as they depict to the Middle East as the supporters of the vanishing order’ while they support revolution, Badeau said .
 When Nasser talked about feudalist states supported by Western impetialism, the Saudis undoubtedly ranked highest on the list . Nasser said that feudalism was supported by the Saudis .
 Most cotrespondence with Feisal was left to the White House staff, while JFK handled Nasset's personally . JFK handled Feisal’s personally .
 By 1961, the power struggle between King Saud and his sons and Crown Prince Feisal was neating its conclusion . A group of young reformers aligned with Prince Tallal ibn Abd-al-Aziz al-Saud was also on the rise .
 The United States needs to force the implementation of various UN resolutions on the Palestinian problem, he said . He also said that the U.S. needs to oppose more openly British and French colonialism in Aden and Algeria .
 Talbot and Ambassador Hart met with Crown Prince Feisal in Riyadh on 17 February . They discussed the relationship between Nasser’s destabilizing effect and the need for reform in the Kingdom .
 Egyptian President Nasset accused of selling out to Israel in return for U.S. aid . He also pushed for attacks on Nasset, accusing the Egyptian President of selling to Israel .
 This served to underscore the U.S. position vis-a-vis the inter-Arab struggles, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The United States gave aid to Nasser to leverage a peace settlement with Israel . The U.S. gave aid during the Nasser era to leverage peace talks with Israel.
 Nasser attempted to undermine the Saudis, who complained to the U.S. about aid to Nasser . Nasser's efforts to undermine Saudi Arabia were thwarted by the Saudis .
 The United States reassured the Saudis, who attacked Nasser for trading the interests of Palestine and the Palestinians to the U.S. for aid . Nasser was attacked by the Saudis for trading Palestine interests to the United States for aid.
 This made it impossible for Nasser to seriously consider a settlement with Israel even if he had been inclined to do so . Nasser was forced to leave the country in the wake of the fall of his regime .
 The new administration is slowly beginning to appreciate the lack of any real desire on the part of the Arab states to find a solution to their differences with Israel or each other .
 At the time, Saud was in a power struggle with Crown Prince Feisal for control . Kennedy was trying to maintain good relations with both sides in the Middle East .
 The Kennedy administration could not push for concessions from Israel . Politically, the Kennedy administration couldn't push for Israel concessions from the government .
 Political and economic instability contributed to Israeli intransigence . Political instability also contributed to the Israeli intranigence, analysts say .
 Concern over its growing isolation fostered more intensive efforts to apply political pressure on the White House for support . Concern over the growing isolation of the U.S. has led to more intensive pressure for support for the country .
 President Kennedy inquired about the status of the visit to Dimona and was told that the Lavon Affair crisis had delayed the visit . On 30 March, President Kennedy asked about the situation in Dimona .
 The U.S. could then confidentially reassure the Atab states of the peaceful nature of the facility .
 The Foreign Office pointed out that the U.S. had ‘no evidence’ that would convince the Arabs that the facility was anything other than a nuclear weapons center .
 Support in the new administration for the Johnson Plan created serious concern in Israel . The Johnson Plan is a major concern for Israel .
 Kennedy appeared to believe that the Israelis sincerely wanted a reasonable settlement with the Arabs, and would compromise . Naively, Kennedy seemed to think that Israel would compromise with the Arab population .
 The White House failed to understand that Israeli opposition to Arab repatriation was absolute . Israel's opposition to repatriation of Arab refugees was absolute, the White House says .
 Ben-Gurion told Kennedy that the UN Palestinian Conciliation Commission would fail because Arab states merely wanted to use the Palestinian refugees to destroy Israel . At their May meeting, Ben Gurion said that the commission would fail .
 President asks Ben-Gurion to consider options for a solution to the problem . President asks him to consider a solution for the situation .
 In contrast, Kennedy had significantly compromised Washington’s position . Kennedy had compromised Washington's position, says historian John Avlon .
 U.S. government contacts with the Israelis would bring a predictable list of military and economic aid requests . The Israelis would complain about American aid to Nasser . The United States would respond to the requests with a litany of complaints .
 Israelis would then list items that the U.S. had refused to provide to Israel . Israel would list the items they had refused the United States had to provide .
 The Arabs are showing a decided reluctance to agree to the refugee plan, Dr. David Cameron says . Dr. Cameron says the Arabs are reluctant to agree with the plan .
 Johnson believed that only an extraordinary level of involvement on the part of the President had any hope of bringing results . Johnson himself believed that . Only an extraordinary . level of . involvement . had any chance of bringing . results, he said .
 Kennedy, unlike Eisenhower, could not point to a single concrete issue where he had supported an Arab cause vis-a-vis Israel . Kennedy was not the only Arab leader to have supported a cause in the Middle East .
 Neither the Arabs nor the Israelis were interested in realistic compromise . Neither the Arab nor Israeli leaders were interested into realistic compromise.
 The Israelis had newfound political leverage in Washington, via a natrowly-elected Democratic president who needed Jewish votes . The Israelis were emboldened by the election of President Barack Obama .
 They had no reason to compromise, because ultimately the resident at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue was in no position to keep them honest . Ultimately, they were not keeping them honest, and ultimately the U.S. had no need to compromise .
 The Arabs still saw little to be gained from the administration that desperately needed domestic Jewish political support . The Arabs saw little of the gain from President Obama's administration .
 Nasser saw less reason to pursue strengthening his ties with Washington . Nasser was disappointed with the outcome of the Arab Spring in Syria .
 The imbroglio over Kuwait eliminated disagreements with the U.S. over how to deal with Iraq . It eliminated disagreements over how the United States dealt with the Iraq crisis .
 British influence rode United States coattails in the Arab world . Now largely out of Iraq, tied by treaty to an independent Kuwait, lacking substantial relations with Egypt and Saudi Arabia . British influence clearly rode U.S.-led Arab influence .
 For the Arabs, the Syrian secession increased Jordan’s chances of survival . For the Arab Spring, the Arab nation will survive in Jordan .
 The two most powerful Arab states and their respective revolutionary regimes wete struggling . The Arab Spring has been a major source of instability in the region .
 In Saudi Arabia, the struggle for power between Crown Prince Feisal and King Saud continued . There were indications that Feisal might be gaining the upper hand .
 Washington had once again been sensitized to the United States interests in Saudi oil . In addition to the U.S. interests in the Saudi oil, Washington was also sensitized .
 As the fall of 1962 approached, most of the tendencies pointed to the return of the Kennedy administration to the fundamentals of past policies, but a catalyst for making them coalesce was lacking .
 The situation in Iran best illustrated the degree to which Kennedy’s White House inherited the policies of Eisenhower . Historians have focused on minor differences in order to build a case that Kennedy policy was more progressive and reform-minded .
 Iran was a critical part of the U.S. commitment to confront and contain the Soviet Union through defense alliances . For both administrations, Iran was critical, if problematic, part of their commitment to contain and contain Soviet Union .
 Both wanted to eliminate the sources of instability through economic development and social and political reform . Both countries wanted to end instability through social and economic development .
 Kennedy’s divergence from Eisenhower on the key issue of support for the Pahlavi dynasty had significant long-term repercussions . While the short-term results of these policies were almost identical, Kennedy's diverging from Eisenhower had significant consequences .
 The Kennedy administration miscalculated and ultimately bound itself and the U.S. even tied itself to the fortunes of the Pahlavi dynasty . Kennedy administration, in seeking to free itself from the Shah and find an alternative to his rule .
 This temporary situation resulted in a misunderstanding of the nature of Iranian political instability in May 1961, which ultimately led to the situation where U.S. fortunes and those of the Shah were one and the same .
 Kennedy’s direct support for and endorsement of Prime Minister Ali Amini, followed by a belated realization that Amini had no real political backing, left Kennedy no option but to offer the same level of support to the Shah .
 The new administration believed that it faced an imminent crisis tequiting special focus . The new president believed that he faced an impending crisis . The White House believed that the new administration faced a crisis .
 Kennedy concluded that the Pahlavi rule and a pro-Western Iran were on the verge of collapse . Because of the Shah’s apparent instability, Kennedy and his advisors concluded that Iran was about to collapse .
 In defense of Kennedy’s foreign policy team, the situation was frightening . Probably not, but in defense of JFK, the crisis was frightening, but frightening .
 Kennedy administration believed that only immediate and extensive reform could save the regime . The Kennedy administration was taking an alarmist view of the situation .
 Khrushchev’s 1959 diplomatic embarrassment in Iran was viewed as a challenge to its ‘pay any price, bear any burden’ pronouncements . Instead of viewing the latest Kremlin pronouncement in the context, the White House took the . statement as a ditect challenge to
 Kennedy believed Iran could become the model for the growth of democracy and Western economic ideals in the Middle East and the Islamic world . Kennedy also believed that Iran could be a case study in economic development .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy's tactics were similar, as was the Shah’s reaction to reform . The Shah's reaction was similar to that of Eisenhower, Kennedy and the Shah's .
 Three yeats had passed since the turmoil of 1958, and yet the ability to influence the Shah’s rule proved as elusive for Kennedy as it had for Eisenhower . The Shah ruled the country until the end of the Shah's rule .
 Kennedy recognized that the U.S. needed Iranian telemetry sites and an anti-Communist Iran . Like the previous administration, Kennedy and his advisors recognized that Iran needed the sites .
 The question centered on what was the best Iranian political vehicle to support U.S. interests . The question was whether Iran could be the best political vehicle for the United States .
 The Shah sent Kennedy a letter addressing Iran’s potentially ‘bright future’ and citing its natural resources and lack of overpopulation . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran during the Shah's reign .
 The Shah wanted more military assistance in return for his support of containment . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Urban middle class leadership with political power might bring class war and retribution against the wealthy . He pointed out that the emergence of urban middle class might bring retribution against wealthy .
 The report also saw no ‘competent’ leadership emerging from the urban middle class, the military, or the traditional leaders, including the clergy, landlords, and very large merchants . The report said there was no 'competency' emerging from traditional leaders .
 Shah sent General Teymour Bakhtiar, chief of SAVAK, to Washington to emphasize that the Shah was concerned about the sincerity of the U.S. Just to make certain that the message was clear, the Shah sent .
 Shah announced in February 1961 that the Soviet Union had agreed to accept a high-level Iranian delegation headed by the Prime Minister to explore ways to lessen tensions between the two countries .
 President dispatched Special Presidential Envoy Averell Harriman to Iran in March 1961 . The President dispatched the envoy to Iran on a mission to discuss Iran .
 Harriman explained to the Shah the budgetary constraints facing the new administration . The new administration is facing a budget deficit of $3 billion .
 The Ambassador’s conclusions vis-a-vis the situation in Iran decisively affected the new administration . Eisenhowet's views were reflected in the new president's views .
 Harriman wrote the President saying he was impressed with the improved standards of housing, the ‘appearance of the people’, the level of education, and ‘substantially’ reduced unemployment, he said .
 The Ambassador’s message mirrored the views of the previous administration, the Shah wrote to Kennedy in January .
 At the NSC, Komer reacted to the Harriman report by fuming at George McGhee about the ‘old refrain’ from the State Department .
 Sure the Shah is a vacillating weakling who cannot be pressed too hard . But he is not a weakling, and he is a strong leader who can't be pinned down .
 We must still rely on him as our chosen instrument until we get something better. Sure we must still . But we must . still rely upon him as . his chosen instrument . We need to get better .
 Morgan added that the U.S. needed to monitor the Shah’s dealings with the Soviet Union closely . Morgan said the United States needed to keep tabs on the Shah .
 The Shah feared that the inability of the Shah to control the situation might result in another 1953, something the new administration wanted to avoid at all costs .
 Rostow: The notion that a solution to social and economic problems could not be engineered in a pro-Western country with ample natural resources was unacceptable . Rostow and the administration were simply unacceptable, he says .
 Rostow believed that the possibility flew in the face of everything he believed about economics and nation-building . Rostow: "The possibility flew ... out of everything that Rostow had to think about."
 Shah wanted the Shah to liberalize and give the urban middle class a stake in the government . He wanted to give the middle class, who hated him, a stake . Shah wanted to open up the government and liberalize the economy .
 The professor called this list his ‘top ten suggestions’ for change in Iran, Soviet aid and neutralism being the tenth . Soviet aid was the tenth suggestion for Iran .
 Iranian control of the oil industry and pro-Western neutrality were unacceptable, says Iran's president . Iran's control of oil industry was unacceptable, he says . Iran has been accused of using its oil wealth to blackmail the West .
 Rostow wanted to believe that the Iranian cloud had a silver lining but, like it or not, he and the president faced the same policy impasse that had plagued Eisenhower . Rostow: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure it's not going
 Doing something about Iran might alienate or unseat the Shah, for whom they had no alternative . The Shah's government had no choice but to do something about it .
 May 1961 brought a conclusive demonstration that the Shah responded only to Iranian necessity, and not to pressure from the United States . May 1961 was a demonstration that Iran responded only by necessity .
 On 4 May, Washington learned that a teachers’ strike in Tehran involving more than 50,000 demonstrators had ended in a violent confrontation with security forces with perhaps hundreds of casualties . The strike in Iran ended in violent clashes with Iranian security forces .
 Iranian Prime Minister Jafar Sharif Emami and his cabinet resigned the following day . The following day, Iranian PM Emami's cabinet resigned .
 Talbot’s realistic support for Pakistan caused Bowles, a former and future Ambassador to India, to regret his appointment . Bowles was a former ambassador to India and future ambassador to Pakistan .
 Bowles had wanted to be Secretary of State but lost a power struggle with Dean Rusk and became Under Secretary . Bowles lost power struggle to become Under Secretary and is now a senior adviser .
 Amini accepted the position on the condition that the Shah dissolve the Majlis, not exactly a democratic move, create a special court to try cases of corruption . Amini also gave him the right to name the cabinet, with the exception of Minister of Defense .
 Amini presented his new government to the Shah on 9 May . The Shah agreed, and Amini's new government was accepted by Amini . Amini was the prime minister of Iran .
 Kennedy instructed Secretary Rusk to set up a crisis task force on Iran . The task force was set up in response to Kennedy's concerns .
 Rostow and Komer wanted to take the policy formulation portfolio for Iran out of the State Department, they say . Rostow, Komer, among others in the White House, wanted to move the portfolio out of State Department .
 It was Rusk’s tice bowl, and he was an experienced Washington bureaucrat . Rusk: "It's a good thing for the nation, but it's a bad thing for us to forget it"
 Rusk appointed Talbot to head the Task Force . Talbot was appointed as head of the task force to head off the power play . Rusk appoints Talbot as Task Force chief .
 Rusk could not be certain how the Talbot move would work, but the tisk with Talbot was preferable to the certain knowledge of trouble if someone like Komer took over . Rusk: "I'm not sure how it would work but it's preferable to having Komer
 By appointing Talbot, Rusk appeased the White House staff with an ‘outsider’, while maintaining control through a State Department official that he knew . Talbot was appointed by Rusk to appease White House .
 Talbot responded with a lengthy document that included the plan for a task force and a series of options and recommendations for dealing with Iran . On 7 May, Talbot said he had responded to the request .
 Talbot, in effect, saw what would happen 18 years later, minus the Communist takeover he had envisaged . Talbot saw what happened 18 years after, but not what would have happened if he had been in charge .
 Talbot and the Task Force dismissed military leadership as a dead-end . Talbot argued that no military leader had sufficient stature to replace the Shah .
 Talbot and his group recommended ‘Limited Support for the Shah’, the same position taken over eight years by the Eisenhower administration . Talbot’s group recommended the position, which was the same eight years ago .
 Task Force believed Amini’s emergence as Prime Minister improved the chances of a successful compromise . The report went on to state that while the ‘Middle ground between the regime and the Mosadeqists is narrow and shaky’
 Talbot concluded that the Shah’s view of U.S. support was so closely tied to military aid that it had to continue . In the end, Talbot said the Shah's view of United States support had to be tied to the aid .
 The hope existed that as only a potential goal, the other forms of aid might eventually lessen the Shah’s focus on the military . The hope was that the aid might help lessen the military's focus .
 Key foreign-policy makers in the Kennedy administration concluded that the Shah was a temporary alternative for American interests in Iran . The Shah's collapse would be viewed as an U.S. failure .
 The tenure of the Amini government would be tied to the White House’s hopes and support for reform in Iran . Amini's tenure would be inextricably tied to U.S. hopes of reform in the country .
 The program's survival would be a litmus test for liberalization within a pro-Western framework . The program’s survival is a test of liberalization in the pro-western framework .
 The United States Embassy in Tehran had a different take on the Amini government . The U.S. Embassy in Iran was in charge of Iran's government .
 The Embassy argued that it did not see Musaddigists as an immediate threat . The embassy argued that the United States should refrain from offering ‘advice’ where there is no chance that the advice would be taken .
 Ambassador Wailes opposed support for local government, arguing that it would cause political chaos . Ambassador said it would 'cause chaos' in the country .
 He obviously had a different take on the gravity of the situation at home . He said: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to live with my family."
 Shah stated that Amini was only popular due to the fact that he had been out of the public eye . On 13 May, the Shah said Amini's popularity was due to his lack of public appearances .
 Shah stated that he would rather abdicate than countenance a neutralist policy on the part of the new government . Shah said he would not accept a neutralism, but would rather be a king .
 Amini was an American favorite with the image of a pragmatic reformer, but the Shah knew his man . Amini died in 1953 at the age of 25 .
 Quasi-liberal reformist sentiments were one thing; ruling in Tehran was quite another . Iran's ruling in Iran was one of the world's most powerful institutions . Tehran was ruled by the Shah Shah Shahriri government in 1979 .
 By saddling him with the problems of government, the Shah undermined him as an alternative power center . The Shah undermined his ability to be a power center in Iran, he says .
 No head of government in Tehran could please the competing factions; Amini would prove no different . Amini is no different to Iran's current president, says Iranian state TV .
 The new Prime Minister would have to pursue a balancing act that would isolate him politically . It would make him increasingly dependent on the Shah for support .
 Amini could take the lead in demanding more military and economic aid . The Shah could claim to be supporting a reform candidate, and Amini is expected to demand more aid .
 Amini’s appointment gave the Shah even more leverage than he could have hoped for . As things would develop, Amini's appointment gives the Shah more leverage . Amini was appointed by the Shah as a member of the Shah's cabinet .
 The Kennedy administration moved to directly support the Amini government . Ambassador Wailes and the Iran experts in the State Department advised against the move .
 Komer and others in the Shah administration could not get it through their collective heads that the National Front was not the primary threat to the Shah . Amini was not a key to controlling the national front, he says .
 They could not grasp, or perhaps admit, that the Shah, not Amini, was the ultimate arbiter of things Persian, and that Amini was merely the Shah’s latest creature .
 Ambassador Julius Holmes, Kennedy’s appointment to replace Wailes, understood this almost immediately and focused his attention on the Shah . White House staff continued attempting to solve the problem of Iran by using a flawed set of assumptions, he says .
 Amini’s anti-corruption campaign even included the arrest of a handful of generals . Amini has been accused of corruption in the past by the government .
 Amini managed to negotiate a settlement of the teachers’ strike by giving in to the strikers’ demands, which eventually put additional stress on the government budget . Amini’s government budget was strained by the strike, putting pressure on the budget .
 As the financial crisis continued, the United States provided a series of grants and loans to alleviate the immediate fiscal pressure . The U.S. provided the loans to help ease the immediate financial pressure .
 U.S. support for Amini created a ‘breathing space’ for the time being, and the Shah’s support for him appeared genuine . Amini is the prime minister of Iran .
 The immediate budgetary crisis passed, and the long-discussed land-reform programs got underway . The land reform programs are now underway .
 Along with improvement came signs that the Shah might reassert himself . Along with improved performance, there are signs that he might be re-asserting himself .
 In August 1961, frustration in the White House once again approached boiling point . The White House was in full control of the federal government .
 Washington had made an unprecedented commitment to Amini’s success, and there was nothing dramatic to show for it . Washington made unprecedented commitment, but nothing dramatic was shown for it.
 The Iranian Task Force bombarded Amini with a plethora of well-meaning but often confusing or useless advice . Amini says the task force's advice is often confusing and useless .
 When Arsanjani’s ideas found their way into law, the British argued that it was basically ‘illegal’ and only succeeded in alienating most of the landowning class .
 In a contradictory approach, Washington overtly pushed for land reform, and simultaneously counseled Ambassador Holmes to talk to Amini about putting the brakes on his program . Amini's land reform program was a success story for the U.S.
 The fact that Amini and Arsanjani were leading the effort also provided an opportunity for the Shah to shift the blame, if things did not go well .
 By August 1961, the Kennedy administration realized that a lack of progress on reform had not brought a collapse . Despite initial concern and trepidation about the instability in Iran, by August 1961 the government had realized that .
 It had become apparent that Kennedy and his advisors had underestimated the resiliency of the Shah and his ability to deal with the situation . The Shah had been in the grip of a growing insurgency in Iran .
 Instead of pushing the Shah toward the National Front and political reform, the Shah actually pulled Amini into his camp . Amini had been pushing for reform, but the Shah was actually pulling Amini in his camp, Wailes says . The Shah was a strong ally of Amini
 Amini now had to accommodate the Shah and suppress the National Front . The National Front was the very group Washington had hoped Washington had believed Amini would attract . To maintain power, Amini had to deal with the Shah .
 Shah had subverted the ‘American’ Prime Minister and engineered his isolation from alternate power bases . Amini was the instrument of the regime’s escalating attacks on the National Front, writes Shah .
 Amini was a political creature of the palace dependent on the Shah for support . Amini's political career was transformed by the Shah's support for the Shah .
 The reaction in Washington to the lack of progress by Amini was as entertaining as it was instructive . Amini, reform, and the reaction in D.C. were entertaining and instructive, as well as instructive.
 At the NSC, ‘Blowtorch’ Bob Komer, in a 4 Match memorandum to the President, pointed out that since the administration’s anointment on 19 May of the Amini government ‘as the best. and perhaps last chance of aver
 Komer concluded that should Amini fail, the U.S. should prepare a contingency plan for a military or National Front government .
 The Iranian Task Force forwarded a memo with the analysis from its 2 August meeting . The Iranian task force forwarded the memo with a memo .
 Report also pointed out that the threat of mass unemployment loomed larger . The Shah continued to press for more military assistance and support from the Shah .
 Kennedy pressed the bureaucracy for action . Kennedy: "It's time to get the government to take action" Kennedy says he hopes the government will act .
 Kennedy expressed his concern that the Amini regime had ‘lost much of its initial momentum’ and lacked a political base . Kennedy expressed concern that Amini's regime had lost momentum .
 The President was also concerned about the additional costs associated with propping up the Amini government . The President also expressed concern about the cost of propping-up Amini .
 The memo included the usual questions about whether or not the Iran situation was a crisis that should be given the same ‘treatment’ as South Vietnam .
 Amini wanted to know how the U.S. could help Amini ‘generate a political base’, ‘get a more competent cabinet’ or ‘split the National Front’. Amini said he wanted to see how the United States could help
 It appeared that the President had signed up to support Amini’s sinking ship . Amini's sinking ship appeared to be sinking .
 The option paper went back for a more palatable vetsion, namely one that agreed with Komer’s preconceived notions . Komer: “The option paper has been a great success story. It is not a good idea. It's a great idea for a new
 Komer stated that he had reassured State that the White House was not going to ‘push the panic button’ and potentially make things worse . Komer said that he reassured State of the U.S. that it would not be going to push the 'panic button' and
 The letter discussed ‘anxiety at the highest levels’ and requested an assessment and prognosis of the political situation . The letter was sent to the White House requesting an assessment of the situation in the country .
 Holmes wanted Holmes’ view on Amini’s survivability and their theory about creating a ‘bridge’ between the Shah and his National Front opposition . In short, Holmes was asked to share his view of Amini and his theory of creating a 'bridge'
 Holmes argued in effect for institutionalizing the primacy of the Shah in U.S. foreign policy . Holmes argued that the Shah had primacy in the United States foreign policy. Holmes argued for the Shah to be a key figure in American foreign policy in Iran .
 He hammered home the point that there wete no current or foreseeable alternatives to the Shah . He said he deserved the full support of the United States.
 Holmes sought to educate the administration to the fact that no government survived without the blessing of the Shah, Holmes said . Holmes said the Shah's government would not have survived without his help .
 "I do not now fully share the apparent deep concern reflected in your letter. I do now fully fully share this concern," he said .
 I strongly believe that it is unreasonable to expect notable progress towards so difficult a future . I strongly . believe that . progress towards a difficult future is not possible .
 NEA had a far better grasp of the situation than the Kennedy brains trust . NEA was far better than Kennedy's brain trust, it says .
 Holmes argued that for this reason the National Front, or ‘neo-Mosadegist elements’ as he termed them, should not be included in the government . Holmes argues that for the reason the . National Front should not include in the . government .
 He minimized anti-American agitation, stating that it fluctuated wildly and could not be used as a barometer of U.S. relations . He said it fluctuates wildly, not used as an indicator of American relations .
 He dismissed fear of Iranian neutralist sentiment, believing that it was overstated . He said Iranians are more likely to engage in talks with Iran .
 During this period, Talbot began to support Holmes . Talbot chose between Holmes and Holmes .
 Talbot noted that the National Front opposition was disorganized and unable to mount an effective challenge to the Shah or Amini government . Talbot said that the opposition had been disorganized by the government .
 The evaluation of the economy was dismal, with ‘no panaceas’ or ‘grand slam solutions’ to Iran’s ‘deeply rooted problems’ in sight . The evaluation was dismal with no panaceaas or grand slam solutions in sight,
 Talbot also stated that he saw no immediate threat to either the Shah or to Amini’s government as long as Amini maintained good relations with the monarch . Talbot said that Amini's government would not be a threat to the Shah, nor would Amini maintain good
 Talbot trip and report squelches talk of an immediate emergency . Washington reoriented Washington’s focus to the coming financial crisis . The Talbot report and trip squelched talk of a financial emergency .
 Ambassador Holmes emerged as the least pessimistic U.S. senior official on the future of Shah . Holmes also emerged as a greatest supporter of Shah and as his greatest supporter . Holmes has emerged as least pessimistic United States senior official .
 Holmes gradually transitioned U.S. policy toward direct support of the Shah . Holmes was tied to a policy of direct support for Amini, but believed that the Shah was the real power in Iran .
 The catalyst for this transition would be the failure of the Amini government, says Amini . Amini's government has been in power for more than a decade .
 Having publicly supported Amini, the U.S. government could hardly revert to an Hisenhower-like distancing vis-a-vis the Shah . The U.K. government has never publicly backed Amini .
 Shah's rule was the only means of reform that included a pro-Western government lay through the Shah’s rule . It was now abundantly clear that the only way of reform was to reform was through Shah's regime .
 Holmes increasingly took the Shah’s side on military assistance, in part to maintain his own relationship with the monarch . Holmes played a key role in the Shah's efforts to furthering reform in Iran .
 The Kennedy administration would not only fail to establish an alternative to the Shah or to improve his relationship with the National Front, but it would, in fact, permanently establish the personal rule of the Shah as the only real option for U.S. policy .
 The outcome of the August ‘mini-crisis’ in Washington enhanced Holmes’ influence, he says . Holmes was elected to the National Security Council in August .
 On 13 September, Holmes responded with what would become his standard position . Holmes responded to the question with a standard response: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 Amini argued that without modernization, a disgruntled military might be tempted to stage a coup . Amini’s reform programs would have been undone by a coup, he said .
 Holmes laid out his military-assistance plan for Iran . This called for a reduction in Iranian standing forces, but a significant upgrade in equipment and training for the remaining units . Holmes then laid out a plan for the Iranian forces .
 Holmes estimated the cost saving at $50 million . Holmes said modernization would bring the Shah around to Washington’s views on reducing military manpower .
 Holmes countered that the U.S. ‘must back the Shah to the hilt as out ‘chosen instrument” in Iran . When the Pentagon balked at supplying modern IRAN . arms, Holmes countered .
 Komer and Bundy, of course, opposed this move, but their unfounded alarms about Iran had undermined their credibility . Bundy and Komer's recent, somewhat unfounded alarms against Iran undermined credibility .
 The White House had begun to wonder whether the Task Force was worth the effort, and whether it should just be reconstituted for the next crisis . The Task Force has been disbanded by the White House since 2008 .
 Chester Bowles and Julius Holmes were both ambassadors to Iran . Holmes was the new Ambassador to Iran, and Bowles was the first ambassador to the U.S. in Iran .
 Bowles had saved Holmes’ State Department career by securing him this post, but later regretted it because of his stalwart support of the Shah’s ambitions over reform in Iran . Bowles later regretted his decision to give Holmes a State Department post .
 Holmes and MAP officers in Iran supported a program that reduced the Iranian military from 200,000 to 150,000 men over five years . The Shah knew that Holmes and the MAP officers helped reduce the number of modern weapons and training in Iran .
 The Defense Department opposed the plan, and wanted a more severe teduction . Defense Department wanted more severe reductions .
 The Shah let Holmes know that he would not agree to reductions without significant modernization . The Shah told Holmes that he wouldn't agree to reduce the size of the budget .
 At the Shah’s insistence, Holmes raised the issue of an official visit to Washington . Holmes: ‘I’m not afraid to go to Washington. I want to visit the U.S.’
 The White House was concerned about the reception that the Shah might receive and about the potential political fallout from the visit . The Shah made exorbitant demands for military aid .
 Holmes argued that the Shah had committed himself to reform and to the support of the Amini government . Holmes: To let the opportunity pass for President Kennedy to reinforce that progress would be a mistake .
 Holmes asked why no one questioned a visit by Nehru or Sukarno, and yet a ‘proven friend’ came under scrutiny . Holmes then asked why didn't question Nehru’s visit by a friend .
 The Shah Ascendant 1962 introduced a new phase in U.S. relations with Iran . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran's first government .
 In 1961, the Kennedy administration introduced the new element of American ‘personal support’ for an Iranian politician, Prime Minister Amini . Amini was prime minister of Iran from 1961 to 1961 .
 Shah concluded that to preserve his position against Iranian and foreign detractors, including those in Washington, he needed to cultivate advocates to further his goals . During that same period, the Shah decided to cultivate his position .
 The United States Ambassador in Tehran, Julius C Holmes, became one of these advocates . Holmes was one of the U.S. ambassadors to Iran .
 By January 1962, the Shah had become mote sophisticated about getting his message through to Washington . The Shah became sophisticated about how he was able to communicate with Washington .
 Prime Minister Amini had become the Kennedy administration’s ‘chosen instrument’ for reform . Shah steadily increased Amini's dependence on the Shah for support, co-opting the Prime Minister . Amini became the Shah's 'chosen tool' for reform,
 By December 1961, the Shah had enough control over Amini to use the Prime Minister to advocate both his military and economic priorities with Washington . Amini was the prime minister of the Shah's regime .
 Amini raised the Shah’s unhappiness with the levels of military aid . On 3 January 1962, in a meeting with Deputy Chief of Mission Stuart W Rockwell, Amini said he was unhappy .
 Politicians wanted Iran to move toward a neutralist stance as quickly as possible, avoid being diplomatically abandoned . These politicians wanted Iran's move toward neutralism to avoid being diplomatically abandoned .
 Amini argued that Washington sought improved relations with Moscow . He said inadequate funding of economic and military aid to Iran had been the price . Amini: U.S. overtures to the Soviet Union were the price of the deal .
 Rockwell defended the U.S. position, pointing to past aid and military aid under consideration .
 Amini was the Kennedy administration’s chosen instrument for creating an alternate political power center to the Shah . Now Amini is lobbying for the Shah's agenda, he says . Amini: Amini's role was to create alternative political power centers and drive reform .
 Julius Holmes wrote to Secretary Rusk on 22 January 1962 about proposed defense aid for Iran . The Shah, the Shah, and the U.S. Embassy in Tehran became more apparent in a letter from Holmes to the Secretary of State .
 The key to drastic reduction in military aid without serious political aid is to prevent it being given to the Shah . The Shah knows that US forces will help him if he gets into difficulties, the report says .
 Shah will not cut his forces from 205,000 to 150,000 if offered no mote modernization than envisaged in the Steering Group’s recommended level of aid . It is the judgment of all of us that the Shah won’t cut his . forces .
 A further probability is that such a level of aid will impel the Shah to draw more heavily on Iran’s oil revenues for his armed forces . Iran's development programs will be the detriment of the country's development program, writes Ali Raza .
 There is a further problem involved in talking to the Shah about additional economic aid accompanying reduced military aid . Our own procedures make advance commitments of greater economic aid extremely difficult .
 Holmes stated that since the Steering Group admitted that ‘it has not been able to obtain a clear cut picture of what the long tern shape of economic programs is likely to be’, it would be less than ‘realistic’ to expect the Iranian to put
 Holmes urged Washington to adopt his recommendations on military aid to Iran for the fiscal years 19621967 and 19621967 . Holmes called the Steering Group report 'a retrograde course'
 Holmes' plan to ‘personally’ support Amini and reform had now dissolved into all-out support for the Shah . The administration’s plan to 'personally support Amini' and reform has now dissolved .
 These visits stroked or stoked the Shah’s ego and subjected key policy-makers to the pomp and armtwisting of the palace and the Embassy . The visits were often stroked, or stoked as the case may have been .
 Holmes won his argument for the Shah’s official visit . Holmes won the argument for Shah to visit Komet .
 Chester Bowles, the Under Secretary of State of State, arrived in Tehran for a four-day visit to evaluate the situation in Iran . Bowles invited the Shah to Washington on a visit to be arranged for September .
 Ambassador Holmes sent an evaluation of the visit to Washington on 13 February, before the Under Secretary had even departed Tehran . As a result of the evaluation, Ambassador Holmes had to send an evaluation on the visit .
 Holmes’ report was to pteempt any criticism of the Shah that might emanate from Bowles’s report . Holmes' report was intended to ppreempt criticism of Shah from the Shah . Bowles' report will be released on Friday .
 At the same time, Bowles argued that the MAP package for military modernization should follow the recommendations of the ‘MAP Steering Group’ and not that of the Ambassador . Bowles argues that the package for . military modernization . should follow . the recommendations . of the 'MAP
 The late September date was disappointing for the Shah, he said . He then quickly added that he was pleased with the decision to invite the Shah . He said he was disappointed by the late September September date .
 The Embassy program was the minimum that the Shah would accept in order for him to seriously contemplate a reduction in his armed forces . Then came the ‘however’s’, and a long argument .
 Lucius Battle, Executive Secretary to Dean Rusk, wrote Bundy at the White House, restating the contents of Holmes’ letter . The letter was restated in a letter to Bundy .
 State sought ways to soften the blow . MAP Steering Group offered only the lower amount of assistance approved by the group .
 Battle suggested to the White House that the date of the Shah’s official visit be moved forward in an attempt to limit his ‘brooding’ over the military aid . Battle strongly suggested that the visit should be moved .
 The Shah is expected to arrive in Washington DC on Monday . He is believed to be the prime minister of Iran .
 Talbot told Holmes that $290 million was all the Shah would get, and that he was lucky to get that . Talbot said he was "lucky" to receive that amount . The Shah was awarded $290million .
 The President also wanted the Shah to implement a force reduction plan as well, or face ‘a flat nagative ’on assistance’
 Holmes could expect instructions to break this news to the Shah as quickly as possible, the letter says . Holmes could also be told that the Shah’s official visit to April or June will be pushed back .
 Amini told Rusk that the Shah would only agree to reduce the size of the armed forces if they were substantially modernized . Amini said the Shah only agreed to reduce his army's size if it was modernized in order to reduce its power .
 Amini stated that he could not finish the planning for the development and economic programs until he knew the answer to the military-aid situation . Amini said he would not be able to complete the planning until he found out the answer .
 Prime Minister also warned that in order to support the military the Shah had in the past transferred civilian funds . Prime Minister: In order to help the military, the Shah has transferred funds from civilian funds to the military .
 The first objective was to ‘calm the Shah’s concerns’, Uncontrolled, Washington believed that these ‘concerns’ might lead to the sacking of Ali Amini .
 The White House feared, as bizarre as this may seem, that the Shah might, in a fit of pique, resign . At the same time, the White House also feared that he might resign .
 The Kennedy administration realized that the Shah was the essential element of stability in Iran . Even the ardent Shah-bashers like Komer now realized that an alternate power center around Amini had simply not materialized .
 The second point was to convince the Shah that economic development should be the Shah's priority over military aid . The Shah was also convinced that the Shah should prioritise economic development .
 He had successfully wrested control of Iranian policy from Talbot’s Iran Task Force . He had limited the NSC's options to grousing about the situation .
 Ambassador had made a cogent argument that the National Front was a grossly overstated threat . The Ambassador had laid the foundation for discrediting the NSC view of impending doom .
 He had managed to co-opt several major administration figures to his view that the Shah was indispensable to the proWestern futute of Iran . The Shah was a key figure in the Shah's pro-Western plans for the West .
 Holmes could take credit for the conversion of Chester Bowles' view of the Shah . The Shah was the key to Iran's stability, Holmes says .
 In Washington, fear of the Shah’s instability drove much of the planning for the visit .
 In daily Embassy reports, the fluctuating mood of the monarch has become the major policy issue . In daily embassy reports, reports reveal the fluctuation of the king's moods .
 It resembled a weather forecast as Holmes contrived to make the royal humor a critical issue for decision-making . It resembled the weather forecast .
 The Shah took the position that the MAP appropriation was still open for the discussion . The Shah said that MAP appropriation is still open to the discussion.
 Fearing that Kennedy would be caught flat-footed by one of the Shah’s recitations of shabby treatment, administration officials subjected the President to a barrage of advice and briefing papers . The Shah's recitation was one of many recitations .
 The White House staff wanted to avoid the potential for a personal confrontation between Kennedy and the Shah . Kennedy and Shah have been married for more than 20 years .
 Also on 10 April, Bowles weighed in with a memorandum about Shah’s fixation on military aid . Bowles also wrote a memo about the prime minister's obsession with foreign aid .
 Bowles urged the President to ‘resist pressures to increase’ military assistance . Argued for the $330million cap, Bowles said it would be difficult to increase the amount .
 Given the similarities in language and views, Komer and Bowles undoubtedly coordinated their appeals . Given their similarities in their appeals, they must have coordinated .
 In meetings with President Kennedy, the Shah made his arguments for increased military aid to Iran . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran in the 1960s .
 President Kennedy presented the United States case for reduced Iranian military expenditures and increased focus on economic development . In response, the U.S. presented the case for reducing Iran military expenditures .
 As expected, the Shah presented Kennedy with an extensive shopping list . Kennedy was presented with a list of what he wanted to buy .
 The Iranian ruler raised the possibility of ‘Civic Action’ programs for the military, increased shipments of surplus grains, and additional aid to assist in reorganizing the Iranian military . In addition to the military assistance, the Iranian ruler .
 The Iranian monarch also took the opportunity to raise the issue of Nassetist agitation against his regime .
 The Shah merely shifted to another area, resembling a day in an Iranian bazaar . Stymied in one area, the Shah merely shifts to another .
 Shah also raised the issue of two frigates that had been deleted from the assistance plan, and insisted that those be reinstated .
 The mobility, mechanization, and frigate requests were the difference between the $330 million budget and the $424 million supported by himself and Ambassador Holmes . The mobility and mechanization requests were .
 During the visit, the Shah showed a reasonable amount of interest in economic development and reform, no doubt to offset his focus on the military . The Shah showed interest in reform and economic development .
 On 13 April, he told Averell Harriman that he was most unhappy with the outcome of his talks .
 Amini's official visit to Washington effectively started the clock ticking on the Amini government . Amini visited the U.S. on a tour of Washington and made commitments to Washington . Amin's visit to D.C. effectively began the end of his government .
 Amini had served his purpose; the Shah had wrung every possible advantage from his tenure . Amini was serving his purpose, and he had served it well, says Shah .
 Amini's appointment cleared the way for the Shah’s visit to Washington . Amini had delivered on emergency economic aid in 1961, and his appointment cleared way for his visit .
 American support for Amini had also exceeded historical boundaries in that the Kennedy administration had thrown its weight openly behind his government . Amini's government was overthrown by the U.S. government in 1953 .
 As long as Washington was willing to contribute materially to Amini's survival, then the Shah supported the Prime Minister . The benefits of material support determined the length of Amini’s tenure, and the benefits of the benefits were determined .
 Shah hoped that the additional aid requested might yet materialize . President Kennedy visited the Shah to discuss the aid request .
 This constituted, effect, in effect, his trump card in dealing with Washington over military assistance, budgetary support, and development aid . This was the president's trump card, he says .
 The United States refused to fund above $330 million, plus the possibility of two patrol frigates, disappointed the Iranian monarch . Iran's monarch disappointed the United States refusal to fund .
 The Shah was determined to have his modernized military, even at the cost of starving development programs and reform .
 Shah could divert more financial resources from increasing oil revenues . The Shah could also divert more money from increased oil revenues from increased revenues .
 Kennedy and other administration officials mistakenly assumed that the Shah, with his ego massaged, had been wined and dined at the White House and charmed by the President .
 Shah acted as if the larger MAP amount, or something approximating it, had been agreed upon . He acted as though the larger amount of money was agreed upon, but it was not agreed .
 Holmes expressed his doubts that the situation was really that serious . Holmes: "I don't think it's that serious"
 The claims sent official Washington scurrying to determine what exactly had been promised . These claims sent officials scrambling to find out what exactly was promised .
 It was now clear that the deficit would total between $100 and $200 million . The deficit would now total between between $200 and $100 million .
 In fact, reform programs contributed significantly to the renewed financial crisis . Reform programs contributed to the financial crisis, the author says .
 The series of contributing factors included problems in tax collection, resumption of building programs, military budget, salary-rises for teachers, land reform, large allocations to the Plan Organization, and finally, unpaid bills from the previous budget year .
 The pressures of modernization and reform, bad luck, and reduced direct financial support in both the military and civilian areas caused a chain reaction that ballooned the budget . Amini was left holding the bag .
 The high expectations for increased administrative efficiency and improving tax collection had gone unrealized . The high . expectations of increased . efficiency and . improving tax collections had gone unanticipated .
 The zealous supporters of reform in the Kennedy administration had failed to reckon with the problems associated with the arcane Iranian tax system .
 IMF, with blessing of both Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, imposed stabilization program on Iran to fight inflation . In addition, the IMF had imposed stabilization programs on Iran . The IMF had also imposed a stabilization program, which was approved by the Kennedy administration .
 As a result, the tax base has degenerated, further reducing government revenues . The tax base also has declined, reducing government revenue . The government has been unable to find a solution to the problem .
 Increasing taxes or implementing “quick-return new taxation measures’ was not an option, the government said . Increasing taxes was not the option for the president .
 Neither the Shah nor Amini could face the political fallout associated with raising taxes in the middle of a depression . The Shah and Amini are unlikely to face political fallout .
 The possibility of floating bonds offered little promise of raising any significant amount of revenue . Floating bonds offer little prospect of raising significant amounts of revenue, analysts say .
 It was unlikely that the IMF would have approved a credit expansion with the necessary scope to offset the deficit . Washington speculated that it ‘would start a wild inflationary spiral’ with unpredictable political and economic consequences .
 Amini had given teachers pay increases in order to end riots of May 1961 . Amini's pay increases contributed significantly to budget growth .
 To delay, reduce, or renege on them would alienate ‘Amini’s last beachhead among intellectuals’ and cause the Minister of Education, Mohammad Derakhshesh to resign .
 Amini had also approved the completion of all construction projects that were 80 per cent finished . Amini also approved all projects that had been completed in the city .
 This created critical jobs during a depression, but it also added to the government deficit . The government deficit is now the largest in the world, according to experts .
 It reduced tax revenues, damaged agricultural production, and undermined traditional support for the regime . Strongly supported by both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, it reduced tax revenue .
 Just to maintain the military budget at the previous year’s level required an additional expenditure of $15 million . Because of U.S. reductions in direct budgetary support, just to maintain military budget was an additional $15million .
 Komer and others had argued that the United States had intended for the Iranians to reduce the military budget . Such a move was unlikely even had the Shah been predisposed to do it, Komer said .
 The Embassy in Tehran, the Iranian Desk at State at State, and the CIA recognized that rising discontent and serious ‘rumblings’ in the army over housing, facilities, and pay posed a threat to reform . The embassy in Tehran and CIA in Iran recognized rising discontent .
 The situation really had only one possible solution, namely, grants in emergency aid from the United States . U.S. grants are only possible solutions to the situation .
 Emergency grants and budgetary support were simply no longer available . The government was forced to turn away from funding for the project .
 Kennedy gave everything that he could to the Shah, but the fact was that U.S. commitments wete outstripping the ability to pay, and cuts had to be made .
 The administration had made it clear that additional budgetary support for Iran would not be forthcoming . The administration made the decision to pull back on Iran .
 The military-assistance program was cut across the board and included civilian subsidies . The Shah was forced to reform after the Kennedy administration cut the program . The program was used to push the Shah toward reform .
 The reductions in support of the civilian government and its related reform efforts were much more severe . The reductions of support for civilian government were actually more severe than the cuts . The government's support for reform efforts was also more severe, he says .
 The cumulative effect of cuts in civilian and military budget support created a situation in which Amini could not achieve his promised goals, he says . Amini says he was disappointed by the impact of the cuts in funding support .
 Washington cajoled, prodded, and pushed the Shah and Amini regime toward reform, but balked at the bill . Washington caved to the Shah regime, but failed to pass the reform bill . The Shah regime was overthrown by the Shah, Amini, in
 The very reform efforts that were to transform Iran into a modern, progressive state had created a financial drain that threatened Iran’s political stability . Iran's political stability was threatened by the financial drain, Iran's president said .
 The Prime Minister listed the measures that he had taken to increase revenues and reduce expenditures . Prime Minister said he had increased revenues and reduced expenditures .
 The government had tried to cut the ministry budget by at least 15 per cent . Amini explained that the military budget would not be cut given the regional political and security issues . The military budget will not be reduced, he said .
 He followed with a special plea to restore the $15 million cut from the military assistance . He followed up with a request to restore that amount .
 Holmes reminded Amini that both he and the Shah had received notification months before that they could depend on continued support from the government . Amini and Shah received notification from Holmes months before they could continue their support .
 Amini did not appear to appear to be contemplating resignation . Amini believed that the Shah would support him. Amini was tired and harassed .
 Amini’s efforts, aimed at gradual change in Iranian social and economic processes, had created more resentment than results, he said . Amini's efforts to change Iran's social, economic processes had created resentment, he added. Amini said .
 Land reform, anti-corruption campaigns, and the economic stabilization-program had managed to alienate large segments of the most influential political groups in Iran . Land reform and economic stabilization programs have managed to have alienate some of the country's most influential groups .
 Reform had garnered little support from more radical nationalists in the National Front . Reform had been criticized by some of France's most right-wing nationalists . Reform has been criticized for being too radical and too radical .
 The landlord-merchant classes saw his reforms as a political and economic threat to their position of influence . Landlord-merchants feared his reforms would threaten their position in power .
 His refusal to hold parliamentary elections and his ‘gradual’ approach to reform undermined any potential support from the radical nationalists . He also said that he would not be able to form a new government in 2015 .
 Amini’s controls over credit and the money supply brought on an economic depression . Amini's control of credit and money supply, while temporarily stabilizing Iran's finances and foreign-exchange crisis, brought on a depression . Iran's economic depression was brought on by Amini
 He supported the military budget and, like Washington, feared growing unhappiness in the army . He obviously supported the budget, but feared unhappiness among the troops .
 At the same time, cuts in education threatened a renewal of the teachers’ strikes and student rioting that had originally brought Amini to power .
 Both Amini and Amini believed that Washington’s personal commitment to the Amini government would translate into a belated reversal of the U.S. decision not to supply the required budgetary aid . Amini's government was overthrown by the United States .
 To Amini, Kennedy and his advisors were heaving his regime overboard to lighten Washington’s financial and political load . Amini: Kennedy was heaving the regime overboard in an effort to lighter the financial burden of Washington .
 Kennedy had done this despite the fact that the very programs advocated by Washington had significantly contributed to the problems Iran now faced . Kennedy's actions contributed to Iran's problems, he says .
 The Amini effort had run its course, the President ignored Komer . Realizing that Amini's efforts had run their course, President Amini decided to ignore him .
 Holmes and the traditional foreign-policy establishment had wrested control of Iranian policy from the activism of the New Frontier . Holmes: Holmes and his colleagues had wrestled control of Iran policy from activists .
 Holmes suggested that Washington wait for the dust to settle before contemplating any action . The Shah and Amini might yet attempt to get the U.S. to make up the difference, he said .
 Holmes had now passed Amini’s reformist mantel to the Shah, making him not only the undisputed Iranian political focal point, but also the only vehicle through which the Kennedy administration might hope to see reform .
 The appointment of Alam left little doubt that the Shah would actively run the government . Iranians would hold him directly responsible for the outcome of the outcome .
 Shah insisted that the program of reforms and the anti-corruption campaign would continue . The Shah insisted the pro-Western orientation of Iran would continue, as would a pro-West orientation .
 Shah raised the issue of ‘loans’ to help the Iranian budget crisis in lieu of the grant program that had ended . Shah then took occasion to raise issue of 'loans'
 There was also a realization that the ‘stabilization program’ had done more damage than good and that ‘less consetvative economic policies’ might be required . There were also a . realization that . ‘Stabilization programs’ have done more
 From Washington, it appeared that Alam, and thus the Shah, would not aggressively pursue reform, leaving them vulnerable to National Front elements . From Washington it appears that Alam and thus Shah would not pursue reform .
 Holmes argued that Amini became a prisoner of men like Derakshesh . He said Amini did not insist on putting the best available men in his cabinet .
 Shah had believed that, contrary to what he had been told, Washington would ultimately bail him out of his predicament . In addition to that, the Shah had also believed that he would ultimately be bailed out of the situation .
 Talbot counseled that despite the problems, the U.S. government needed to see the current course through . Talbot: Despite the difficulties, the United States government needs to see through .
 At the White House, Brubeck wrote to Bundy stating that Amini resigned because of problems with the Iranian budget . Amini was 'on whom we had pinned great hopes for economic and social reform'
 CIA reported no apparent immediate threats to the Shah’s rule in August 1962 . As a result, Washington had to retain the Shah's ‘confidence and goodwill’
 The agency stated that his return to the position of ‘single focal point’ in Iranian politics meant that future unrest would be directed at him . The agency also stated that he is a ‘one focal point in Iran politics’
 The fact that the Shah would have to face the mounting problems alone created the possibility that instability might lead to his overthrow or abdication . The fact . that instability may lead to instability might . lead to the possibility of his overthrow .
 Shah made certain that if the Shah's government failed, there was little chance of a similar government succeeding, he would abdicate and leave Iran . Playing on tried and proven methods of getting Washington’s attention, the Shah made sure that the Shah was certain that the Kennedy administration
 These warnings gave added importance to Vice-President Lyndon Johnson’s upcoming visit to Tehran . Vice-president Lyndon Johnson is scheduled to visit Iran .
 It warned against getting into any discussion with the Shah on specifics issues of budgetary support or military aid . It said the conversation would undoubtedly be ‘misinterpreted’ as commitments .
 This was obviously an oblique reference to the President's ‘personal diplomacy’ during the Shah’s official visit to Washington . The Shah made claims with regard to promised military aid .
 He pressed the Shah on reforms on reforms, the economy, and reductions in the military . The Shah died in 1953 .
 The Vice-President made it clear to the Shah exactly where the administration stood, he said . Mr Shah was the first to meet with the Shah .
 Almost on the eve of the presentation, Holmes cabled Washington and asked to be allowed to include the two frigates eliminated from in the plan . Holmes asked to include those frigates in the proposal .
 He argued that aside from whatever military benefits might accrue, it would reassure the Shah of United States good intentions and support .
 For Komer, the struggle with the State Department had now become as important as the issues with the Shah . Komer: "The struggle with State Department has now become more important than the issue with Shah."
 The Secretaries of Defense and State obtained permission to include the two frigates, as a personal gesture from the President . Washington had nothing else to give .
 Shah accepted the offer, leaving the door open for more military assistance . After some discussion, the Shah accepted it .
 Despite unhappiness at the NSC, the collapse of Amini, and rumors of continued instability, Tehran’s ‘acceptance’ of the MAP ended hopes that an alternative to the Shah might exist . The crisis over — almost — almost ended .
 NEA and CIA representatives on the Iran Task Force recommended that Iran be removed from the ‘Critical Country List’, and the other Task Force members agreed . NEA: ‘Iran is no longer on the critical country list’
 Iran continued to be unstable, and the situation ‘could change completely tomorrow’; however, the overall situation had improved . Iran’s overall situation in the country had improved, the Iranian president said .
 Those charged with policy in NEA wanted these outside irritants removed . They wanted to manage relations with the Shah and Iran in a traditional manner, as they had been managed under Eisenhower .
 The subsiding crisis mentality allowed the State Department to focus on more mundane issues that had languished during the tumultuous Amini period . The sub-crisis mentality also allowed the U.S. to focus more on mundane issues .
 ‘status of forces’ agreement would evolve into something far more serious than anyone anticipated . One of those issues, the 'status of force' agreement, would evolve to something far worse than anyone expected .
 Congress wanted agreement on jurisdiction over U.S. military personnel in Iran . Congress wanted an agreement on United States jurisdiction over United States military personnel .
 The Embassy was attempting to explore some reciprocal agreement with the Iranians that would keep U.S. servicemen out of Iranian courts, while allowing the Iranians to save face .
 Aram Aram gave some indication of sympathy for the United States concern . He said Amini had ‘forbidden him to give sympathetic consideration’ to the U.S. position .
 Fouthi’s warning foreshadowed the controversy that would grow into a hurricane over immunity for U.S. servicemen in Iran . The controversy over immunity grew into a storm that erupted over immunity .
 This issue would ultimately become the principal catalyst around which opposition to the Shah and the U.S. role in Iran would coalesce, but that lay in the future .
 By the end of 1962, despite all the effort and the creation of a special task force, Kennedy and his advisors found themselves tethered to Eisenhower's approach .
 The outcome of the U.S. presidential election of 1960 raised several questions about the future direction of U .S. policy toward Pakistan and India . Pakistan, India, and Priorities.
 Kennedy’s election might shift U.S. containment policy toward an economic posture as opposed to military aid . Kennedy's election seemed to shift United States containment policy .
 Kennedy, as a candidate, took the position that the US’s commitment to ‘northern tier’ defense — Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan — had undermined the possibility of a more balanced policy across the Greater Middle East .
 The Indians and the Pakistanis concluded that a Kennedy administration might be serious about reducing military aid and pressing forward with a greater focus on economic aid and development aid in the region .
 A new emphasis on democratic government and reform might emerge, and favor democratic India over authoritarian Pakistan . It also appeared that a new emphasis may emerge .
 Karachi wete indications of a more positive and tolerant U.S. approach to nonalignment . Also troubling for Karachi is a more tolerant and tolerant United States approach .
 Kennedy appointed Chester Bowles, the former U.S. Ambassador to India during the Truman administration, as one of his principle foreign-policy advisors . Bowles was appointed by Kennedy to be a key foreign policy advisor .
 The fact that Bowles had once written ‘Jawaharlal Nehru 7s the politics of Asia’ was not lost on Ayub Khan . Bowles once wrote that Nehru was the prime minister of India .
 Bowles made no secret of his desire to see a major U.S. policy reorientation and a more pro-Indian stance . Bowles wants a major United States policy change in the United States .
 His presence as a Kennedy advisor, coupled with the Senatotr’s statements, was disquieting . He added that his presence as an advisor to the Kennedy administration is disquietening .
 Ayub, like the Shah, had discreetly supported Nixon’s candidacy . Ayub had looked with foreboding on Kennedy's election . The Shah was assassinated in June 1968 .
 In New Delhi, a cautiously optimistic Nehru viewed with interest the arrival of the Kennedy administration . Nehru was cautiously optimistic in the early years of his presidency .
 Kennedy’s intention to reduce tensions with the Soviet Union might also bring a commensurate reduction in the value of the U.S. relationship with Karachi .
 Kennedy fought for ‘massive economic aid’ for India and gone out of his way to flatter Nehru . In addition, Kennedy had fought for massive economic aid for India . Kennedy had also fought for economic aid to India .
 In his inaugural address, Kennedy referred to the ‘soaring idealism’ of Nehru . Nehru was the prime minister of India in the 1960s and 1961 .
 Nehru hoped that Washington would renege on its arms commitments to Ayub Ayub . Nehru probably hoped that U.S. reneged on its commitments to India .
 Ayub also took note of how candidate Kennedy’s ideas on foreign policy might affect US-Pakistan relations and specifically arms shipments to Pakistan . Ayub was well-educated and perceptive, Ayub said .
 He was sensitive to arguments that arms for Pakistan forced India to divert much-needed funds for economic development into arms purchases . He said the funds were diverted from economic development to weapons purchases .
 Ayub feared that the new American administration might not be as enamored of ‘controlled democracy’ as the old had been . Ayub: ‘The new U.S. administration might be less interested in 'controlled democracy' than the old .
 Ayub concluded that just in case the new administration contemplated serious shifts, he needed to reeducate Kennedy and his advisors about the realities of U.S. defense needs and containment policy in the Greater Middle East and Asia .
 Pakistan was the lynch-pin in CENTO and SEATO, making it imperative that a pro-Western and pro-US regime maintained control in Karachi . Pakistan was a key part of the CENTO-SEATO-CENTO-Cento operation .
 Ayub had become the most stable of the critical ‘northern tier’ states . Given the coup in Iraq and the perceived instability of Iran, Pakistan under Ayub was the best of the northern states .
 Ayub appeared to have stabilized both the political and the economic situation in Pakistan . In Pakistan, Ayub was in charge of the country's political and economic affairs .
 Pakistani Foreign Minister Bhutto advocated conclusion of an oiland gas-exploration agreement with the Soviet Union . Pakistanis had oil and gas exploration agreements with the USSR .
 Bhutto believed that Western oil companies ‘left to themselves, will not allow themselves to find oil in Pakistan ... because of the world glut in that commodity’ Argued that the Soviets lacked ‘inhibitions’ in that regard .
 Editorials appeared in several Pakistani newspapers comparing the merits of alignment and non-alignment . Simultaneously, editorials also appeared in Pakistani newspapers .
 Harriman told him that he had been asked to go to Europe, Iran, Pakistan, and New Delhi to consult with the various leaders . He said he had asked him to travel to Europe and Iran, Iran and Pakistan .
 The foreign policy of the new administration would ... present a sharp break from that of its predecessors, says Obama . Obama administration would present a 'sharp break' from its predecessors .
 Due to the narrowness of electoral victory and lack of support by the Southern Democrats, the President could not afford to offend the Republican vote in Congress by announcing in words a drastic change in foreign policy .
 His deeds would gradually show in which direction he was going, they had to date been cleat . His deeds had to show which direction they were going and they had been cleats .
 Ayub visited Karachi in hopes of putting Ayub’s concerns about Kennedy to rest . He visited Karachi hoping to put Ayub's concerns about JFK to rest. Ayub was assassinated in 1968 .
 Harriman reaffirmed U.S. commitments to Pakistan . He delivered personal letters from the President to the President of Pakistan .
 Ayub Ayub’s state visit to Washington scheduled for November 1963 . Ayub also reconfirmed Ayub's state visit in November 1963 to Washington .
 Ayub stated that the ‘US needed Pakistan as Pakistan needed the US’ because the only way to combat Communism was for the 'free world’ to remain united . In a cordial but straightforward manner, Ayub said that he knew that the 'US needs Pakistan as
 On 22 March, Harriman faced a grueling news conference in which he was bombarded with questions on foreign aid, Kashmir, and non-alignment .
 Harriman tried to explain that he had emphasized the importance of CENTO and SEATO, but justified Western support for neutrals, stating that the U.S. needed to assist them in maintaining their independence . He said that the United States needed to help them maintain their independence
 The Indians also emphasized that since the signing of the Indus Waters agreement Ayub had exhibited a ‘hostile’ attitude . Ayub has exhibited a 'hostile' attitude, the Indians said .
 Pakistan now seems intent on negotiating its northern border with China . The area occupied by Pakistan but claimed by India is also claimed by China .
 The Harriman visit produced a cleat picture of what Eisenhower had dealt with from 1953 onwards . It was the first time the president had visited the White House .
 Many in Washington believed that resolution of the Indus dispute would be a first step toward the settlement of other outstanding issues, including the impasse over Kashmir . The United States believed that the resolution would be first step to settlement of the issue .
 Of course, everything depended on the willingness of India and Nehru to compromise, says historian . Nehru: "Everything depends on the willingness of India to compromise"
 Kennedy appointed officials with well-known Indian sympathies to key positions in key positions . Kennedy appoints officials who have well known India sympathies in key posts .
 Chester Bowles, the Under Secretary of State, and John Kenneth Galbraith, the new U.S. Ambassador to New Delhi, are staunch advocates of a pro-India view .
 Kennedy found himself forced to wink at the dictatorship in Pakistan and the ‘hoax’ of a Communist threat to justify military aid clearly aimed at India .
 Kennedy tried to divert attention away from the confrontation with India toward economic development . Following Eisenhowet’s example, Kennedy .
 Johnson asked Nehru to speak out ‘in stirring and ringing tones against the Communist tactics’ in Southeast Asia, and pointed to Laos as an example of the ‘moral force’ that India could exert, he said .
 Nehru stated that he understood the United States desire for him to take a position, but refused to do so . In a pointed reference to Southeast Asia and Pakistan, Nehru told Johnson that he agreed that economic development was the principal guarantee against totalitarianism .
 Johnson came away from these meetings optimistic that Nehru would consider taking a more pro-American stance on the situation in Southeast Asia . Johnson hopes Nehru will take a similar stance to the U.S.
 Ayub made it clear that he believed that U.S. economic aid, the refusal of Washington to put pressure on Nehru, and the pro-Indian sentiments emanating from the administration were the primary impediments to a settlement on Kashmir .
 Ayub argued that the dangerous situation with China left Nehru with no choice but to listen . Ayub said Nehru had to listen to the situation with the Chinese .
 Ayub offered Pakistani troops to confront the Laotian Communists and their North Vietnamese masters . Ayub wholeheartedly supported the U.S. position and offered Pakistani forces to confront them .
 Vice-President argued that while it was ‘impossible’ and ‘probably unnecessary’ to convince India to drop its non-aligned status . Pakistan’s strategic position deserved full consideration for military and economic modernization, he said .
 Ayub’s views that ‘open fepresentative’ government would invite chaos and ‘Communist infiltration’ made it impossible to ‘eradicate poverty, ignorance, and disease’ resonated with the administration . Ayub: ‘Open
 Nehru apparently hoped that improved US-Soviet relations would help India . Nehru hoped that better relations with the U.S. would help his country .
 Nehru wanted the ‘Kennedy regime’ to respond favorably to Russia’s new ‘liberalized’ outlook . As Krishna Menon stated, Nehru . wanted the Kennedy regime to respond positively to Russia's new 'liberalized' outlook .
 The Indian Prime Minister may also have viewed the meetings between Khrushchev and Kennedy as something of test for the new U.S. administration .
 Kennedy reaffirmed Eisenechower’s position on access to West Berlin . The new administration would be much like the old in its approach to the Soviet Union and Communism .
 Ayub increased his complaints about U.S. policy, fears grew in Washington that relations with Pakistan were slipping dangerously . Ayub: "I'm sorry for what I've done to Pakistan"
 In reaction, Washington advanced President Ayub’s official visit to July 1961 from its original date in November 1963 . The White House added an ‘unrivalled occasion’, a dinner at Mount Vernon .
 The change in dates moved Ayub’s visit ahead of one planned for Nehru in November . Ayub's visit to Nehru was originally scheduled for November . The change of dates moved the visit to November .
 On his way to Washington, Ayub gave Kennedy a preview of what was to come . Ayub's visit to Washington was a prelude to his visit to the nation .
 He stopped in London and told British Prime Minister Macmillan that the inability of the United States to bring stability to the subcontinent called into question Pakistan’s decision to join the Western alliance system .
 Ayub pointed out that the proposed new constitution of 1962 might force a neutralist course . Ayub said that the new constitution might force the government to take a neutral stance .
 Ayub knew that Macmillan would pass the substance of the conversation to Kennedy . Ayub: "Macmillan knew that Kennedy would pass on the matter to Kennedy"
 Eisenhower wanted to avoid the Kashmir issue and discourage Pakistani action in the UN Security Council . Like Eisenhower, Kennedy avoided the issue and wanted to discourage Pakistan taking action .
 The official U.S. position argued that only bilateral contacts could resolve the issue . Pakistan should cultivate broad relations with India as a starting-point in settling the dispute, the United States said .
 Washington needed Pakistan for its collective security alliances, CENTO and SEATO . The relationship required arms. Washington needed arms. The relationship needed arms .
 Ayub Khan was President of Pakistan during his visit to Washington in July 1961 . Ayub visited the U.S. on a state dinner during Ayub’s visit .
 This picture symbolizes the close relationship between Eisenhower and Kennedy policy . This picture was taken during the Eisenhower-Kennedy era .
 Pro-Indian pronouncements raised fears of Pakistan’s defection to the neutral camp, prompting Kennedy to advance the date of Ayub’�s visit by more than two years . Ayub's visit prompted an outpouring of reassurances to Pakistan .
 Ayub always found their way back to Kashmir, despite efforts to the contrary . Ayub visited Kashmir in July 1961 and visited the region in 1961 .
 Ayub used Soviet involvement in Afghanistan to highlight Pakistan’s lack of military capability to defend itself . Ayub: “Pakistan has no military capability to defend itself.” Ayub said .
 Ayub disagreed with United States aid to India, stating that the purpose of U.S. aid was ‘not with the expectation that India would support United States policies’ but to prevent an Indian economic collapse .
 Ayub maintained that this approach only made India more difficult to deal with on Kashmir, and freed other funds for military use . Ayub said this approach made it harder for Kashmiris to reach out to India .
 Ayub asked for American help with Nehru and told Kennedy that the Kashmir situation had reached a point where the ‘Pakistani people’ had to see some sort of progress, which contributed to the demands for a closer relationship between Beijing and Karachi .
 Ayub believed that he and President Kennedy saw eye-to-eye on most issues . Ayub was President Kennedy's secretary of state at the time of his presidency . Ayubs believed he and Kennedy were on the right side of the issue .
 Ayub obtained Kennedy’s promise to support Pakistani position on UN resolutions on Kashmir, if it comes to that . Ayub had obtained Kennedy's promise to back Pakistan's position on Kashmir resolution .
 Nehru called them ‘aggressive and even offensive’ with regard to Kashmir . Nehru said they were 'aggressive' and ‘offensive’ in Kashmir . Kashmir is a major source of tension between India and Pakistan .
 The trip also had significant long-term ramifications for US-Pakistani relations . U.S. President Barack Obama made a trip to Pakistan in 2009 .
 President Kennedy made some injudiciously vague statements on Kashmir . President Kennedy was pressed on Kashmir, but made some vague statements .
 Kennedy reaffirmed that the U.S. would continue economic aid to India to stave off economic collapse . Pakistan was the principal United States ally in the region, Kennedy said .
 Kennedy agreed to talk to Ayub prior to any change in that policy . Kennedy also agreed to discuss Ayub's role with Ayub before any change of policy .
 U.S. officials knew that they had misled Ayub about the nature of the ‘talk’ that would occur between Pakistan and the United States. United States officials knew about the 'talk' that would happen between the two countries .
 President Kennedy certainly left Ayub with the wrong impression . Personal diplomacy tended to leave a trail of misunderstandings, and Ayub had a problem .
 During the meetings, to everyone’s surprise, the issue of India-Pakistan relations never came up . The meeting was held in Islamabad .
 Galbraith in New Delhi requested that Washington allow him to notify Nehru of the type and number of F-104s to be delivered to Pakistan .
 Karachi objected, and Washington ordered the New Delhi Embassy not to inform the Indians . The U.S. Embassy in New Delhi refused to inform Karachi . Karachi objected .
 If the State Department drives you crazy you might calm yourself by contemplating its effect on me. If you want to calm yourself down, think about the effect on you .
 "The other night I woke with a blissful feeling and discovered I had been dreaming that the whole Goddamn place had burned down," says the author . "I woke up in a dream that the place had been burning down"
 The touchiest issue is the shipment of military hardware to Pakistan — arming the present rival and foe and the ancient enemy and rulers of the Hindus . Pakistan is arming itself with the weapons it is sending to Pakistan .
 A few weeks ago one of our aircraft carriers brought twelve supersonic jets to Karachi where they were unloaded in all the secrecy that would attend mass sodomy on the B.M.T. at rush hour . The jets are unloaded in secrecy in the secrecy of the aircraft carriers .
 The U.S. allowed the Indian intelligence service to report the unloading of between 50 and 75 aircraft . Galbraith complained that in placating the Pakistanis, the United States .
 Ambassador ‘threatened physical violence’ to get permission to explain the transfer to the Indians, causing Pakistan to complain that the United States had not kept it a secret .
 Galbraith was beginning to understand what he viewed as the unpleasant realities of Kennedy policy . "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say, but I'm glad to see that," he said .
 Ayub Ayub’s visit in July and Nehru's in November placed additional strain on US-Indian relations . Ayub visited India in July; Nehru visited in November .
 From 1 to 6 September 1961, a NonAligned Conference met in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, with Nehru in attendance . Nehru was in attendance at the conference .
 Desai suggested to Nehru that ‘there is a lot of justification for the attitude taken by the U.S.’ on nuclear testing . Desai promised to recommend a modification of the policy .
 Galbraith, who thought that he had an understanding with the Indians, was perturbed . He said: "I thought that I had a sense of respect for the Indians"
 Averell Harriman was responsible for the Geneva negotiations over Laos . He detested Arthur Lall, who headed the India contingent . Lall was the head of the Indian contingent .
 In the United States view, the Indians were ‘more interested in discussing broad international profundities’ than in making the ICC work effectively . The U.S. view is that the Indians are more interested in discussion of international issues .
 On 8 September, Galbraith informed Desai that Lall continued to be an impediment . Desai told Desai on 8 September that Desai was not happy with Lall .
 Washington gave all the appearance of preferring that India be embroiled in a conflict with China . Washington gave the impression of preferring to avoid a conflict between India and China .
 Nehru reacted negatively to any hint of external coercion . The United States suggestion that Lall be removed certainly did not sit well . Nehru responded negatively to the suggestion .
 Galbraith’s use of the American right-wing bogey man in an attempt to apply leverage to India policy . Finally, there was the issue of using the U.S. Right-wing man in a bid to get leverage .
 It raised doubts about the administration’s ability to conduct pro-India policies championed by Galbraith and Bowles . The administration has been criticized for its policies .
 From the Indian perspective, either the administration was too weak to change Eisenhowet’s policies, or too duplicitous to be trusted . The administration was either too weak or not trusted to change the policies of the Indian government, or not .
 Nehru countered that weak regimes propped up by outside military forces merely resulted in ‘weaker’ dependent regimes and invited outside subversion . Nehru: ‘Weaker regimes’ invited subversion.’
 The Kennedy charm was getting nowhere. Kennedy charm is getting nowhere, but it's not going away .
 Kennedy promised Ayub that Kashmir issue would be a priority . Ayub had promised Kennedy that Kashmir would be discussed .
 Kennedy observed that this flashpoint issue hindered the ability of both Pakistan and India to focus resources on economic development . Kennedy said that this issue hindered both countries' economic development efforts .
 Nehru said India could only consider a settlement based on the status quo . Nehru pointedly countered that India could not consider a solution based on status quo. Nehru: "India can only consider an agreement based on a status quo"
 Nehru stated that a plebiscite recognized the efficacy of communalism, something that he had long rejected, and thus the possibility of partition threatened the fundamental basis of the Indian secular state . Nehru said that a plebiscity recognized the efficacy of communal
 To recognize the Pakistani claim and their communal argument would invite a never-ending cycle of agitation among minorities and threaten the existence of the state itself . To recognize Pakistan's claim would invite never an end to a cycle of agitations among minorities .
 Nehtu’s attitude was that of a senior statesman advising a young, inexperienced American President . Nehta was a senior stateman advising the young American President.
 Nehru had gotten along well with Eisenhower, in part because he viewed him as an equal . Nehru and Eisenhower got along well because they viewed each other as equal .
 Menon was broadly despised, and his irascibility and rudeness were legendary . He was widely despised, but was widely respected in the world .
 On 21 November, the President met with Menon, who, while staying on what was for him his best behavior, still managed to disagree with Kennedy on every point of substance in the conversation .
 Menon was blind to North Vietnamese infiltration and violations of Laotian neutrality . Menon had been blind to the North Vietnam infiltration of the country .
 He lectured Kennedy on Washington’s need to get along with the Soviets . Kennedy lectured on Washington's need to avoid warring Russia .
 Nehru gave Menon the green light to occupy the Portuguese enclave of Goa in December 1961 . Three weeks later, on 17 December 1961, Menon was given the goa green light by the Indian president .
 Founded in 1510, it was the last vestige of colonial presence in India . Founded by the 15th century, it is now the most important British colonial outpost in the country .
 Britain, France, and the U.S. condemned the move . Nevertheless, it brought a stinging condemnation from Britain and France . The U.K., France and the United States condemned the decision .
 Ayub Khan demands UN action on Kashmir, something Washington and London wanted to avoid . Pakistan reacts to the Indian occupation of Goa . Ayub: 'Goa is a state of Kashmir'
 Kennedy’s letter made acceptance of the U.S. proposal for bilateral talks contingent upon the suspension of the Pakistani action in the United Nations . Kennedy: Acceptance of the United States proposal for talks was contingent upon suspension of Pakistani action .
 When Galbraith interpreted a non-committal Nehru response as a commitment to talks, Kennedy was encoutaged . Kennedy was encouraged by the decision to go to India for talks .
 Indians responded with a vague invitation that did not meet the Pakistani criteria for real talks on Kashmir . Instead, the Indian government responded with an invitation that didn't meet Pakistan's criteria .
 Nehru would 'wriggle' and 'wheedle' in an attempt to escape his tight situation . Nehru added that he would ‘wrigle’ and ‘wheedled’ in a bid to escape the situation .
 Ayub’s position was his fundamental distrust of the Nehru-Menon axis . Ayub feared that Menon might actually manage to succeed the ailing Nehru . The root of Ayub's position was that he was distrusting of Menon .
 The provision in the treaty could be interpreted to include an attack on Pakistani forces in Kashmir . The provision could also be interpreted as an attack by Pakistani forces .
 The pro-India optimists, Komer, Bowles, and Galbraith, believed that improved relations with India and Chinese pressure had created an opportunity to reassess U.S. policy on the subcontinent .
 In addition, the Pakistani démarches of January 1962 had ruffled feathers . In addition to the Pakistani démarches of January 1962, the Pakistani deremarches were also ruffles .
 India carried more weight in international affairs, but the relationship with Pakistan directly affected U.S. security . Pakistan's relationship with the United States directly affected United States security .
 During early 1962, the Kennedy administration attempted to produce alternatives to Pakistani efforts to bring Kashmir dispute to the UN Security Council . The Kennedy administration tried to produce alternative alternatives to Pakistan's efforts to take Kashmir to the Security Council.
 The United States continued to hope that the parties might yet be amenable to ‘bilateral talks’ or a mediation effort . The U.S. hopes that the two parties might still be open to bilateral talks or mediation efforts .
 Pakistan’s 1959 land-reform program attempted to reduce the influence of the ‘landed gentry’ while increasing the support of the mid-sized landowners for the government . Pakistan's 1959 land reform program aimed at reducing influence of 'landing gentry'
 Talbot met with Sir Zafrullah Khan, the Pakistani UN Representative, and Aziz Ahmad, the Karachi’s Ambassador in Washington . Talbot also met with the Pakistani ambassador to the US .
 They accused the Kennedy administration of dragging its feet on pressing India for negotiations, the Black mission, Kashmir, and Goa .
 Ayub became mote disenchenchanted with Kennedy, and India now decided to pursue closer ties with Moscow . Ayub was disenchaged with Kennedy and became disenchanted .
 In May 1962, the Indians concluded that they needed modern arms for protection against Pakistanis and Chinese . Nehru explores the Soviet option in May 1962 .
 Krishna Menon, the architect of the Soviet deal, would get credit for having forced Washington’s hand . Menon: "Krishna Menon" would have had to have forced Washington to accept the deal .
 Ambassador Galbraith confronted Krishna Menon about the possibility of U.S. aid subsidizing Soviet arms . Menon denied this, and claimed that India was paying cash for them . The ambassador confronted Menon, who claimed that the arms were paid in cash .
 Given the state of the rupee, it was military aid pure and simple . Galbraith said given the state-of-the-rupee, given the military aid it was a military aid .
 The lack of meaningful U.S. military assistance for India had opened the door to the Soviets and undermined pro-Western elements in the Indian military . Having temporarily delayed significant Soviet military assistance, Galbraith, Bowles, and to a lesser degree, Komer argued .
 The deal enhanced the reputation and influence of Krishna Menon, the pro-Soviet and anti-American Minister of Defense . Galbraith further pointed out Nehru’s poor health and the fact that the Soviet arms deal .
 At a minimum, Galbraith wanted to offer India C-130 transports to stave off the MIG transaction . The deal is expected to be worth $1.5 billion .
 He visited Hammersmith Farm, Jacqueline Kennedy’s family farm at Newport, Rhode Island . The family farm is owned by the former First Lady .
 He argued that large-scale U.S. economic aid allowed India to divert resources into purchase of increasingly sophisticated weapons systems .
 Ayub viewed the U.S. reluctance to use economic aid to pressure India as the principal obstruction to progress on Kashmir . Ayub made it clear that he viewed the United States reluctance to help India as an obstruction .
 When it came to the fundamental U.S. policy of containment, Pakistan, not India, was more important . Pakistan was a key part of the United States' containment policy, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Chinese provided a catalyst that permanently altered the dynamic of U.S. relations with both New Delhi and Karachi . In this environment of distrust and dissatisfaction, the Chinese provided .
 The Cuban missile crisis and potential for Armageddon with the Soviet Union consumed the Kennedy administration in the fall of 1962 . The Kennedy administration faced a series of challenges in the wake of the crisis .
 Two smaller crises, the Yemen civil war and the Sino-Indian border war, significantly altered the direction of the administration’s policy in the Greater Middle East . Nevertheless, the U.S. has been in the Middle East for more than a decade .
 These two events complicated U.S. relations with pro-Western states and Britain, and chilled relations with the UAR and India . The UAR, India and the United States are the two most powerful countries in the Middle East .
 Kennedy administration brought to Washington an intellectual acceptance of the principle of non-alignment . Kennedy administration accepted non-aligned principles, says historian .
 Eisenhower administration accepted that Eisenhower administration had mismanaged relations with the developing world . 'Personal diplomacy' and economic aid could bring nonaligned countries to a more pro-Western orientation, he says .
 As with Eisenhower, the Kennedy administration viewed Nasset’s Egypt as the key to Arab world and to any Arab-Israeli peace . Nasset's Egypt was key to the Arab world, Kennedy administration said .
 By the late 1950s, Nehru’s India had become a potential counterbalance to growing Chinese power . Nehru's India was seen as potential counter balance to growing China power .
 Eisenhower had shied away from encouraging this competition . Many in the new administration, including President Kennedy, believed that if the dispute with Pakistan over Kashmir could be solved, non-aligned India would move into a pro-Western posture .
 Like Eisenhower, Kennedy’s ultimate goal was the containment of Soviet and Chinese Communism . Kennedy was even more aggressive and less risk-averse in pursuing that goal than Eisenhower .
 During 1961 and 1962, cooperation and building a working relationship with Nasset and Nehru had not gone well . The attempt to cultivate better relations with non-aligned states, to one degree or another, had antagonized U.S. allies in the region .
 To grasp the complexity of events during the fall of 1962, one need only examine a single page in the Melbourne, Australia, newspaper The Age . The Age.com is published today .
 The 28 October edition provided a snapshot of the chaotic fall of 1962 . It was the first edition of this month's edition of The Daily Tribune .
 The next column described fresh Indian troops moving up to stem the Chinese attack along the northern border . Indian troops move up to stop the Chinese advance along the border .
 The Yemen civil war and the Sino-Indian border conflict would crush Kennedy’s hopes for improved relations with the two key non-aligned states in the Greater Middle East . In retrospect, Cuba was the beginning of the end for Khrushchev's regime, and in the same
 Given the pressures of the Cuban situation, the handling of Yemen and India devolved to mote traditional channels within the foreign-policy establishment . Kennedy still played an active role in policy formulation .
 He wanted to take credit for any breakthroughs on the non-aligned diplomatic front . He wanted personal credit .
 President Kennedy concluded that his ‘personal diplomacy’ had done little to alter the situation in December 1962 . Unfortunately, by December 1962 events forced President Kennedy to conclude that his 'personal diplomacy' had failed .
 The inability of the President to affect substantive changes in the Arab-Israeli dispute or the Indo-Pakistani conflict over Kashmir placed the onus of failure squarely on the White House . In fact, the President failed to change substantive changes on the Arab and Israeli disputes .
 In terms of diplomacy, presidential correspondence, personal statements, and initiatives often diminished Kennedy’s stature, while at the same time compromising his goals . Kennedy's actions often diminished his stature, but also compromised his goals, he says .
 As 1963 began, the Kennedy administration faced a growing number of frustrations and disappointments in the Mideast .
 The White House had attempted to juggle traditional U.S. security interests and broaden relations with key non-aligned states . The Obama administration has been criticized for trying to balance security interests .
 Kennedy found that he faced the same constraints faced almost a decade earlier by the Eisenhower administration . Kennedy found himself in the same situation as Eisenhower administration in the 1960s .
 Kennedy learned that these constraints were less of choice and more of necessity dictated by the requirements of containment . Kennedy also learned that this was not a matter of choice but more of choice . Kennedy: "These constraints are less than a choice, they are dictated by necessity"
 Kennedy, like Eisenhower, had no choice but to support U.S. regional allies . Kennedy had to support regional allies in order to keep the United States in the region . Kennedy and Eisenhower supported each other in Vietnam .
 The Kennedy administration believed economic development and reform were the best long-term guarantors of containment . But reality often made security and stability for the traditional allies the more immediate priority .
 Kennedy, the erstwhile progressive, drove the UAR and India into closer cooperation with the Soviet Union . As a result, Kennedy drove India and UAR to closer ties with the USSR .
 The U.S. became dependent on the fortunes of the Pahlavi dynasty in Iran, a goal diametrically opposed to what the administration had planned in 1961 . He also alienated Pakistan, and left the United States unambiguously dependent .
 The United States found itself tied to Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Libya, and other traditional or conservative authoritarian states . The U.S. has been tied to many of the world's most repressive regimes .
 White House found itself alienated from most secular revolutionary states . Labeled as imperialist, the White House has been alienated by most secular states .
 Policy toward Israel set Washington on a path toward massive arms and economic subsidies to the Jewish state . In addition to arms, economic subsidies, the U.S. also set up massive arms sales to Israel .
 Kennedy bet the future of the U.S. in the Greater Middle East on Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and Israel . Ultimately, Kennedy bet on Iran and Saudi Arabia in the region .
 Nehru stoutly refused to consider the ‘Black mediation plan’ for Kashmir . Nehru cited ‘confidence’ in Black but a lack thereof in President Kennedy’s proposal .
 Nasser publicly rebuffed Kennedy over the Johnson Plan, much to the relief of the Israelis . The Israelis were only too happy to lay the onus for failure on Cairo .
 Kennedy and his advisors had adopted Eisenhower’s view that Nasser was the key to the Arab Middle East and to a solution of the Arab-Israeli dispute . Yet they had no more progress to show for their efforts than Dulles had had .
 Kennedy believed that he could succeed on the Nile where Eisenhower and Dulles had failed . Kennedy believed he would succeed in the Nile, but the Nile had failed him .
 Kennedy believed that he was different because initially he had failed to understand the complexity of the situation; it was lack of experience, pure and simple. Kennedy thought that he would be different because he had not had enough experience to deal with the situation .
 On the whole, the Kennedy administration had a faulty understanding of what had occurred between 1953 and 1956 . The Kennedy administration has a faulty view of what happened in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Eisenhower and his advisors had five yeats of policy experience that tempered their views . Eisenhower had five years of experience in dealing with foreign policy that tempered his views .
 Kennedy and his advisors really believed that the situation in the Middle East was due to ineptitude on the part of Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles . Kennedy believed that Eisenhower and Dulles were ineptitude .
 In addition to their rhetoric, they believed their own high-minded rhetoric about managing change . In addition, they said they believed in their own rhetoric about manage change .
 They tended to see developmental stages in economics and politics, and believed that Nasser had already passed through his revolutionary stage . Nasser believed that he had passed through a revolutionary stage, they said .
 The administration believed that with the proper incentives and handling ‘radical change’ would occur in terms of economic development and cooperation in the region .
 This change would relegate political differences to history’s dustbin, as economic development drove the dynamic in the region, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says the change would be a boon to the region's future prosperity .
 The Syrian coup and dissolution of the union with Egypt further complicated the relationship . Policy differences had always existed between Washington and Cairo .
 Nasser faced the combined verbal abuse of Damascus and Baghdad, and rather than helping, Washington’s attempt to move closer to Nasser merely added to the voices assailing him . Now Nasser .
 Nasser could not afford to act in concert with the U.S. for fear of further damaging his revolutionary Arab nationalist credentials . Nasser was not willing to act with the United States for fear he would damage his revolutionary credentials .
 Egyptians needed to openly challenge the U.S. on some key issues to demonstrate their independence . To the contrary, the Egyptian needed to . challenge the United States on some . issues . The Egyptians need to openly . challenge their . independence .
 Cairo decided that accusations from various Arab capitals, particularly Baghdad and Damascus, suggesting that the UAR would sell out to Israel over Palestine over Palestine in return for U.S. economic aid needed to be demonstrably discredited . Cairo decided to repudiate the accusations, saying accusations from Arab capitals
 Kennedy’s personal correspondence with Nasser proved too tempting to pass up . Kennedy's personal correspondence between Nasser and Kennedy is published on CNN.com .
 Kennedy had proposed a settlement with Israel in return for increased economic aid and development assistance . Kennedy had also proposed a deal with Israel to increase economic aid, development assistance.
 Egyptian government published contents of the President’s cotrespondence with Nasser . Referring to Kennedy's proposals as ‘foolish’, the Egyptian government .
 Imam Ahmad died on 18 September 1962 in Sanaa, Yemen . Crown Prince Badr declared himself Imam after his father died .
 Crown Prince had supported close ties with Cairo and had long been viewed as pro-Nasserist and pro-Soviet . The Crown Prince was seen as a pro-Egyptian, pro-Sasserist .
 Badr had no sooner taken the reins than Egyptian-trained army officers staged a coup . The coup was a coup by Badr's army officers . Badr took over from Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi .
 The coup began in the early hours of 26 September 1962 . It was led by a group of Yemeni army officers headed by Colonel Abdullah al-Sallal . The coup was the first of its kind in Yemen .
 The coup leaders announced the death of the Imam and the creation of the Yemen Arab Republic . Using Soviet-supplied tanks, the tebels surrounded key government installations, and after a pitched battle in Sanaa’s ‘Old City’
 Rumors of Imam’s demise had been greatly exaggerated . Unfortunately for the plotters and the UAR, to paraphrase Samuel Clemens, the rumors had been exaggerated . The Imam's demise was greatly exaggerated, according to reports .
 In Iraq, despite early suspicions to the contrary, homegrown fevolutionaries overthrew the Hashemite government . The U.S. government has been overthrown in Iraq since 2003 .
 In December 1961, Nasser replaced both Numan and Zubayri with a new leader, Abd-al-Rahman Baydani . Nasser asserted control over the opposition movement by replacing them with new leader .
 Numan and Zubayri had displeased Nasser by conferring too closely with Ba’thist party elements . Numan had refused to work with Baydani, according to the Egyptian leader .
 Imam Ahmad conveniently died, more or less of natural causes . As fate would have it, before the coup could be mounted, he conveniently died . Imam Ahmad's death was a natural accident .
 Initially, the Kennedy administration was positively predisposed to the plotters . The Kennedy administration initially thought the plan was a success .
 Working with the Imam and Crown Prince had always been difficult . Yemen was one of the most backward places on the planet, he says .
 Sadat also informed Badeau that Free Yemeni officials wanted to meet with him in Cairo, and asked him to oblige them . Sadat has also asked the Free Yemeni government to meet him in Egypt .
 The Egyptians obviously had a vested interest in the new Yemeni regime . The Egyptian regime had a strong influence in Yemen .
 Nasser might not have known the coup’s exact timing, but his involvement was clear . Given the vagaries of Yemeni planning, he might not know the timing of the coup .
 The U.S. carefully avoided pointing the finger at Nasser while trying to understand what was going on . Be that as it may, the United States avoided pointing out Nasser .
 Badeau argued that the Imamate was a ‘paragon of anachronism’ and that the U.S. needed to identify with progressive forces . The Imamate is a 'paragon' of the American state .
 The Cuban missile crisis also reduced the role of the White House in the early stages of the Yemen affair .
 Preoccupation with Cuba, the Soviet Union and the possibility of nuclear war allowed the handling of the Yemen coup to revert to Talbot, Badeau, and the foreign-policy apparatus . The Yemen coup was the first to be handled by Talbot .
 When the coup occurred, Crown Prince Feisal happened to be in Washington, D.C. He was there at the time .
 Feisal told Phillips Talbot that U.S. aid to Nasser did not moderate the UAR’s activities, but rather freed other funds for propaganda and subversion . Feisal: UAR funds were used for propaganda, subversion and subverting .
 If its UAR policies were to be salvaged then recognition was unavoidable . But such a course now appears to have repercussions for U.S. relations with Britain and other traditional U.K. allies in the region .
 The White House viewed the coup as a minor event in an insignificant place . The British in Aden, the Jordanians, and the Saudis saw it as evidence of resurgent aggressive revolutionary nationalism .
 Rumors spread that the Imam was alive and organizing tribes of the Bakil confederation to retake the capital and destroy the YAR government . Then, just to add chaos to confusion, rumors spread that he was very much alive . The Imam is believed to be organizing the northern tribes of
 Despite the long list of outstanding problems between the Saudi regime and the Imamate, the destruction of a fellow monarchy was inconveniently inconveniently, left Nasser and an Egyptian army ensconced next door .
 Kennedy offered Feisal a series of ‘small scale’ proposals and the president’s assurances of United States support .
 The fact that Radio Cairo said the same thing did not help the situation did not . It was not the first time Radio Cairo had said the situation had worsened .
 Feisal asked Kennedy to use his influence with Nasser to prevent subversive Egyptian activities . On 5 October, Feisal wrote to Kennedy asking him to help prevent subversive activities in Egypt . Feisal was assassinated in Cairo in October .
 The President responded by saying that the US, despite its aid programs, lacked that kind of influence with the Egyptian leader .
 The Saudis believed that the U.S. had a close enough relationship with Nasser to control his activities, the Saudis believed . The United States had no control over Nasser's activities, therefore making the United States responsible for something over .
 The Crown Prince criticized what he viewed as the shortsighted ‘belief that Nasser is the natural and inevitable leader’ He said Nasser appeared to be the ‘chosen United States instrument’ in the region . Nasser was the 'chosen U.S
 Feisal informed Kennedy that King Saud had not been well and was no longer participating in the details of government . King Saud was not well enough to participate in government, according to Feisal .
 Saudi Arabia pledged covert support for the royalist cause in response to an appeal from Yemeni Prince Hassan . Saudi Arabia has pledged covert backing for the Yemeni prince's cause .
 When the King ordered the Saudi Air Force to begin ferrying supplies to advanced bases on the Yemen border, three aircrews defected and took their planes and cargo to Egypt . So much for covert support, so much for the King .
 The Saudis immediately grounded the air force, fearing more defections . Saudi Arabia's air force was grounded after the defections, but it was not immediately known .
 Yemen coup and Egyptian intervention did as much to stabilize the situation in Saudi Arabia as any other single event . Although not immediately apparent, the coup and intervention did not immediately seem to be an immediate effect .
 Feisal’s presence in Washington had, in some ways, been fortuitous . The confusion at the top of the government in Riyadh created an opportunity for the new government to steal a march on its opponents .
 On 19 October, the YAR government invited the United States Consul General in Ta’iz to Sanaa . The U.S. Consul general in Ta'iz is currently in the country .
 The Consul met with Sallal and several influential, well-known pro-Western and pro-American Yemenis .
 Ahmad Muhammad Numan and his US-educated son Abd-al-Rahman Numan were present, along with Abdul Ghani Nagi . Ahmad Muhammad . Numan .
 The elder Numan was purported to be an ‘influential political advisor’ to Sallal . He is alleged to have been a ‘political advisor to’s son-in-law’ The Numan family is believed to be the prime minister of
 Hart recommended immediate recognition of the YAR regime . Mentioned Saudi confusion in Riyadh, Hart said .
 Hart also asked permission to inform contacts in Saudi government that Yemen revolution was ‘succeeding and counter-tevolution succeed’ because the ‘Imamate had acquired too evil and backward reputation’ that attempts at a ‘restoration’ would ‘
 The position of the U.S. Embassy in Jidda, supported by the reports from Ta’iz, resonated with Badeau in Cairo and the desk in Washington . Hart was wrong indeed about Feisal’s support, but the embassy's position resonated
 U.S. officials in the region had spoken out in favor of YAR recognition . By the time the Saudis had reorganized and lodged a dissenting view, senior United States officials spoke out against recognition .
 On 6 November, the YAR government summoned the American Consul General in Ta’iz once again to Sanaa . The UAR government is aware of planned UAR air raids against tribal resistance .
 Baydani stated that the YAR would be justified in retaking Najran and Asir, lost to King Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud in 1933 . Claimed a ‘Saudi invasion’ of Najran, Asir .
 Baydani also accused the United States of supplying arms and pilots for the Saudi and Yemeni royalist efforts . The United States has been accused of supporting the Saudis and Yemenis in Yemen .
 The administration offered assurances that Saudi forces were not active in Yemen . The reassurance of questionable value in Sanaa and Cairo is questionable .
 The attacks delayed U.S. recognition of the YAR and brought a threat to forego it altogether . The attacks also delayed United States recognition .
 Riyadh demanded additional U.S. military assistance, and broke diplomatic relations with Cairo . Saudi Arabia also demanded additional United States military assistance .
 The State Department concluded that recognition of the YAR government would prevent a further escalation of the conflict, limit UAR influence, and undermine Soviet influence . In the middle of this confusion, the UAR government was recognized as a government .
 Washington feared that Saudi Arabia and Jordan might face a rebellion by internal dissidents as a result of their participation in the Yemen conflict . Washington also feared that internal dissidents might be behind internal dissidents .
 On 12 November, despite the UAR air raids on Saudi border ateas, Secretary Rusk recommended to Kennedy that the U.S. recognize the new republican government in Sanaa .
 The administration felt that the delayed recognition, coupled with assurances to Feisal in the form of ‘Operation Hard Surface’, the dispatch of U.S. combat aircraft to Dhahran, would soften the blow and make both the Saudis and Egyptians more agreeable .
 U.S. will seek assurances from Egyptians that no further attacks on Saudi Arabia would occur . Neither Yemenis nor the Yemenis had any territorial designs on Saudi Saudi Arabia or Aden .
 The federation was a British creation designed to support the British presence in Aden . It was created in response to the threat posed posed posed by Aden .
 London believed recognition of the Yemen republic would undermine Adeni confidence and, ultimately, their position there . London believed that recognition would undermine their position .
 We would, however, remind you that in this matter H.M.G. is handling the Federation’s foreign affairs in terms of the treaty . We would rather remind you of the Federation's interests in the matter, we say . We are happy to clarify that H.
 The Yemeni Republican regime has not given a formal public undertaking to recognize the existence of the Federation as an Arab Government under the United Kingdom’s protection and to respect its integrity, the Foreign Office says .
 Clearly it would be unreasonable for H.M.G. to oblige the Federation to acquiesce in the recognition of a regime within a neighbouring state, which has refused to give such an undertaking .
 Macmillan wrote to Kennedy explaining the potentially ‘disastrous effect’ that the loss of Aden would have on ‘the Anglo-American position in the Gulf .
 Kennedy withheld recognition in order to make sure that he got something concrete in return from Nasser . He suggested that Kennedy needed to withhold recognition to get something concrete from him .
 Prime Minister points out that Sallal’s public call for a revolt against the British in Aden made recognition impossible .
 On 15 November, Macmillan reiterated opposition to recognition and suggested that the U.S. should use economic aid as leverage against Nasser and the Egyptians . He suggested that economic aid should be used as leverage .
 The British Ambassador in Cairo, Sit Harold Beeley, supported recognition . Sir Charles and the Colonial Office had not yet recognized that Pax Britannia was a thing of the past .
 The royal family faced more defections to Cairo by ministers whom Feisal had removed . In an unsettling note, the royal family was faced with defections .
 Feisal's government has been accused of corruption in the U.S. in the past . Feisal is the only government that has been able to form a government under Feisal .
 Fearing revolutionary instability in the Kingdom, the Kennedy administration continued to hedge in its support for Feisal . The Kennedy administration was expecting a renewed power struggle with the reformist princes or with King Saud at any time .
 Recognition of the YAR United States hedging did not go unnoticed in Riyadh . Recognition was not unnoticed in Saudi Arabia, but the U.S. did not.
 As Feisal became more secure, he flexed his diplomatic and economic muscle . Feisal is now more secure in his country .
 President Obama instructed SAG to inform Washington to stay out of SAG policy vis-a-vis Yemen . He instructed Hart to inform Hart to tell him to tell the Washington Post not to get involved .
 Feisal became increasingly aggressive in his demands for United States support against the UAR bombing campaigns . At the same time, Feisal demanded U.S. support .
 He believed that the war had become a grinding stalemate and that he could economically crush Egypt . He believed he could crush Egypt economically . He said that he believed the war was a stalemate .
 Feisal Feisal had no intention of backing down in the face of UAR attempts to intimidate him . Feisal said he would not back down and did not want to back down .
 He calculated that a UAR invasion of Saudi Arabia would bring U.S. intervention . The Kingdom had the resources to undermine the UAR in Yemen and at home, he said .
 Badeau redouble efforts for YAR recognition . Increasing problems in U.S.-UAR relations spurred efforts for recognition of YAR .
 As United States recognition of the YAR became more likely, opposition intensified . As U.S. recognition of YAR becomes more likely the opposition intensified.
 The United States attempted to reassure the British that it had extracted non-interference pledges from the UAR regarding Saudi Arabia and Aden . In response, the U.S. attempted to assure the British they had obtained the pledges .
 Amman also pointed out that the Royalists were gaining ground and would be disheartened . Amman said they would be disappointed by the outcome of the Syrian election .
 The Jordanian government requested that the United States await the report of a British parliamentary delegation currently visiting Yemen . The United States should wait until the report is made, the government says .
 The Jordanians questioned U.S. reliability, stating that Washington would recognize any splinter group, including those in Saudi Arabia or Jordan that might gain temporary power .
 Britain, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia are key allies of the U.S. in the Middle East . Badeau had his work cut out of an opposition leader .
 The administration began a damage-control effort, addressing letters to both Feisal and King Hussein .
 Washington informed both Riyadh and Amman that U.S. recognition was in the interest of both Jordan and Saudi Arabia . Washington informed the two countries that it was in their interest .
 It also warned against Jordanian ‘diversions’ that might undermine domestic development goals . The Jordanian government also warned that Jordan could undermine its own development plans .
 The embarrassed monarch was not dissuaded from supporting the Royalist cause . While these moves caused internal dissatisfaction, the monarch did not dissuade him from joining the cause .
 Nasser administration attempted to get agreements out of Sanaa government . Relaying messages through the Chargé in Cairo, the administration relayed messages .
 The United States wanted the YAR to acknowledge the Sanaa Treaty of 1934, to recognize British rights in Aden, and to recognize the rights of the United States Agency for International Development mission in Ta’iz° The YAR government flatly refused .
 In Cairo, A+ Juburiya attributed it to Ambassador Badeau’s consultations in Washington .
 The same article also described the United States as the ‘main prop’ for reactionaries . The United States is the 'main prop' for reactionists, the article said .
 British Ambassador Beeley, in Cairo, saw the Yemeni chaos as an opportunity for Britain to get its South Arabian Federation organized .
 The increasingly violent tone of Nasser’s pronouncements on the ‘forthcoming liberation’ of Aden left Whitehall more convinced than ever that U.S. recognition had been a mistake .
 Egyptian President concluded that the U.S. had little positive to offer . The Egyptian President said that the United States had little to offer to Egypt .
 A fundamental shift in attitude took shape within the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration took shape in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 The Yemen coup and civil war demonstrated to the White House that economic development usually took a back seat to political considerations in the Middle East . The White House says economic development is a priority in the region . Yemen's civil war and coup show that political considerations are often taken into account .
 The looming confrontation between China and India had long been a topic of speculation in Washington . But familiarity had bred complacency, Washington officials say .
 The problem with Yemen and the UAR, not the mounting concerns about Soviet missiles in Cuba, also distracted the Kennedy administration . In addition to the problem, the U.S. was also distracted by the growing threat of Soviet missiles .
 The responsibility for watching the situation fell heavily on the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi and Ambassador Galbraith . As a result of the situation, the responsibility for monitoring the situation was placed on the ambassador .
 The idea that conflict would erupt simply did not fit Galbraith’s preconceived notions about non-alignment . “Conflict would not fit’t fit his preconceived notion of non-interaction .
 His lack of insight also resulted from his dependence on senior Indian officials, whose heads were firmly buried in the sand, for information . He also relied heavily on senior officials for information on the situation .
 Nehru did not see the dispute erupting into a major border war . Nehru certainly did not expect the dispute to become a major issue .
 Even the Chinese may not have believed that it would escalate, but they were prepared just in case . The Chinese may have believed it would never happen .
 The success of the Goa operation served as a catalyst that made Nehru and Menon over-confident . Nehru's capacity for self-deception and miscalculation increased significantly .
 In Washington, the foreign-policy apparatus understood that India could not successfully challenge China and believed that Nehru understood it as well . Nehru was the prime minister of India during the Second World War .
 Galbraith believed that a war would not occur because India was militarily unprepared and because Nehru was ideologically predisposed against the use of force .
 The intellectual association of India with non-alignment, and non-violence, placed the potential for hostilities outside Galbraith’s preconceived realm of possibilities . The leftist leanings of Nehru himself, coupled with the leftist leaningings of his own, led to the potential
 Galbraith’s well-known hubris made it easy for him to discount any opinions contrary to his own . In addition to his hubris, he was easy to discount his own opinions .
 The situation with the UAR magnified the impact of his lack of appreciation of the potential for conflict, he says . The situation has been magnified by the fact that UAR is in the U.S.
 Talbot was not alone in this sentiment; it was shared by other senior officials in the administration . Talbot said he was disappointed with the lack of transparency in the White House .
 Washington deferred to Galbraith’s judgment much more than it might otherwise have done . As a result, Washington deferred more to him than others .
 By the fall of 1962, Nehru had backed himself into a corner with the Chinese . Extrication, no matter in what way, promised to be painful . Nehru’s miscalculation was a mistake .
 Nehru and Menon had placed unprepared India on a military collision course with China . Nehru, Menon put unprepared India at risk of being at risk to China .
 The politicians resented the military, because many of the senior officers had served the Raj . Many of them had served in the Raj, but many of them were senior officers who had served .
 No country will tolerate the idea of another acquiring the commanding position, which England occupied so long . England occupied the position of the most powerful position in the world for decades .
 If any power were covetous enough to make the attempt, all the others would combine to trounce the intruder . "All the others" would join forces to defeat the intruder, says the author .
 Beijing began making ageressive moves in the late 1950s . This prohibition continued even after Beijing began to make ageressive changes .
 Krishna Menon’s appointment as Minister of Defense further undermined the professional military . Menon's appointment as minister of defense further undermined professional military. Menon was appointed in 1957 . He was appointed by the government of India in 1958 .
 Menon had favorites and cteated a ‘promotion crisis, which severely damaged army morale,’ he said . ‘Promotion crisis’ was ‘severely damaged’ army morale. Menon said .
 India faced an experienced, tough, stubborn adversary in the Chinese . With an under-equipped army, a demoralized chain of command, and a leftist Defense Minister who was roundly despised by most of his subordinates, India faced a tough adversary .
 The only bright spot for the Indian military, the Goa operation, had created more problems than solutions . Goa operations have been a problem for India's military, says Ravi Agrawal .
 As a result of Goa, surging popular support in India for the government provided a seductive brew that lowered the threshold for aggressive military posturing . Goa's Goa has been a major success story for the Indian government .
 ‘forwatd policy’ vis-a-vis China became an integral part of the January 1962 election campaign . This so-called ‘Forwatd . Policy’ was an integral . part of . the . 1962 election .
 Campaigning for Menon in Bombay, Nehru declared that the Indian army was prepared to repel any threat to Indian territory . Menon was assassinated by the British Army in the Second World War .
 The Indian president has convinced himself that the Indian military can actually defeat the Chinese . More significantly, he managed to convince himself that he could actually defeat China .
 He also underestimated the lack of ideological synergy between India and China . He also underplayed the importance of the two countries' ideological differences .
 In reality, Maoist Beijing possessed a fundamental ideological antipathy toward India . Maoist China had a fundamental ideology antipathy towards India .
 India has become a Chinese target that would allow Beijing to demonstrate that it, not New Delhi, was the real power in Asia . India had become a China target, allowing Beijing to prove that it . not New. Delhi, it said .
 Kaul stoked Nehru’s intransigence by assuring him that the Indian military could handle the Chinese . Nehru was convinced by Kaul that the country could handle China .
 They ‘brow-beat’ local Indian commanders, stifled dissent, and placed Indian army units in untenable positions . The British 'brow-beats' local commanders, they 'stifled dissent'
 In September 1962, the Chinese responded to the Indian aggressiveness with a forward policy of its own . The Chinese government responded to India's aggression in September 1962 .
 New Delhi concluded that Chinese moves, particularly at Thag La Ridge, would be the trip-line for Indian action . New Delhi concludes that the Chinese move, particularly in the region, would lead to action .
 Failure to act would have undermined public support for the government, writes Andrew Hammond . Failure to take action would have been embarrassing for the Indian government .
 Nehru's personal control over foreign policy significantly increased the potential for a serious Indian miscalculation . Nehru’s personal control of foreign policy increased the risk of a serious miscalculated .
 The aging Prime Minister lacked the energy, the basic information, and the focus to deal with the situation, says David Cameron . The aging PM lacked the information and the energy he lacked, he says .
 Nehru controlled the foreign-policy apparatus personally, and those who disagreed with him were ignored or marginalized . Nehru ruled the foreign policy of India .
 The Indians lacked basic information and intelligence to accurately evaluate the situation . To complicate matters, the Indians lacked intelligence and basic information . The Indians failed to accurately assess the situation in advance .
 He was obsequious and totally unsuited for the job, owing his tenure in the Intelligence Bureau to Krishna Menon . Menon's tenure in Intelligence Bureau was due to Menon, who is now a senior intelligence official .
 Nehru might not have listened, but with Mullik in charge, there was almost no information of substance on which to rely on . Mullik was in charge of the Indian government in the 1970s .
 Krishna Menon convened a meeting of a handful of Defense Ministry officials on 9 September . Menon said the meeting was a 'meeting of defense ministry officials'
 Defense Minister declared that the Chinese must be evicted immediately from the Thag La ridge area . At the meeting, the defense minister declared .
 Neither Nehru nor Menon saw the possibility of military disaster, only a quick Indian victory and political gain . Nehru and Menon did not see a military disaster .
 Menon browbeat the area commanders, who protested that their troops were unprepared . They protested that they were unprepared, only to be browbeated by Menon . Menon: "They were unprepared. They were unprepared"
 Indians intensified their campaign for diplomatic support . At the same time, the Indian government intensified its efforts to get diplomatic backing .
 Kennedy administration welcomed increased tensions between India and China . Kennedy administration actually welcomed increased tension between the two countries .
 The situation promised to translate into New Delhi’s support on Cuba and in Southeast Asia . New Delhi's support for Cuba and Southeast Asia will translate into support for the U.S.
 Washington hoped confrontation with Beijing would create problems in Indian relations with Moscow . Washington hoped that the confrontation with China would also create problems with India's relations with Russia .
 In Beijing, the Chinese, decidedly unimpressed with Indian demands, called for negotiations . The Chinese are unimpressing with the Indian demands .
 On 6 October, the Indians rejected the Chinese overture, and announced New Delhi’s withdrawal from discussions planned for 15 October . New Delhi also withdrew from discussions with China on 15 October.
 The prospect of a clash, diplomatic or military, between China and India could be a windfall for Washington . No matter how foolhardy for Nehru and his government, the prospect of such a clash would be a boon for U.S.
 Washington and London believed that the difficult terrain in the border regions would lead to either a military stalemate or a localized Chinese victory or a move by India .
 Nehru issued instructions to remove the Chinese from the Thag La ridge by 1 November . Nehru ordered the removal of the Chinese by the end of October .
 The Chinese prepared to teach the Indians and their American and Soviet backers an object lesson . Well aware of Indian intentions, the Chinese prepared .
 Chinese mortar and artillery shredded the vulnerable, poorly-deployed Indian front-line units . On the morning of 20 October 1962, Indian forces were shredded by Chinese forces .
 Indian press, public, and government blamed Krishna Menon . Shocked by the setbacks, the government blamed Menon for the setbacks .
 Questions arise about India’s unwillingness to accept Western military aid . Questions arose about the willingness to accept military aid from the West .
 A thoroughly shaken Nehru immediately called on London and Washington for help . Nehru: "A thoroughly-shaken Nehru has called for help"
 Having predicted ‘no war’, Galbraith was in London on vacation when the war broke out . He was in the UK on vacation at the time of the war .
 The United States requested in a blatant quid pro quo that India support a call at the UN for inspectors in Cuba . The U.S. requested that India supported a call for inspection in Cuba, the U.N. said .
 Talbot's characterization of the potential for a military assistance program to India as a ‘revolutionary development with far-reaching effects’ reflected the administration’s overall optimistic and opportunistic view of the situation .
 On 12 November 1962, key Kennedy administration officials met with British officials in London to discuss the Sino-India conflict .
 The British understood that Krishna Menon had not been solely responsible for the Indian collapse, but welcomed his political demise as a bonus for the West . Menon's political demise was a bonus to the West, says the British .
 London and Washington agreed to focus on arms for an entrée into the Indian military establishment, to counter Soviet influence, and to contain the conflict . Washington and London quickly agreed on arms to help the Indian army .
 For those advocating the primacy of India over Pakistan, the border war was a godsend . For those advocates of India's primacy, the war was an ideal for Pakistan .
 Chester Bowles, Galbraith, and Komer believed that ‘a whole new chapter in the relations with the subcontinent’ had begun . Chester . Bowles believed that a ‘whole new chapter’ in relations with . India had begun.
 Komer called the border war the end of ‘nonalignment’ and then asserted that it did not affect India’s non-aligned status . Komer said border war did not change the status of India as an ally .
 The realists at the State Department, the Pentagon, and the CIA saw a solution to Kashmir as an unlikely outcome . Far more skeptical, the State Dept. and the Pentagon were skeptical about Kashmir .
 The State Department and CIA argued that when the shooting stopped, the chances of a settlement on Kashmir would be remote . The State Dept. and CIA said the chances were remote .
 They saw immediate negotiations and concessions from Nehru and Ayub as the only hope of progress . They were disappointed with the result of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 As an alternative, Galbraith obtained permission to ask Prime Minister Nehru to meet with Ayub and discuss their problems . As a result, the Prime Minister Ayub agreed to meet up with him .
 Washington should encourage India to establish normal relations with its neighbors and ‘court peace’ by following up on its international obligations under the 1947 and 1948 agreements for a plebiscite in Kashmir .
 Pakistan was the ‘agerieved party’ and yet Pakistan had been far more willing to compromise than India, he said . He pointed out that Pakistan was Pakistan’s 'agerieved' party, but Pakistan was more willing than India .
 Until now, it has been a few million dollars’ worth of items for immediate use by their infantry . Until now they have been only a few hundred thousand dollars worth of equipment .
 Kennedy wrote Ayub on 27 November, stating that the U.S. intended to provide India with the help it needed . Kennedy said that the United States intended to help India .
 Ayub assured Ayub that any military assistance would not be used against Pakistan . Ayub: Any military assistance not used against Pakistani people .
 It lies in creating a situation whereby we are free from the Indian threat, and the Indians are free of any apprehension about us, says the PM . It is not only to create a situation where India is free from any apprehension, he says .
 This can only be done if there is a settlement of the question of Kashmir, says Kashmiri leader . Kashmir is a major source of tension between India and Kashmir . Kashmir has a history of unrest in Kashmir .
 Ayub went on to assure Kennedy that the Chinese incursion was limited and that the United States arms would be turned on Pakistan ‘at the first opportunity’.
 In Washington those supporting closer alignment with India urged President not to compromise nor to apologize to Ayub Ayub . Ayub was assassinated in 1999 .
 "The Chicom attack in effect justifies a long needed readjustment in our policy," says David Cameron . The Chicom attacks justify a long-needed readjustement, he says .
 Komer, Galbraith, and Bowles wanted no compromises with Pakistan that might jeopardize their goals in New Delhi . They said they wanted no compromise with Pakistan .
 Ayub’s barbs with regard to U.S. military aid to India and the ‘failure’ of the United States to consult with Pakistan added to White House anxiety .
 Kennedy understood Ayub had strong backers in the Congress, including Senator Stuart Symington of Washington . Kennedy understood that Ayub was backed by Symington, a Democrat .
 No matter how large the potential opportunity with India, the President could not allow the lid to blow off the relationship with Pakistan, he says . Pakistan is one of the countries with the largest economies in the world .
 India must understand the limits upon our capacity to influence Karachi, says India . India must see limits upon the limits of its power to influence the city, says Pakistan .
 The Pakistanis had ‘whipped themselves into a near hysterical state’ and the administration had to defuse the situation . We ourselves cannot prevent a Pakistan-Peiping side deal and a withdrawal of Pakistan from CENTO and SEATO,’
 Kennedy dispatched Averell Harriman to Karachi and New Delhi . Once again, Kennedy dispatched a man to Karachi, India .
 He believed that the Indians now view China, not Pakistan, as the primary military threat . He said he believed that India now views China as the main military threat against Pakistan .
 Nehru had said that India had been ‘living in a dream world’, Harriman believed that the possibility of a compromise settlement of Kashmir situation existed .
 Apparently some important officials had not changed their views on Pakistan as the primary enemy . Pakistan is still considered a primary enemy in the world .
 Indian refusal to blame Communism indicated a desite to maintain its ties with the Soviet Union, Hartiman said . Hartiman also pointed out that the Indian refusal indicated a desire to maintain ties with Russia .
 Despite Menon’s resignation, Harriman saw no Indian inclination to abandon non-alisnment . Harrimans said Menon had resigned from the post .
 United States military aid to India had been a ‘shock’, magnified by the lack of ‘prior consultation’ with Karachi . The U.S. military aid has been a 'shock' for the Pakistanis, according to the report .
 Ayub himself had ‘permitted’ and ‘encouraged’ the political and press outcry, the report said . The report stated that politicians of all stripes had exploited the situation .
 Ayub believed that only a settlement of the Kashmir issue on ‘acceptable terms’ could correct the problems and rehabilitate Washington’s image . Harriman: Only a settlement on 'acceptable terms' could fix the problems of Kashmir .
 Hartiman also saw signs of increased political pressure on Ayub . Hartiman: "There are signs that there will be more pressure on him"
 Ayub told Harriman that new constitutional procedures limited his freedom of action . Ayub said he expected Western assistance in ‘getting a fair settlement’ with India .
 Using shuttle diplomacy, Sandys returned to New Delhi and met with Nehru, Desai, and Gundevia . Sandys used shuttle diplomacy to reach out to Nehru and Desai .
 After some modifications, they agreed, in a vaguely-worded joint communiqué, to talks . The two countries agreed to go to talks after some modifications to the agreement .
 A consensus began to emerge that military assistance for India required, if not a settlement, then major progress toward a solution on Kashmir would be needed .
 Pro-India faction voices support for ‘ministerial level talks’ between India and Pakistan . New tactics for the pro-India side .
 The Indian government released the communiqué on Kashmir talks with Pakistan on 29 November 1962 . It was released by the Indian government in 1962 .
 The following day, the Indian opposition attacked Nehru in Parliament, demanding a clarification of the Kashmir issue . Nehru was attacked by the opposition in Parliament .
 Kennedy hoped for a breakthrough, but U.S. diplomats closer to the problem had become increasingly pessimistic . Diplomats were increasingly pessimistic about the situation .
 All signs point to continued unwillingness of the Prime Minister to trust us or to confide in us, especially as regards Pakistan. All signs show that Pakistanis are not trusting us or confiding in us .
 Laise insisted that in India, there would be ‘no retreat from the status quo in Kashmir’
 On 7 December 1962, the same day as the Laise memoranda in New Delhi, Komer wrote to Bundy at the White House . Komer expressed his concern about the improving situation in the Sino-Indian conflict .
 Komer stated that limiting escalation in the border war worked against U.S. goals of getting India to side with the West of to compromise on Kashmir . Komer said limiting escalation worked against United States goals .
 The end of the Chinese incursion undermined the justification for arms to India, says Komer . Komer also pointed out that the end of China's incursion undermines the argument for arms .
 He wanted to press Ayub to show restrain and limit pressure on Nehru while hoping for continued Chinese pressure on India . Nehru wanted to show restraint on Ayub while hoping to continue Chinese pressure .
 Komer suggested that the U.S. needed to convince the Indians to be ‘pugnacious’ with the Chinese so that the crisis would continue .
 As with the other ‘working groups’, Washington had an agenda — emergency military aid, air defense, Kashmir, and a military assistance program .
 The President ordered the NSC Subcommittee on South Asia to come up with a plan of action that would encourage a Kashmir settlement . The NSC subcommittee is expected to discuss a Kashmir resolution .
 Talbot concluded that continued diplomatic pressure from Washington and London could cause Nehru to conclude that a settlement was to his advantage . Talbot concludes that only continued pressure from the U.S. and Britain could cause a settlement .
 Talbot pointed out that ‘in the absence of further frightening Chinese military successes’ progress would be ‘difficult and slow’ By 17 December, there were further indications that the initial scare had worn off .
 Ambassador Nehru requested a meeting with President Kennedy in Washington . He complained about Pakistani efforts to use its relationship with the U.S. to pressure India .
 On 17 December 1962, in a memo to President Kennedy, Secretary of State Rusk pointed out that essentially the U.S. faced a no-win situation . The United States faced a 'no-win' situation, Rusk wrote .
 Rusk believed that Ayub had overplayed his hand and that the U.S. had encouraged him to do so . Rusk said the United States had encouraged Ayub to overplay his hand . He said that the United. States had been encouraged by Ayub .
 Rusk believed Ayub saw U.S. responsibility extending to the point of actually leveraging a settlement . Rusk said Ayub believed that Ayub would be able to leverage a settlement with the United States. Rusk: Ayub wanted the settlement to be leveraged to leverage the
 Ayub wanted pressure applied to bring Ayub back to a more realistic position . Ayub said pressure was being applied to make Ayub's position more realistic .
 By 19 December, Komer described a policy picture that largely contradicted his view of only a week before . Komer: "By the end of the week, I'm not sure what I think about the U.S. immigration policy."
 Komer stated that Harriman and the Department of Defense opposed any aid, beyond the $120 million in emergency military aid and the air defense assistance, without progress on Kashmir .
 Komer added that Talbot and Galbraith wanted no linkage between aid and Kashmir for fear of hardening Nehru’s views . Komer said Talbot wanted no link between Kashmir and Kashmir to be hardened .
 At that time, Komer had strongly supported Galbraith’s contention that aid should not be linked to progress on Kashmir . Komer said Pakistani concerns should not ‘bar’ military aid to India .
 Talbot's admonition about pressure on Nehru merely reflected what he knew to be the Indian Prime Minister’s aversion to such tactics . Ever the realist, Talbot said Nehru was wary of pressure tactics .
 Talbot had always understood and valued what was at stake in intelligence sites in Pakistan far more than Komer . Talbot was always keen on Pakistan's intelligence, but Komer was always more cautious .
 Komer reversed himself on the issue of India as a counterweight to China in Asia . Komer also reversed himself when asked about the role of India .
 Indians have already picked them up with ill-concealed satisfaction, seeing in them a means of retaining Kashmir sovereignty while accepting a little ‘European-type’ window dressing . Indians see in them as a way to retain Kashmir sovereignty .
 In the memo, Komer expressed the opposite concern that the Indians now view United States involvement as problematic .
 Reduced Chinese pressure removed any sense of ‘urgency’ on the part of the Indians with regard to Kashmir . In New Delhi, reduced Chinese pressure has removed any . sense of 'urgency' in Kashmir .
 Even among political figures that had supported such a settlement, the reality of what it would cost had taken a toll . The cost of the settlement has taken toll on those who had supported it .
 Krishna Menon may have been out of power officially, but he and his leftist supporters agitated against any deal with the West that involved Kashmir . Menon was not in power officially but he was agitated against a deal involving Kashmir .
 Non-leftists argued that because of the Soviets, the West would provide military support with or without progress on Kashmir . The West would continue to do so regardless of progress, they said .
 The net result was that the Indians convinced themselves progress on Kashmir was not vital to their national security . India's lack of progress in Kashmir is not a vital security issue for the country, says the author of the book .
 In Pakistan, Nehru’s public statements merely served to underscore skepticism about his good faith . Just for good measure, he accused the Pakistanis of an ‘attitude of blackmail’
 Talks of a ‘condominium’ or other solutions short of a plebiscite wete viewed as part of an Anglo-American conspiracy aimed at the ‘murder Pakistani freedom’ and an attempt to embroil Pakistan in a conflict with China . In addition,
 President Kennedy and British Prime Minister Macmillan discussed the pros and cons of providing military support to India, and the possible ramifications of this in Pakistan .
 Macmillan and Commonwealth Secretary Sandys proposed that the Anglo-American effort go slowly . MacMillan and Sandys said that the effort should go slowly.
 Macmillan supported Averell Harriman’s concern for the impact on Pakistan . MacMillan supported a debate on the impact of Pakistan. Macmillian supported a proposal for Pakistan .
 The British were concerned that massive arms aid to India without progress on Kashmir would leave such a taste of betrayal in Ayub’s mouth that Pakistan might abandon its Western ties . Pakistan was concerned that the aid would leave a taste in the mouth .
 At that point, Sandys, Home, and Macmillan reminded him that it would be a major psychological victory for the Communist bloc and that Iran would doubtless follow suit . Iran would undoubtedly follow suit.
 President and Prime Minister concluded that they would continue with plans to provide air defense for India . Ayub and Nehru were pressured to come to an agreement on Kashmit Kashmit .
 On 26 December, the first ministerial-level meetings took place between the Pakistanis and an Indian delegation headed by Sardar Swaran Singh, in Rawalpindi, Pakistan .
 Pakistan announced an agreement with China to negotiate a settlement of its northern border with Tibet . Pakistan announced the agreement in the middle of the meetings . The agreement was announced during the meeting .
 The Indians debated using the announcement of negotiations as a pretext for breaking off the talks but decided against it . The Indian team decided to use the announcement to break off negotiations .
 Pakistani Foreign Minister, Bhutto, made it clear that Pakistan could not accept the status quo . In the talks, the Pakistani foreign minister said Pakistan couldn't accept the current status quo.
 Bhutto stated that Pakistan would consider a ptoposal to redraw the boundary line through Kashmir, but that Karachi still supported a plebiscite . Pakistan would not consider redrawing the border through Kashmir .
 The Indians intended to propose a redrawn boundary line that essentially confirmed the current ceasefire line . The Indians wanted to propose redrawn a new boundary line .
 Ayub told U.S. Ambassador McConaughy that he believed the crisis between China and India was basically over . Ayub said that only significant United States and British pressure would bring any modification in India’s position on Kashmir .
 Ayub said he would tolerate the current levels of military aid to India on condition that the U.S. pressure India about Kashmir . Ayub bluntly told McConaughy that the United States should pressure India on Kashmir issue .
 The West is trying to draw India into a closer alignment with the West, but not jeopardizing the alliance structure in which Pakistan participated . So began the effort to achieve a compromise over Kashmir, the diplomat says .
 The Kennedy administration had clutched at the Chinese border war as a way to reorder the political map of South Asia, but had at first underplayed and then later overplayed its hand .
 The pro-India faction prevented massive pressure on Nehru at the beginning of the crisis . Once the crisis abated there was no chance that Nehru would compromise . Galbraith, Komer, and Bowles, the pro-Indian faction, had prevented pressure .
 If the Chinese incursion and the sound military defeat that Beijing administered to the Indians did not fundamentally change the orientation of India, then nothing would have changed India's orientation . Quite simply, if the incursion . did not change the direction of India .
 Supporting and courting India at the expense of Ayub’s Pakistan had been a major mistake, says Hussain Hussain . Hussain says the decision to support and courtee India was a mistake .
 From Karachi's point of view, military aid to India and Kennedy’s promises left the U.S. with only one option . From Karachi, the United States had only one choice, says Karachi . The United States was forced to rely on military aid from India and promised promises
 Washington could try to pressure India into a settlement of the Kashmit dispute that was acceptable to Pakistan . Washington could expect Karachi to take a very dim view of U.S. policy .
 The Kennedy administration’s entire policy structure toward the non-aligned world hung in the balance in 1963 . Kennedy administration's entire policy .
 Kennedy’s concern over domestic political repercussions prevented any dramatic initiatives that might alienate Israel and its supporters . Neither side had the inclination or much incentive to compromise, Kennedy said .
 Israel has refused to cooperate on any plan involving a settlement with the Palestinians, and refused any meaningful inspection of its ‘peaceful’ nuclear program . Israel demanded more military aid, refusing to cooperate with any plan with a settlement .
 Nasser’s Yemen adventure underscored his intention to pursue a mote radical revolutionary course and his growing conviction that Washington had little to offer that would enhance up his standing in the Arab world . Nasser's Yemen adventure .
 The border war between India and China ended in a Chinese-dictated truce . It seemed to promise a major reorientation in Indian foreign policy, but ended in truce .
 Nehru deeply resented U.S. attempts to use the war to leverage a compromise with Pakistan over Kashmir . Bitterly disappointed and broken by the Chinese inflicted humiliation inflicted, Nehru resented United States attempts .
 The Kennedy administration’s plan to co-opt nonaligned Egypt and India was on life-support, leaving its advocates within the administration struggling to salvage what was left of their hopes for a new U.S. role in the region .
 The unhappiness of U.S. allies with the administration is perhaps more alarming . It's not the first time the administration has been unhappy with the Obama administration .
 Kennedy's initiatives with the non-aligned states threatened to wreck containment . Kennedy’s initiatives . Kennedy's initiative with the . non .aligned states . threatened to wreak containment .
 Washington had little choice but to make a similar commitment to the Shah . Having given its support for the first time to a specific Iranian politician, Washington now has little choice .
 Eisenhower policy of supporting Iran, but not necessarily the Pahlavi regime, vanished in Kennedy’s effort to establish an alternative to the Shah .
 Kennedy’s unwillingness to use economic aid to pressure New Delhi alienated President Ayub . In Pakistan, United States military assistance for India, U.S. military aid for India was also a stumbling block .
 This development threatened Pakistani participation in CENTO and SEATO, as well as U.S. strategic intelligence interests . The development threatened Pakistan's participation in the CENTO .
 Ayub believed that President Kennedy had intentionally misled him with regard to Pakistan's role as Washington’s principal partner in South Asia . Ayub: President Kennedy deliberately misled him about Pakistan's position as a partner in the region .
 Britain, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Jordan were all at odds with U.S. policy in the Arabian Peninsula .
 Yemen conflict had placed US-UAR relations under considerable stress . Yemen conflict straining relations with its allies, strained relations with allies .
 Having recognized the YAR, Washington faced pressure from its allies to secure a UAR withdrawal . Washington now faced pressure to secure the withdrawal of the UAR .
 United States Ambassador Badeau in Cairo sought Nasset’s agreement to outside mediation . Nasset agreed outside mediation with the U.S. Ambassador in Cairo .
 Badeau and the administration attempted to put the onus for the Yemeni disengagement on Saudi Arabia and Crown Prince Feisal .
 Badeau argued that by prolonging the conflict, the Saudi government raised the specter of instability and revolt . The Saudi government has been accused of instigating a revolt .
 Feisal’s supporters pointed out that not only was Saudi Arabia pursuing the reforms that Washington had long sought, but, also under Feisal, the government in Riyadh was mote stable .
 Realists argued that Western Europe and potentially the United States needed Saudi oil significantly more than they needed good relations with Cairo . These realists also argued that the U.S. and Western Europe needed Saudi Arabia more than Cairo .
 In Washington’s view, the easiest way to secure an ‘honorable’ way out for Nasser was to pressure Feisal to stop arms shipments to the Yemeni Royalists . In Washington's view, this is an 'honorable way out'
 President Kennedy called on Riyadh to end its support to the Royalists . President Kennedy wrote to Feisal calling on the Saudis to end their support .
 Feisal responded by accusing Kennedy of selecting Nasser as the ‘chosen instrument’ of the U.S. in the Arab world . Feisal: Nasser was the 'Chosen instrument' of the United States in Arab world. Feisal says Kennedy selected Nasser
 An old charge dating from the Eisenhower administration, it was doubly effective . The charge is an old charge .
 It put Kennedy on the defensive and put pressure on Nasser to demonstrate his independence from Washington .
 It appeared that Kennedy and his advisors failed to appreciate that while the frail Crown Prince might have been born in Bedouin tent, he was a shrewd politician, highly sophisticated .
 Johnston said Jordan, with everything going against it, had been more stable than either Iraq or Syria . Johnston pointed out that Jordan, despite everything, had more stability than Iraq and Syria, than both countries .
 On 19 January 1963, Kennedy wrote to Nasser complaining that UAR and YAR activities were the cause of Saudi and British alarm and intensified their opposition to the revolutionary government .
 Nasser told Kennedy that he ‘had to respond to great concern owing to my knowledge — and the confirmations made to me by the American ambassador to Cairo Dr. Dr. Cairo’ Nasser .
 Nasser stated that Saudi intervention had been made possible by American assistance . Laying the problem at Kennedy’s door at the door, Nasser said .
 Badeau attached his own summary of Nasset’s letter to Nasset . Nasset's letter was sent to the governor's office in New York City .
 He argued that the YAR and UAR had acted with restraint given the magnitude of Saudi interference . He said that the UAR and YAR were restrained by Saudi Arabia .
 Feisal finally agreed to end his support for the Yemeni Royalists . In return for the ‘temporary’ basing of United States fighters at Dhahran, Feisal agreed to stop supporting the Royalist .
 Kennedy promised to assist ‘at Saudi expense’ in building up the Kingdom’s air defenses including a new aitbase near the Yemeni border at Najran . Kennedy also promised to help build up the Saudi air defenses .
 Bunker offered to place U.S. fighter aircraft at Dhahran ait base in return for Feisal’s compliance with a ceasefire in Yemen . Bunker offered the deal to place United States fighter planes at the base . Bunker also offered to offer Feisal compliance with the ceasefire
 Feisal accepted the Bunker offer on 7 April, after signing the Yemen disengagement agreement . Feisal accepts the offer .
 On 17 April, Ambassador Badeau informed Nasser that this U.S. ‘training mission’ would conduct exercises near the Saudi-Yemeni border . Nasser: ‘This United States 'training mission' will conduct exercises .
 Badeau expressed concern that ‘grave consequences ... would arise from a confrontation’ between United States and UAR aircraft . The UAR has been criticized by the U.S. government .
 Nasset knew that Saudi activities and Feisal’s support for the Yemeni opposition continued . Nasset, through his intelligence chief, Zakaria Muhyi al-Din, knew that .
 Bunker was trying to obtain a UAR commitment to withdraw its forces . This created a credibility problem for Bunker, who tried to get the UAR to withdraw forces . Bunker was forced to withdraw his forces from South Korea in order to avoid a U.S. withdrawal .
 Komert to the President were aware of commitments made to Nasser that the squadron would not be sent until Saudi support for the rebels had stopped . Komert and Nasser were also aware that Feisal had not lived up to his side of the bargain .
 Cairo’s view is that the Saudis’ continued support to the Yemeni rebels constitutes a breach of faith . The arrival of U.S. Air Force components at Dhahran and the continued support for the rebels constituted a breach, Cairo says .
 In trying to steer a middle course, the Kennedy administration damaged its credibility . Kennedy administration had damaged it credibility, he says .
 The relationship with Nasser was further complicated when Washington announced the sale of Hawk missiles to Israel . Nasser's relationship with the U.S. was complicated when it was announced that Israel would sell Hawk missiles .
 For Nasser and the Egyptian leadership, Kennedy had become little more than a rerun of the disappointments from the Eisenhower administration . Kennedy was a more urbane package — John Foster Dulles in a more uphphphy package .
 On 8 February 1963, in Baghdad, Ba’thist, nationalist, and Nasserist army officers overthrew Qasim’s regime . The revolution took place in Baghdad in February 1963 .
 ICP held positions of substantial influence and ‘advantage’ in Iraq . Prior to the coup, the ICP had substantial influence in Iraq, according to reports .
 Qasim’s isolation created a situation in which the ICP had become his most faithful supporter . The Soviet Union was the principal benefactor of his regime .
 Soviet military aid, economic support, and technical assistance dominated Iragi development . Soviet support dominated the development of Iragi .
 Iraqi foreign policy, diplomacy, and propaganda followed the Soviet line . In return, Iraq's foreign policy and diplomacy followed the Soviets' line .
 By the next day, Qasim was dead, executed ‘after a short trial’, along with the Communist commander of the Iraqi air force, Brigadier Jalal Awgqati, and other Qasims supporters .
 Radio Baghdad announced the formation of the yet another RCC and called on the 'masses to descend to the streets to see the body of Qasim' The Communists knew the score.
 They would receive the same consideration that they had meted out when they hung Ba’thists and Nassetists from lampposts in Mosul in 1959 .
 The RCC issued Proclamation 13 to make certain that there was no ambiguity, the RCC said .
 Washington welcomed news that thousands of Communists were either dead or in jail . The shops in Baghdad were doing a booming business in portraits of the new President, Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref .
 A broadly-held assumption that the coup resulted from US-UAR cooperation created the biggest stit among pro-Western states in the region . Ironically, the assumption that U.S.-UAR . cooperation resulted from the coup created a big stit .
 Administration officials told the Saudi Arabian Ambassador, Sheikh Abdullah al-Khayyal, that the Iraqi coup coming on top of the Yemen situation made it imperative for the Kingdom to cease its involvement in Yemen . ‘emboldened ... nationalist elements’ might move against the monarchy,
 Syrians and Jordanians openly discussed the danger posed by the US’s ‘chosen instrument’, Nasser and resurgent PanArab nationalism . To compound this speculation, both Jordanians and Syrians openly discussed Nasser .
 The Kennedy administration’s initial analysis concluded that Iraq would continue to chart an independent coutse as a ‘separate pole of alignment’ in the Arab world .
 The potential downside was that the Ba’thists in Iraq might succeed in overthrowing the monarchies in both Saudi Arabia and Jordan, possibly with UAR complicity . The UAR might have helped topple the monarchs in Saudi Arabia or Jordan .
 The administration feared a coalescence of interests between the Iraqi Ba’thists and Nasser that might overpower the weaker pro-Western monatchies .
 There was also the outside possibility of another Nasserist unification movement . The outside possibility is also the possibility of a new unity movement .
 The possibility of an Iraq cleansed of Communists and friendly to the West presented Washington with an inviting potential for Baghdad to reclaim its role as a counterbalance to Cairo .
 On 15 February, in ALAbram, Heikal pointed out that it was necessary to differentiate ‘between the real Ba’th and the opportunists and profiteers’ in the party, the latter obviously referring to the Syrian secessionists .
 Heikal stated that the UAR looked forward to the possibility of fresh approaches that the Iraqi Ba’thists might have with regard to furthering Arab unity . The UAR is looking forward to a fresh approach from the Ba'thists .
 Nasser may have been disappointed by the Iraqi Ba’th’s refusal to side with the UAR against its Syrian branch, but he carefully left the door open for cooperation . Nasser was disappointed with the decision, but left the possibility of cooperation .
 London concurred that the new regime would be anti-Communist and nationalist . But they believed that it would maintain correct relations with the Soviet Union . London believed that the regime would maintain relations with Russia .
 There was too much Soviet military hardware laying around for it not to be on speaking terms with Moscow . The Soviet Union had too much of its own military hardware to keep in touch with Russia .
 Because of their support for Qasim, the British were concerned that their lack of connections with the new government, the Nasserist influence, and the imposition of austerity programs might effect Britain's commercial position .
 New Iraqi Foreign Minister Talib Shabib outlined the foreign policy of the regime . Talib is the new foreign minister of the new regime .
 The Iraqi government supported the YAR and UAR position on Yemen . On the matter of Yemen, the Iraqi government said it was not interested in Yemen .
 Baghdad made it clear that the culprits standing in the way of progress and peace in the region wete the Saudis, who were subsidizing and supplying the Royalists, and the British, who are creating problems on the southern border .
 Iraqi government intended to stay out of it but it 'could not control' the 45 newly-licensed Iraqi publications .
 Baghdad expressed specific concerns in light of reports that fugitive Iraqi officials had fled to Syria . Baghdad expressed concerns over reports of fleeing Iraqi officials in Syria .
 Iraq does not plan direct action against Syria, says Shabib . Iraq would welcome a more ‘congenial’ government there at the earliest possible date, he says .
 The Baghdad coup left the Syrian government of President Nazim al-Qudsi in an impossible position . The government was overthrown by a coup in Baghdad . The coup has left the government in a difficult position .
 Qudsi resorted to what could only be described as a kind of policy schizophrenia . In a desperate bid for political survival, he resorted to a policy schizophrenia.
 U.S. faced incessant Syrian media attacks, predicated on the proposition that Cairo and Washington were working in consort to undermine Syria . Following Syria’s secession from the UAR, the United States faced constant media attacks .
 In January 1963, the Syrian government suddenly reversed itself and began to question U.S. support for Saudi Arabia in the Yemen conflict . The Syrian government then asked the United States for support in Yemen .
 Qudsi attempted to enlist U.S. help against his Syrian Ba’thist and Nassetist opposition . Facing mounting problems with Syrian Ba'thists, he believed that the United States had the influence to put in a good word with Nasser .
 President Qudsi responded to a letter from Kennedy in which Kennedy protested that Syrian accusations against U.S. officials for allegedly supporting UAR subversion in Syria were false . Kennedy: Syria's accusations against United States officials were false.
 Qudsi lodged an obligatory complaint about Israel, but agreed that the charges against the U.S. officials were unfounded .
 Damascus regime was simply flailing about in a futile attempt to save itself . Isolated, with internal opposition surging, the Damascus regime is simply trying to save its own life .
 On 8 March 1963, Ba’thist military and party elements overthrew the Syrian government . They announced a policy that supported Arab unity with Iraq, the UAR, the YAR, and Algeria .
 His credibility was undermined by his agreement with Nasser in 1958 to dissolve the Ba’th party . Aflaq was no longer the dominant power in the new Syrian Ba'th party, he says .
 A group of military officers, refered to as the ‘Military Committee’, ran the show . Instead of a group of officers, the 'Military Committee' ran the run of the country .
 This secretive cabal, composed of Muhammad ’Umran, Salah Jadid, Hafiz al-Assad, Abd-al-Karim Jundi, and Ahmad al-Mir, resented Aflaq and Bitar because of their agreement in 1958 to dissolve the
 Now the military Ba’thists no longer needed the civilians in order to grab power . Now they no longer need the civilians to take power. Now they have no choice but to take control of the country .
 Nasser, not Aflaq, was the most visible symbol of Arab nationalism and unity . In addition, Nasser was the symbol of national unity in Arab nationalism .
 UAR, Syria, and Iraq call for ‘tripartite unity’ between the UAR and Syria . These factors, along with the arrival in Damascus of exiled Syrian Nassetists, resulted in a call on 14 Match for unity .
 Negotiations ensued in Cairo in March and April 1963 between Syria, Iraq, and the UAR, paralleling the Yemen mediations . The negotiations took place between Syria and Iraq in March 1963 .
 He explained that before negotiations could begin, he had to clear the air with regard to the creation of the UAR and Syria’s secession . He said that before talks could begin with Syria, the Syrian delegation and the United Arab Republic had cleared the air between them .
 Nasser wanted his pound of flesh in terms of an admission by the Syrian Ba’th of their past sins, and submission to Egypt’s ‘Charter of National Action’ and ‘revolutionary experience’
 "If the Ba’th party is ruling Syria and we are supposed to unite with it, then I am not at all prepared to continue these discussions," he says . "I am not ready to continue discussions. If the Ba'th party [is] ruling Syria, then
 Nasser intended to string out the talks, either obtaining the total supplication of both the Syrian and Iraqi Ba’thists or gaining time for his own supporters to grab power in Damascus and Baghdad . Nasser wanted to get the support of both his supporters in Syria and Iraq .
 As the unity talks progressed, pro-Nasserist pressure in the form of riots and demonstrations grew in Syria . The talks have been held in Syria since April 2012 .
 Despite prognostications that Iraq would maintain its independence from the UAR, Kennedy wanted to hedge his bets . Kennedy wanted an independent Iraq from the United Arab Republic .
 As long as the potential existed for Nasser to head a federated Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, the White House intended to tread lightly on the Yemen issue .
 Like Dulles and Eisenhower in 1958, the administration feared finding itself confronted by a hostile Arab super-state . In 1958, Eisenhower feared finding himself confronted by hostile Arab state .
 Kennedy’s conciliatory letter to Nasser on 18 April reflected the uncertainty created by the tripartite negotiations . Kennedy: ‘I’m sorry for what I’ve done with the situation in the Middle East .
 He congratulated Nasser on the formation of the new UAR and argued for restraint in Yemen . He also argued that restraint was necessary in Yemen, especially in the region .
 President Obama preferred the Saudis simply to withdraw support from the politically odious Yemeni Royalists . To accomplish this, he preferred to simply withdraw support .
 Kennedy saw possibility that Nasser might pull another rabbit from his political hat . Now with Iraq and Syria, Kennedy saw the possibility of Nasser pulling another rabbit out of his hat .
 Soured relations with the UAR Nasser’s unification talks, Jordan and Saudi Arabia once again became the focus of concern . Nasser's unification talks with the United Arab Arab States led to the collapse of Jordan-Saudi Arabia relations .
 On 27 March, in Amman, the coups in Iraq and Syria and internal dissatisfaction brought the fall of the Tal government . The Tal government was overthrown in March after a series of coups .
 The King called on the venerable Samir Rifa’i to form his last government . The King asked for the venerable Rifa'i's government to be formed .
 Regime instability and domestic opposition to Hussein’s rule created the possibility, or in minds the probability of a collapse .
 There would be no repeat of the 1958 military rescue of the Jordanian Hashemites . The Jordanian government would not have been able to rescue the Hashemite .
 The potential damage of such a rescue to British petroleum interests in the Arab world was now unacceptable, says the Foreign Office .
 Syrian Ba’thist Saladin al-Bitar told the U.S. officials that the ‘Hussein regime’ in Jordan was ‘entirely unacceptable’ to the majority of the Jordanian people, he said .
 Pro-union demonstrations in various Jordanian and West Bank towns resulted in Parliament passing a no-confidence vote in the government . Parliament passed the vote in response to pro-union protests .
 On 20 April, Rifa’i’s government fell, but instead of backing down, the King appointed his uncle, Sharif Hussein ibn Nasir, Prime Minister on 27 April . The King appointed Sharif Hussein Ibn Nasir as Prime Minister .
 On 25 April 1963, Ben-Gurion sent President Kennedy a note citing the unification of Iraq, Syria, and Egypt and their promise to liberate Palestine . The letter was sent to President Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1963 .
 Ben-Gurion letter also coincided with attacks on Assistant Secretary Talbot’s statement on 22 April 1963 to the National Foreign Policy Conference of Editors and Broadcasters that the administration did not believe that the proposed UAR federation ‘measurably affected’ Israel’
 On 26 April, the Istaeli Ambassador met with State Department officials to discuss the Ben-Gurion note . The ambassador to the U.S. met with officials on 26 April .
 The Israelis stated that they would not sit idly by and have a hostile regime replace the Hashemites . The Israeli government said it would not allow the regime to be replaced by Israel .
 U.S. officials expressed doubts about Nasset’s involvement . Israelis believed that anti-Hashemite propaganda broadcasts were coming from Cairo . They feared a repeat of the Yemen scenario .
 The Israelis expressed concern about the difference between the UAR unification announcement and the initial U.S. view that the Syrian and Iraqi coups would form a ‘counterpoise’ to Nasserist ambitions .
 Warning against Israeli action, U.S. officials point out that Israeli actions had a tendency to unify the Arabs . United States officials say Israeli actions tend to unite the Arab population .
 The Israelis returned the next day with visiting minister Modechai Gazit in tow . The next day the Israelis returned to Thailand .
 The Israelis wanted to know how the U.S. justified economic and military aid in light of this . The Israelis asked how the United States justified economic, military aid to Israel .
 Department officials cautioned the Israelis not to overreact to the situation . Department of State Department officials caution against overreacting to situation .
 The administration sent Ambassador Badeau scurrying to Egyptian officials with another warning about intervention in Jordan . The ambassador has been warned that intervention is imminent .
 Badeau met with Sami Sharaf, one of Nasset’s aides and a direct pipeline to the Egyptian President, to warn about the situation in Jordan . He also met with Sharaf to complain about Egyptian propaganda emanating from the Voice of the Arab Nation .
 Sharaf denied any knowledge of the station even when confronted by Badeau with its exact location . Sharaf said he did not know where the station is located when confronted with the location .
 Nasser was concerned that action might be taken based on information unavailable to him . He asked Badeau to keep him informed of the situation .
 Acknowledging that any move against Hussein would be laid at his ‘doorstep’ Nasser stated that at the beginning of the unification talks he had personally had personally .
 He added that the overthrow of Hussein was inevitable and could happen at any time, given the level of discontent in the officer corps . He said he had no information of an imminent threat .
 Badeau ended the conversation by telling Nasser that the Washington would attempt to restrain Israel but that the UAR needed to stand clear of any appearance or real involvement in the Jordanian crisis . The UAR would not be involved in any appearance of real involvement .
 Badeau attempted to preempt any further demands on Nasser for assurances, stating that guarantees would not be forthcoming . In his comments on the meeting, he attempted to avoid further demands .
 Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported that ‘Nasser fully understands’ the U.S. warning not to intervene in Jordan .
 Ben-Gurion was actually concerned about Nasser and the 'constant military threat' posed by Egypt . Harman explained to Averell Harriman that the perceived Egyptian threat had nothing to do with Jordan or UAR unity 'at the moment'
 U.S. approaches to Nasser created the impression in Cairo and other Arab capitals that Kennedy had become Ben-Gurion’s errand boy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, assassinated by Israel in 1968 .
 The Israelis calculated that Congressional pressure on the White House over aid to the UAR, and the looming elections of 1964, put Kennedy in a position where he could not ignore Israeli demands . The Israelis no doubt calculated that .
 An irritated Nasser might break with Washington . The possibility of an angry Nasser breaking with the U.S.
 In Cairo, with Arab unity again perhaps within his grasp, Nasser needed to demonstrate his independence from U.S. pressure . Nasser was in Cairo to demonstrate independence from United States pressure .
 U.S. moves to ‘show military interest in Jordan’ made this demonstration even mote critical . United States moved to show ‘military interest’ in Jordan, Jordan, made it even more critical .
 The Kennedy administration had dispatched a small joint exercise Air Force team with two aircraft . The exercise was part of a joint exercise exercise with the Air Force .
 The administration concluded that maintaining Jordan as an independent, pro-Western state served U.S. interests . The administration also concluded that regardless of other considerations the maintenance of Jordan served United States interests .
 The White House feared a ‘crisis of confidence’ in Amman and the ‘cost to us if it folded’ An alarmed White House brought Ambassador Macomber to Washington to talk to President .
 Hussein asserted his position vis-a-vis Israel by allowing Jordanian border guards in Jerusalem to fire on an Israeli military patrol in a disputed zone . Hussein said he wanted to improve his Arab credentials .
 King Hussein invited to make an ‘informal’ call at the White House in early 1964 to ‘clear the air’ on Arab issues and on problems in US-Jordanian relations . The additional leverage earned King Hussein an invitation to . make an 'inform
 The Ba’thists in Syria and Iraq had become even more reluctant to enter into the kind of union proposed by Nasser . Nasser had proposed a union with the Ba'thists, but the union would be unlikely to happen .
 Nasser wanted a plebiscite to be held on the question of whether rule of the united UAR should be by committee or by a single president .
 Syrian Ba’thists and government rejected the plebiscite in 1958 . Remembering 1958, the Syrian Ba'thists rejected the vote .
 The coup failed and, rather than the usual exile, the coup ringleaders were tried and executed . The coup ringleader was tried, executed and tried to escape .
 The coup and the subsequent suppression effectively ended Nasserism in Syria . The coup effectively ended the Nasserist regime .
 The split with Nasser pushed the Syrian and Iraqi Ba’th parties into closer alignment . Nasser's split with the Nasser party pushed the Ba'th parties closer together .
 Nasset’s old supporter Abd-al-Salaam Aref, now President of Iraq, agreed to unity talks with the Syrian Ba’th party .
 On 8 October 1963, Iraq and Syria signed the ‘Military Unity Charter’ as an initial step toward full unification . The charter was signed as an early step toward a full unification of the two countries .
 Despite outward signs of progress, relations between the two Ba’th party branches had already begun to unravel . Relations between the Ba'th party branch and Ba'Th party branches are already beginning to unravel.
 The strong Nasserist element in Iraq and staunch Iraqi nationalists would not reconcile themselves to Syrian Ba’thist domination. Basically, the strong . element in . Iraq would not be reconciled with Syrian Ba'thists .
 Nasset’s tefusal to consider an alliance with any government in which the Ba’thists were a member increased the pressure . Nasset said he would not consider a government alliance with a government in that country . The Ba'thists have been heavily criticised for
 Nasser now had to face the prospect of losing United States aid altogether if he did not toe the U.S. policy line . Nasser had already been warned he could lose aid if he refused to toe the United States line .
 Shah appointed Asadollah Alam, former head of the Pahlavi Foundation and palace creature, as Prime Minister . So there would be no doubt that he was in charge, the Shah appointed Alam as PM . Alam was a palace creature .
 Tehran regime had opted for a new approach, but ‘once the Shah and his entourage realized the crisis was over, they resumed the perennial game of cutting the new boy down to size. Although running scared, the Tehran regime was running scared .
 Komer even mused about encouraging the Iranian opposition . Nevertheless, activist elements in the administration continued to want to do something about the Shah .
 Like it or not, the Shah provided the only viable pro-Western soutce of power . The Shah was the Shah's only viable ally in the Middle East .
 The Shah really did want to reform Iran, albeit in a manner acceptable to him . No matter how misguided or half-hearted his efforts, the Shah really wanted to reform the country .
 In December 1962, borrowing an idea from King Hassan II of Morocco, he toyed with the notion of holding a national referendum on his reform programs . The king's idea was borrowed from Morocco's King Hassan .
 The Shah’s move to break with the past and with the ‘traditional moneyed, land-owning, and religious elites’ received strong support in Washington, D.C.
 Ayatollah Borujerdi of Qom had been preaching openly against the referendum and the reforms . An associate of Ayatullah Borujardi, the Ayatoll Ruhollah Khomeini, had preached openly against reforms .
 The message first attacked land reform and then later, women’s sufftage under the planned election law .
 Khomeini and other nationalists pointed to the status of force agreement being imposed on the Shah by the Kennedy administration and the U.S. government . To support this claim, the Shah was forced to leave the country .
 In return for military aid, the Iranian government had to give up the right to try U.S. military and aid personnel in Iranian courts for crimes committed in Iran . The Iranian government gave up the rights to try United States military and . aid personnel . in exchange for military .
 This smacked of the old concession system practiced by various and sundry colonial powers in Qajjar Persia and Pahlavi Iran . The U.S. has been branded a colonial power by some .
 In March 1963, Iranian paratroopers broke into the madrasa where Khomeini preached and arrested him . In March 2013, Iranian forces arrested him in retaliation for his arrest . In 1963, he was arrested in a madrasi in Tehran .
 Sporadic outbreaks incited by disaffected clergy continued during the spring . Disaffected clergy were incited to outbreaks of violence in the spring and spring .
 Husayn was arrested the next morning on Muharram, the day of Husayn’s martyrdom . He was arrested next morning, the next day .
 In several major cities, Muharram crowds, already massed and emotionally charged, rioted . Crowds called for the overthrown of the regime, calling for an overthrow .
 The uprising went on for several days, but was finally suppressed by security and military units . Heavy loss of life was caused by the uprising, with heavy losses of life .
 The cooperation between religious opponents of the regime and nationalist nationalists began with the rioting of June 1963 . A little-known cleric from Qom became a widely-known and influential opponent of Iran's regime .
 Shah’s White Revolution had challenged the traditional foundations of Iranian society . The Shah's White Revolution took place in Iran in 1953 .
 The monatch’s survival rested on the loyalty and efficiency of the military and his security services . As a result, the survival of the monatch's survival rested upon the loyalty of the army and security services, he says .
 Land reform had reduced the focus on long-term development, with the probable outcome being immediate and mid-term economic problems . In addition, land reform had . reduced the . focus on the focus of the . future development, he said .
 Shah was attempting to restructute Iranian society and focus on economic development . The Shah was taking U.S. advice, taking United States advice, he says .
 It was the reform program that had served as the catalyst for the uprising . The reform program was the program that led to the uprising against the government .
 Shah’s attempt to modernize Iran and his White Revolution sparked the revolt . Military assistance contributed to the revolt, but it was the Shah's White Revolution that sparked it .
 Kennedy's advisors realized that the Shah, with Washington’s encouragement, had alienated traditional centers of support for the monarchy . The Shah, along with Washington's encouragement, was seen to have alienated traditional center of support .
 For the Shah to succeed or even to survive, the military and security services would be the key . The Shah would need the support of the military, security services to succeed .
 Kennedy, in a personal message, commended the Shah for ‘surmounting the disturbances’ and encouraged him to improve the economic situation to ensure the success of his reforms .
 Kennedy also cautioned the Shah about the stresses that reform put on a society . Kennedy also warned the Shah that the stresses of reform will be put on the society .
 Kennedy, the progressive reformer, was cautioning against tapid reform . He wanted reform in Iran, but not if it resulted in the collapse of the Shah’s regime .
 Shah had the long-sought, undivided attention of the Kennedy administration . Shah felt reasonably sure that Washington saw no real alternatives to his rule .
 The situations in India and Pakistan also defied the Kennedy touch . Pakistan and India are the two countries that have been at odds for decades .
 On 4 January 1963, the British expressed their reservations about the Kashmir situation . The British government expressed its reservations about Kashmir .
 Ayub was simply unwilling to accept the limited adjustments that Nehru might offer . Reaching the same conclusion, Ayub said he was not willing to accept Nehru's reforms .
 There was a rising sense that Ayub’s rule had run its course and a belief that Pakistan was descending into yet another period of political instability and economic stagnation . There was also a rising belief that the country was descending .
 Senior government officials and army officers felt that Washington had sided with India . They said support for the West counted for little in terms of military and economic aid .
 Embassy reporting from Pakistan indicated a building crisis on domestic issues and discussion of taking Kashmir by force . U.S. Embassy reporting indicated a growing crisis in Pakistan .
 Sandys, the British facilitator, believed that once India obtained military aid, all hope for a compromise on Kashmir would evaporate . Sandys said once India gets military aid all hope of a compromise will evaporate, he said .
 Having spent a lifetime arguing for a secular, united India, he could not bring himself to compromise . He spent his life fighting for secularism and unity .
 During the summer of 1963, a series of developments further undermined a compromise on Kashmir . Kashmir was ruled out of Kashmir by the British government in 1963 .
 Nehru, in increasing ill-health, suffered a seties of internal political setbacks . Nehru was Prime Minister Nehru's prime minister during his health crisis .
 In July 1963, conservatives in Congestess forced Malaviya from power . Menon was gone, and in July 1963 he was forced out of power .
 ‘Opposition’ in the Pakistani National Assembly argued that CENTO and SEATO membership, as well as the alliance with the US, had brought greater — not reduced — insecurity .
 The United States realized India really wanted its own modern air force, with a manufacturing capability . The U.S. realized India wanted to have its own air force with manufacturing capability.
 Bowles realized concern over Pakistani overtures to the Chinese would wreck any chance for military aid to India . Bowles, now the principal spokesman for the pro-India group, realized that concern .
 Bowles returned in November 1963 with a plan to provide arms to India that he believed would not upset the Pakistanis . Bowles' plan to arm India was rejected by Pakistanis in 1963 .
 He managed to get Komer’s attention, and the latter coordinated a meeting with the President . The President is currently in the midst of a crisis in Syria .
 He’s putting up a brave front but actually feeling a bit low, and wondering whether we’re still signed on to moving ahead with India . ‘I’m not quite sure whether I’ve signed on with India.’
 The President believed that it only had a ‘50-50 chance of success’ because it only amounted to $50—75 million per year and did not create a modern air force . The President . believed that the . President believed it only . had a 50-50 .
 Komer relayed the message and requested that President Johnson approve it . President Johnson approved the move .
 Komer stated that Johnson was known to be pro-Pakistani . The plan for India needed a sign-off before a potential change of heart occurred, he said .
 Komer referred to Talbot’s alleged fears that Pakistanis would take ‘great heart’ from LBJ’�s advent’ and be more difficult .
 This exercise marked a last-ditch effort on the part of Bowles and Komer to salvage arms for India . This exercise is the first to try and salvage arms from India .
 In fact, Komer's statement that this was Kennedy's policy was something of an overstatement is something of a overstatement . Komer said Kennedy’s policy is not that of Kennedy .
 Given the record and Bowles’ belief that Talbot had undermined the pro-India policy, it is unlikely he was a party to this effort to slip the India arms deal by the new President .
 Bowles knew that he had lacked the clear-cut support of Kennedy and that McNamara, Rusk, and Talbot actively opposed him . Therefore, he tried to use a quick meeting with President Johnson to commit him to the India arms deal .
 McCone insisted that the intelligence relationship with Pakistan was of the ‘greatest importance’ to the security of the U.S. The intelligence relationship is of the 'greatest of importance' to the United States .
 McCone: Hard-intelligence collection sites directly affected U.S. security . McCone said the sites affected the United States' security . He said the intelligence collection sites were directly affected by hard-intelligence .
 President Johnson reviewed with President Johnson the commitments made to Pakistan with regard to the attack by India and the recent deterioration in US-Pakistan relations . President Johnson said the commitments were made to the country .
 Kennedy and his advisors believed that they could bring significant improvement to the baseline foreign policy handed to them by Eisenhower . Kennedy believed that he could bring improvements to Eisenhower's foreign policy . Kennedy and advisors believed they could improve their foreign policy.
 By 1963, it had become apparent that they had nothing to show for their efforts . "By 1963, there were no more than a million dollars left to go"
 The administration had failed to give proper consideration to or to try and understand exactly what Eisenhower experience had been. The administration failed to consider the Eisenhower experience, he said .
 Kennedy found himself pursuing policies that had failed eight years before . Kennedy's policies were not as successful as they had been eight years earlier . Kennedy found his policies failing to live up to expectations .
 Kennedy’s early approach to Nasser had almost all of the goals and attributes of early Eisenhower efforts . Kennedy's approach was similar to that of Eisenhower's efforts to get Nasser to Egypt .
 As in the 1950s, Nasser and the UAR continued to pursue their goal of pan-Arab revolution . The UAR was in the midst of the Arab Spring in the 1960s .
 The UAR could not be enticed to make further compromises with Israel or to withdraw its forces from Yemen for any amount of aid . The United Arab Arab Republic was not enticed by the UAR to make more compromises .
 When pressured by the U.S. to follow a certain policy, they defied Washington . They defied Washington and ignored threats to cut off aid, CNN's John Sutter says .
 In Iran, Kennedy’s attempts to find an alternative to the Shah failed, and left the U.S. identified more than ever with the Pahlavi regime . Kennedy's attempt to find a alternative to Iran failed, leaving the United States with the Shah .
 Shah charged ahead with reform at such a frightening pace that it appeared to threaten his own survival . With United States encouragement, the Shah then charged ahead . Shah's reform appeared to be at risk to the Shah's survival .
 This situation left the reform-pushing Kennedy administration counseling caution and emphasizing the critical need for loyal military and security forces . The Kennedy administration advised caution and emphasized the need for loyalty .
 The opportunity posed by the Sino-Indian border war turned into a mitage and worse . With regard to India and Pakistan, the opportunity posed . turned into worse and worse. The opportunity .
 United States pressure on India coupled with Washington’s unwillingness to provide New Delhi with an indigenous manufacturing capability for advanced arms, resulted in a broad program of military cooperation between New Delhi and Moscow . Moscow and New Delhi have been involved in military cooperation since 2003 .
 In Pakistan, the limited arms that India did receive angered and frustrated Ayub Khan . The limited arms received by India angered the Pakistanis .
 Ayub opened relations with Communist China to show his displeasure with President Kennedy . Ayub accused President Kennedy of bad faith in his decision to open relations with China .
 1963 saw virtually all of Kennedy's ideas and hopes for the Greater Middle East unravel . 1963 saw Kennedy and his advisors lose their hopes for a greater Middle East . 1963 was the year of the Arab Spring .
 Kennedy found himself struggling just to maintain the more conservative policy positions established by Eisenhower between 1958 and 1960 . In fact, Kennedy struggled to maintain those positions established between Eisenhower and Kennedy .
 The policy of global containment of the Soviet Union, China and indigenous Communist movements dominated U.S. foreign policy for more than 40 years . Reform and the Primacy of Containment are discussed in the book .
 Truman administration created the model first in its commitment to the defense of Western Europe and Japan . Then in its strong support for economic development and reconstruction as a means of undermining Communism’s political influence .
 U.S. commitment to military confrontation or deterrence through alliances like NATO and economic development and reconstruction programs like the Marshall Plan became the models for Cold War policy . This commitment to confrontation in Korea, or defense alliances, was the model for the Cold War .
 The exact form and meaning of containment in the developing world and particularly the nature of its application were vague to non-existent . Although it was clear what this meant in terms of Western Europe and Japan, the exact form of containment was vague .
 Historians have argued argued that this lack of definition sparked the Korean War and created a muddled situation in Indochina that led from the French to the American war in Vietnam .
 For 40 years American administrations took the Truman model for Western Europe and Japan, used it as a baseline . For better or worse, the U.S. attempted to construct a Cold War policy paradigm for the developing world .
 It was an ad hoc learning process that reflected all the pitfalls of ‘real-time’ ‘on-the-job’ policy development and execution . Washington’s understanding of the situations ranged from marginal to opaque .
 Truman created a containment policy that held the line against Communist expansion in Western Europe and Japan . Truman bequeathed to his successors the unenviable task of creating a workable formula for containment in the developing world .
 Truman drew the line on containment in Europe and the Far East . Eisenhower administration would develop and, through trial and error, develop containment in Latin America, Africa, and the Greater Middle East .
 Eisenhower administration atrived in Washington believing that long-term political stability and staunch anti-Communismn could come only from economic development and political reform . In 1953, the Eisenhower administration in Washington believed that .
 Eisenhower believed that the new nationalisms of the Middle East and developing world had to be encouraged or tolerated . Eisenhower: "New nationalisms" of the Mideast must be encouraged and tolerated .
 Eisenhower and Dulles believed that military assistance should conform to the requirements of internal security and order . The two men believed that the U.S. should provide military assistance to internal security .
 This primacy of economic development and political reform as the best guarantor of containment and Western interests in the Middle East had strong support from White House advisors like Walt W Rostow . Rostow served the Eisenhower administration and then became a key policy-maker in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations .
 Between 1953 and 1955, the Eisenhower administration tried to implement this vision of containment . The Eisenhower administration was in charge of the project .
 This effort included attempts to use economic assistance to entice Egypt into the Middle East Defense Organization, obtain a solution to the Arab-Israeli problem, and bring an end to Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan .
 Shah of Iran was pressured to reorient his focus from building his military to concentrating instead on developing the economy . Pressure included pressure on the Shah to focus on bringing social reform and political liberalization .
 Eisenhower and his advisors accepted the idea that traditional regimes in the region would ultimately succumb to nationalist revolutions . Eisenhower's advisors said that traditional Arab regimes would fall victim to nationalists .
 Despite India’s non-aligned status, the administration strongly supported economic assistance and Nehru’�s focus on development . Nehru's focus was on development and economic assistance .
 Eisenhower pushed Pakistan toward democracy, economic development, and social reform . Eisenhower pushed the country toward democracy .
 In each case, adherence to a Western defensive organization, whether the Baghdad Pact or SEATO, represented a mote of a political commitment than a military one . The Baghdad Pact was a Western defense organization .
 Military aid to allies of the West was nigglingly compared to economic assistance . Military aid is nigglerly compared with economic assistance to the West's allies in Syria .
 Military aid was a vehicle intended to pacify the various officer corps in order to maintain their political identification with the West . It was intended to encourage their support for economic and political development .
 The litany of complaints from members of the Baghdad Pact concerning the lack of military aid dominated the history of the organization through 1958 .
 Even the crisis of 1956 failed to garner significantly more military aid for aligned states . Even the 1950s crisis of the Cold War did not garner significant military aid from aligned states.
 Eisenhower’s view was containment first required economic development, followed political and social reform, and only enough military assistance to maintain internal stability . Initially, in Eisenhower's view, economic development first required .
 A key pro-Western regime in the process of instituting reforms collapsed in revolution . Pro-Western regimes have been overthrown in recent years .
 Short-term stability and a pro-Western political posture took priority over pro-western political posture, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the country's stability was prioritized by short-term economic development .
 This re-prioritization brought a shift in Washington’s thinking about the importance of stability in the quest of reform . The White House is now looking at the role of stability as a key to reform .
 The maintenance of pro-Western stability became the baseline for economic development and political reform in Syria . The country has seen a surge in economic and political stability since 2003 .
 The United States found itself increasingly identified with authoritarian monarchical or military regimes . This shift began a process in which the U.S. became increasingly associated with authoritarian regimes .
 In terms of military and economic aid, Iran and Pakistan were the gteatest beneficiaries of 1958 . Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and others also benefited as well .
 Fearing another Baghdad-style coup, the Eisenhower administration raised the priority of shoring up military loyalty and internal-security forces . Fearing a Baghdad style coup, Eisenhower administration sought to shore up the military loyalty .
 Eisenhower administration adopted a more flexible approach to both the non-aligned and aligned states . In 1959 and 1960, the Eisenhower administration took a different approach to the non and aligned countries .
 Relations improved and economic assistance to the UAR and India increased . Economic and military aid to aligned Pakistan, Iran, and Jordan increased . Relations improved as relations improved .
 Eisenhower administration was unfairly characterized as weak on economic development, says historian . Eisenhower administration had a much greater increase in military aid that resulted in increased economic aid .
 The military aid constituted a pragmatic reaction to the events of 1958 . It did not end Eisenhower’s focus on economic development, but was instead a means to provide internal security and stability . Washington believed that economic development would maintain pro-Western regimes .
 In 1960, when Kennedy took office, he inherited a pragmatic, working foreign policy, which he largely adopted . In 1960s, Kennedy took over a pragmatic foreign policy . Kennedy's foreign policy was largely adopted by the president .
 Kennedy had run for office on a foreign-policy platform that attacked Eisenhower and Dulles for their alleged blunders between 1955 and 1958 . The adjustments made by the Eisenhower White House between 1958 and 1960 restored stability and direction to U.S. policy in the Middle East .
 Containment remained the centerpiece of the U.S. policy thrust, but the administration adjusted the application of those policies to meet the challenges of non-alignment and revolutionary nationalism . Containment remains the centerpiece .
 Kennedy believed that through supetior management and sophisticated application of economics they could attain results that would far exceed those of Eisenhower and Dulles . Despite these improvements, Kennedy and his advisors, including Rostow, believed .
 Kennedy and his advisors concluded that Eisenhower and Dulles had been too doctrinaite and lacked creativity to achieve theit key policy goals . Instead of objectively assessing Eisenhower’s policies to see what had wotked and what had not in the 1953 to 1955 time-frame, Kennedy
 Kennedy made the UAR the center of its efforts to achieve an Arab-Israeli peace . Kennedy attempted to dampen radical Arab nationalism by encoutaging Cairo to focus on economic development .
 Pushing the Shah toward economic development and away from military assistance paralleled similar Eisenhower efforts . Eisenhower pushed the Shah away from his fixation on military assistance .
 Eisenhower, like Kennedy, attempted to identify an alternative to the Shah’s rule . The Shah was ruled by the Shah of Iran in the early 1950s .
 The Kennedy administration also attempted to foster better relations with India and a more pro-Western orientation through economic assistance and the promise of military aid . In return for a settlement of the Kashmir dispute with Pakistan .
 Kennedy, no less than Eisenhower, found himself tied to Ayub’s regime in Karachi because of its key position in the Western alliance structure and because of intelligence sites critical to the strategic defense of the U.S.
 Kennedy, due to over-confidence and a lack of appreciation for the degree of change that had occurred in the Middle East during the 1950s, failed to learn from Eisenhower’s setbacks . Kennedy, in the 1960s, was over-confident and didn’t learn
 In one sense, Kennedy had the luxury of inheriting a set of stable, functioning policies, something that Eisenhower had acquired by trial and error . In another, Kennedy failed to apprehend the magnitude of the difficulties encountered during the 1950s .
 This lack of objectivity and perspective condemned Kennedy and his administration to repeat many of Eisenhower’s early mistakes . Kennedy's administration repeated many of the mistakes Eisenhower made in his first administration, including the Vietnam War .
 Eisenhower learned in bitter experience that the Middle East often required a wait-and-see approach to developments . Eisenhower had learned through bitter experience he had to wait and see .
 Kennedy's can-do attitude created an imperative to take a proactive approach to developments and issues . Kennedy’s attitude created a need for Kennedy to be proactive, he said .
 As a tesult, aggressive administration pronouncements and policies often brought exactly the opposite results from what was intended .
 Pressing Nasser on the issue of a settlement with Israel made the Egyptian leader vulnerable to criticism from his Arab rivals . Nasser faced criticism from pro-Western Arab states, including pro-West Arab states .
 Despite warnings from Ambassador Wailes, attempting to replace the Shah with Prime Minister Amini left the U.S. in the end even mote closely identified with and firmly tied to the dynasty .
 Campaign rhetoric concerning support for India created a situation in which Kennedy had to demonstrate the importance of Pakistan to U.S. interests . This in turn discredited Washington in Nehru’s eyes, he says .
 This credibility problem is further complicated by overt attempts to leverage the border war with China into an Indian compromise on Kashmir . This is further compounded by overt, even crude, attempts to use the border conflict with China to leverage an India-China deal .
 The overwhelming desire for action, to get something done, caused a series of miscalculations that actually undermined U.S. stature and influence . Eisenhower's miscalculation undermined the gains made by Eisenhower between 1958 and 1960 .
 By late 1963 the United States position in the Greater Middle East had taken a clear step backward from its position in 1960 at the end of the Eisenhower eta. Arguably, by late 1963, the U.S. position in Middle East was a step backward .
 World Communism is taking advantage of that spirit of nationalism to cause dissention in the free world . Nationalism is on the march and world Communism is using that spirit, he says .
 Moscow leads many misguided people to believe that they can count on Communist help to achieve and sustain nationalistic ambitions . Moscow leads people to think that it will help them achieve their nationalistic aspirations, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Eisenhower and Dulles recognized the problems associated with tising nationalism, British imperial baggage, and the Soviet threat . Eisenhower and D.C. Dulles were able to overcome the problems of nationalism and imperialism .
 The administration believed that through astute policy-management the U.S. could successfully contain, and perhaps even undermine, Soviet influence . The administration thought that through . astute . policy-managing the United States could . successfully contain the Soviet influence.
 The key to long-term stability and a pro-Western political posture was economic development . Economic development is economic development, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Eisenhower administration shated views of Walt Rostow and others that economic assistance would foster economic self-sufficiency . Eisenhower administration hoped that economic aid would bring pro-Western political orientation and stability .
 Both he and Secretary Dulles viewed economic development as the most viable path to stability and a pro-Western orientation . Economic development was a key part of Dulles' policy .
 It has been on this point that Hisenhower’s policies have been most misunderstood, misrepresented, and criticized, says the minister .
 Whether the Baghdad Pact or SEATO, Western defensive alliances constituted political rather than military organizations . The Baghdad Pact was a political organization rather than a military alliance .
 Adherence to the Western alliances represented a statement of pro-Western political orientation and solidarity . The country's commitment to the West was seen as an important part of its democracy .
 No-one in Washington, and certainly not President Eisenhower, believed that any of the members of the pro-Western defense pacts, either alone or collectively, could stand up to the Soviet Union .
 The members of the Baghdad Pact continually complained about the lack of military assistance and the utter ineffectiveness of the organization as a real military alliance . For example, the members of this alliance complained about lack of a command structure, a command system and a lack of assistance .
 Washington simply saw little or no military value-added in the pacts . Washington saw little military value added in the agreements .
 Military aid was either intended to placate the various military establishments or provide for internal security, or both . The aid was intended to provide security or placate internal security .
 Eisenhower avoided large-scale military assistance that provided any real offensive capability . Between 1953 and 1958, Eisenhower avoided any real military assistance .
 Eisenhower administration did not provide sufficient military assistance to Egypt in order that Caito might challenge Israel . It was the unwillingness of the Eisenhower administration to provide enough military assistance that brought on the deal .
 This precipitated a crisis in relations with the West that ultimately led to the nationalization of the Suez Canal . The resulting AngloFrench-Israeli debacle of 1956 was the result of an Anglo-Israeli crisis of 1956 .
 Historians have often credited Nasser’s unwillingness to join a Western defense pact as the primary reason for not supplying arms to Egypt . Nasser's refusal to join the West's defense pact was often cited as a primary reason .
 In reality, had Nasser joined a Western pact, Egypt would not have received the quality of quantity of arms that it sought to confront Israel . Egypt would have received more arms than they did in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Eisenhower intended to limit arms and military assistance to the essentials required for internal security . Eisenhower wanted to limit armament assistance to essentials required to protect the country .
 Between 1953 and 1958, no country in the Western alliance systems in the Greater Middle East was satisfied with the level of military assistance provided by Washington . Egypt would have been no different .
 Eisenhower administration refused to contribute to an arms race in the region, preferring instead to offer economic aid and to encourage economic development .
 Nasser's realization that sufficient arms would not be forthcoming from the West provided an additional impetus toward non-alignment . Nasser’s realization that . sufficient arms was not forthcoming from . the West .
 The situation became more complicated when the Turko-Iraq pact of 1955 led to the creation of the Baghdad Pact . The Turko and Iraq pact was formed in 1955 . The Baghdad Pact was created in 1955 after Turko, Iraq pact of 1953 .
 Egypt's president faced an immediate threat to his rule from Israel, while Washington was unwilling to provide arms for Egypt’s defense . Now he faced the immediate threat from Westernsupported Israel .
 The Soviets were the natural choice to provide what the West would not . The Soviets provided the West with what it would not. The Soviet Union did not provide the West .
 The United States arms for Pakistan under the 1954 Turko-Pakistan alliance placed him squarely at odds with the Eisenhower administration . In Nehru’s case, the U.S. arms .
 Washington had not only armed India’s bitter enemy, but had also attacked the very ideological foundations of Nehru's view of the developing world . No matter how limited in scope, Washington had armed India's bitter enemy . The U.S. had attacked the ideological foundation of Neh
 In a real sense, the pro-Western northern-tier alliance linked Indian and Egyptian interests at a critical historical moment . The alliance is linked to India and Egypt's interests in a 'critical historical moment' in Egypt .
 The governments in Cairo and New Delhi were attempting to consolidate internal political power in the face of potentially serious opposition, while at the same time facing what they viewed as external threats funded by Washington .
 No amount of economic aid could compensate for the political pressure created by insufficient arms for Egypt and Pakistan, writes Peter Bergen . The U.S. State Department says it has no obligation to arm Egypt or Pakistan .
 For Nasser, the quid pro quo for cooperation with the West would not be what he needed in the way of arms . It would probably cost him the support of the Egyptian military, a potentially fatal political development . Nasser would probably lose his support of Egypt's military .
 Nehru's and Nasset’s confluence of political interest at the 1955 Bandung conference produced a revolution in Middle East politics . Despite their differing political practices and ideological proclivities, Nasset and Nehru produced a change in Mideast politics .
 Bandung provided the crowning blow to the Eisenhower administration’s initial plans for the defense of the Greater Middle East . Bandung was Bandung's first major operation in the region .
 Egypt provided India with an effective counter-balance to Pakistani influence in Islamic and Arab states . Nehru provided Nasser with global stature and a Chinese mid-wife in the form of Chou En-Lai for the delivery of Soviet arms .
 Egyptian-Indian policy also profoundly affected Western allies in the region . Egypt's relationship with India led to tensions between the two countries .
 Countries like Iran, Pakistan, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia learned to barter their allegiance in ever-escalating demands for economic and military aid from the U.S.
 Washington pushed for arms to compete with non-aligned neighbors or with the Soviet threat . While Washington continued to push economic development and reform, allies pressed for arms .
 Washington found that influencing even its allies became increasingly difficult as it attempted to maintain a balance between the demands of its erstwhile allies and their actual needs . Ultimately, Washington found it difficult to influence even its .
 U.S. parsimony generated threats to quit the Baghdad Pact from Iraq, Iran, and Pakistan . United States parsimoniousness generated threats from Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, Pakistan .
 Eisenhower’s good intentions in 1953 for economic development and an Arab-Israeli peace had degenerated into confrontations with Nehru and Nasser . Nasser was the leaders of what Eisenhower and Dulles believed to be the most important states in the region .
 Eisenhower moved, from faith in the power of economic development to influence Mideast politics to a more realistic view that took into account the balance between economic development and political considerations generated by regional rivalries .
 Eisenhower and Dulles never lost sight of their goals in the Middle East . Containment revamped 1958-1960 . Despite these problems, Eisenhower and D.E. Dulles continued to focus on their goals .
 In the post-Suez and Eisenhower Doctrine environment, with expectations scaled back, they sought to regenerate working relationships with Nehru and Nasser . They sought to regroup with Nasser and Nehru .
 As a result, the administration once again focused on economic development . The administration is focused on the economy .
 Eisenhower and his advisors hoped to correct the inability of the U.S. to project the good intentions of its policies properly . Eisenhower hoped to gain greater acceptance from non-aligned and nationalist movements .
 Eisenhower administration concluded that policy revisions were in order in 1957 . Eisenhower administration decided to make changes to the law .
 Nasset's rejection of Eisenhower Docttine and Nehru’s refusal to compromise over Kashmir led to a major reevaluation of U.S. policy . In 1957, the United States reevaluated its policy on Kashmir .
 In February 1958, the union between Syria and Egypt was accelerated by the formation of the United Arab Republic . The union began in February 1958 and Syria became part of the Arab Arab Spring .
 Washington courted Nasser, while encouraged Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, and Jordan to resist UAR pressure . Nasser was still conflicted about working with Nasser on the one hand .
 The administration had concluded that it needed improved relations with the UAR and to work with Caito on a case-by-case basis . Caito is a member of the United Arab Council of Representatives .
 Eisenhower had decided on a more flexible but conservative course that allowed the U.S. to improve ties with Egypt and India while pursuing its strategic Cold War objectives in the region .
 The administration hoped to garner limited influence from economic and financial aid . The administration had no expectation of major breakthroughs with regard to Nasset's revolutionary activities, the Arab-Israeli dispute, Nehru’s non-alignment .
 On 14 July 1958, Brigadier Qasim’s detour through Baghdad destroyed the Hashemite regime and most of what remained of British prestige in the Middle East .
 Iraq’s entry into the Western security system had sent tremors through the region, its exit was an earthquake . Iraq's exit from the Western system was an exit from an earthquake, the U.S. says .
 British were more than willing to settle for a new arrangement with Qasim that protected their oil interests . The British were willing to accept a new deal to protect their interests .
 The United States also pressed the British to provide similar support to Jordan . The U.S. has pressed the UK to provide support for Jordan .
 Nasser sought immediate Soviet support and lambasted Anglo-American intervention . Fearing U.S. intervention in Syria, he sought Soviet support from the Soviet Union .
 The effects of the Iraqi coup rippled across the northern tier, undermining improving US-Indian relations . This situation threatened to wreck improved ties between Cairo and Washington, Washington .
 The White House increased the flow of military and economic aid to what remained of the Baghdad Pact . Fearing the collapse of the Western alliance system and of containment, the White House stepped up the aid .
 Washington’s focus shifted dramatically to the short-term perspective, namely the survival of pro-Western regimes . The administration continued to believe that economic development and reform held the key to long-term stability, but Washington's focus shifted to short term .
 Eisenhower put a priority on stability, economic development, and controlled reform, in that order . As a result, Eisenhower put an emphasis on stability and economic development . Eisenhower also put a focus on controlled reform and stability .
 Pakistan was simply too important to U.S. security and intelligence interests . Pakistan was too important for the United States to keep it in Pakistan .
 General Ayub Khan replaced the dysfunctional civilian government in a military coup in October 1958 . Pakistan became more attractive as an ally when Ayub took control of the country in a coup . Pakistan is now one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Military rule stabilized the situation in Karachi, providing what the White House hoped would be a stable environment conducive to economic development and safe reform . The U.S. hopes that the situation will lead to economic and political stability .
 Shah had become the real center of political gravity for containment . Bouts of depression and vacillation aside, the Shah had been the Shah's real center for containment. Shah was the Shah .
 Survival of a pro-Western regime, if not the Pahlavi dynasty, became an absolute priority in Washington . Survival of the pro-western regime was a priority for the Iranian regime .
 As a part of its conservative approach to Iran, the Eisenhower administration assiduously avoided direct commitments to either the Shah or his dynasty . The Eisenhower administration .
 Washington wanted to maintain the option of supporting a more broadly based proWestern ruler, on the off chance that such an alternative might arise . Washington also wanted to retain the option to support a pro-Western ruler in the future .
 The White House assured Tehran that the United States was committed to the ‘independence’ and ‘territorial integrity’ of Iran, not the Pahlavi dynasty . As a result, the White House .
 The inability or unwillingness of the Shah to bring constructive change frustrated the administration, says Shah . Shah was frustrated by his inability to reform the government, he says .
 The United States provided the minimum amount of aid necessary to maintain the Tehran regime . As a result, the U.S. provided the minimal amount of assistance necessary for the regime .
 Shah deeply resented and vigorously complained about the nigegardly dole from Washington, particularly for the military . The Shah was deeply unhappy with the dole, especially for his military .
 Shah recognized the opportunity immediately, and began to demand additional military and economic support . The Shah recognized this opportunity immediately and demanded additional military support .
 He interspersed these demands with random soliloquies about the virtues of non-alignment and accommodations with Moscow . The Russian leader interspersersersed his demands with a series of statements about Russia .
 Eisenhower administration was in no position to take a chance, dramatically increasing economic and military aid . Bluff or not, the Eisenhower administration had no intention of taking action .
 The Iraqi coup had an unexpectedly positive impact on US-UAR relations . In addition to the Iraqi coup, the coup had a positive effect on U.S.-U.AAR relations.
 Within weeks of the coup, Qasim and his Communist allies began to undermine Nasserist elements in the government .
 Nasser found himself under increasing attack from Baghdad, while his supporters in Iraq found themselves in prison or worse . As disagreements escalated, Nasser was under increasing attacks from Baghdad .
 Communist support for the Qasim government also brought strong Soviet support and military aid from Moscow . Strong Communist support also brought military aid and military support .
 Khrushchev finally had an Arab client who did not hang Communists as an avocation . From Khrushche's perspective, he finally had a client who didn't hang Communists .
 The hostility between Nasser and Qasim spread to the UAR’s relations with the Soviet Union . In the ensuing Arab Cold War, the hostility between the two sides spread to Arab relations with Russia .
 Nasser finally shared Washington’s concern about the threat of Communism . Much to the delight of the Eisenhower administration, Nasser shared the concern .
 Nasser, with the encouragement and assistance of the Eisenhower administration, was bent on undermining Qasim, whose fall would threaten British petroleum interests in Irag . Ironically, the British once again faced a situation in which Nasser once again sought to undermine his regime . The fall of Q
 The United States and UAR found themselves on even better terms because of the political synergy created by their joint aversion to Qasim’s Iraq . The UAR and the U.S. are now on good terms because they have a shared aversion to Iraq .
 Eisenhower administration suffered no misconceptions about the depth of cooperation with the U.S. Eisenhower administration . President Eisenhower's administration suffered from no misconceptions of cooperation, says historian .
 Washington and Cairo had a mutual problem in Iraq, but there was no expectation that cooperation on Iraq of compromises over the situation in Lebanon would translate into solutions for more vexing regional problems like the Arab-Israeli dispute . There is no expectation of a solution to the Iraq-Lebanon
 The White House believed that working with Nasser and Nehru was critical to U.S. interests in the region . The relationship between the two nations was critical for U.N. interests .
 This realization was in fact an acknowledgement that the region had undergone a fundamentally revolutionary change . The realization was an acknowledgement of the region's revolutionary change, the author says .
 In 1953, both the President and Dulles had recognized the nature of the coming change, but their strategies were overwhelmed by its complexity . The President and Secretary of State John Eisenhower had a plan to deal with the problem .
 Between 1958 and 1960, they reconstructed U.S. relations in the Middle East based on new political realities and more limited goals . They reconstructed the relationship based on political realities .
 At the same time, they managed to maintain the fundamentals of their containment strategy with regard to the Soviet Union . The U.S. managed to manage to maintain its containment strategy in the 1980s .
 Eisenhower could look back with satisfaction on the progress that had been made since 1958, particularly in U.S. relations with Egypt and India .
 The policies of 1958 to 1960 did not include dramatic breakthroughs, but they were balanced and workable . The policies were balanced, workable, but balanced .
 Eisenhower administration learned that some regional problems were simply insoluble, that the U.S. had little leverage, economic or otherwise, to force solutions . The Eisenhower administration had learned that the situation was neither as bad nor as promising as it appeared .
 January 1961 would bring a new administration and its own understanding of the lessons of the Eisenhower years . January 1961 was the first month of the new administration .
 In January 1961, the Kennedy administration had the options of continuing with Eisenhowet’s conservative but workable foreign policy in the Middle East, or embarking on the series of activist initiatives proposed during the presidential campaign .
 Kennedy administration arrived in Washington determined to replace what they considered lethargy and mismanagement of the Eisenhower administration with activist programs . In an almost exact reflection of Eisenhower’s attitudes about Truman in 1953, the Kennedy administration was determined to change that .
 Kennedy believed technocrats would correct the shortsighted policies of the past and open a new era of U.S. influence in the developing world . Eisenhower and Dulles had believed that their ability to manage foreign policy would immeasurably enhance United States interests .
 In an intellectually selective way, the new administration viewed U.S. Middle East policy in terms of the turmoil of 1955 to 1958, rather than over the continuum of the Eisenhower period . The new administration saw the turmoil in 1955-1958 as a matter of Mideast turmoil,
 The junior senator from Massachusetts had often supported Eisenhower’s policies when the majority of Democrats had opposed them . They also ignored the fact that the junior senator often supported .
 The Eisenhower administration’s arrival in 1953 was a rough parallel with the Eisenhower administration in 1953 . Here again, the president's administration arrived in 1953, but the situation was different .
 Eisenhower criticized Truman policies that he helped create as NATO Supreme Commander . Eisenhower criticized the very Truman policies he had helped create . Eisenhower was criticized for criticizing Truman policies .
 Kennedy took office committed to correcting what he viewed as the mistakes of the past . Kennedy: "Instead of a president, Kennedy was a president of the United States"
 He wanted to translate into policy his campaign rhetoric about the importance of India, the UAR, an Arab-Israeli settlement, and an accommodation with non-alignment .
 Kennedy brought with him a cadre of experts and technocrats who believed that they had the answers . Kennedy trusted the traditional channels of foreign-policy development to develop foreign policy .
 Kennedy sought to bypass the bureaucracy and put his personal stamp on U.S. foreign policy . Using these outsiders, Kennedy tried to bypass bureaucracy and bypassed bureaucracy .
 A small group of ‘experts’ attempted to reshape policy largely without the benefit of an objective evaluation of what had gone before . Thus, a small . group of 'experts' attempted to . reshape . policy without benefit of objective evaluation .
 In the Middle East, the quiescence of the Arab-Israeli dispute, the shared views of Nasser and Eisenhower on Iraq, and growing Indian preoccupation with China tended to mask the chronic nature of regional conflicts .
 The situation created the illusion that key states in the region were actually moving toward more moderate positions, the author says . The situation was created by the illusion of the situation, he says .
 Kennedy and his foreign-policy advisors concluded that more activist policies could result in major gains . As a result, Kennedy's foreign policy advisers concluded that such policies could lead to major gains.
 Kennedy advocated more aid to India . Kennedy criticized Eisenhower for ignoring the importance of Indian economic development .
 Kennedy had advocated economic aid to the UAR in an attempt to turn Egypt away from revolutionary activity and toward economic development . During the campaign Kennedy had pushed for economic aid .
 Kennedy pronouncements about a new opening to the non-aligned countries had raised the expectations of both Nasser and Nehru . Kennedy's words raised the expectation of both the two countries .
 When Washington deemed the existing programs sufficient, there was a sense of disappointment . There was a feeling that the New Frontier largely represented a continuation of Eisenhower policies .
 Eisenhower administration had learned from bitter experience between 1953 and 1955 that aid often translated into only limited leverage in the Middle East . Eisenhower administration failed to learn from that experience, and the new administration failed .
 Kennedy was far too optimistic about economic aid generating a political quid pro quo . Like Eisenhower and Dulles in 1953, Kennedy was too optimistic . Kennedy was optimistic about the aid generating political quests .
 Kennedy concluded that U.S. aid and an increased Egyptian focus on economic development would open the door to an Arab-Israeli peace settlement . For example, he concluded that United States aid and increased Egyptian interest in economic development could help .
 He failed to consider that funding for Aswan had not altered Nasser’s arms deal with the Soviet Union or his Arab nationalist policies .
 Aid had little effect on Ben-Gurion, who was even more opposed to a settlement . Aid was given to Israel in the 1950s and 1960s .
 With increasing aggressiveness, the administration attempted to exploit the growing rift and later the border war itself . With increasing aggression, the government tried to exploit growing rift . The border war was the result of a growing rift in the region .
 First, Washington attempted to gain Indian support in opposing North Vietnamese and Chinese policy in Laos and Vietnam, and then attempted to use the border war itself to leverage a settlement of the Kashmir issue with Pakistan . The U.S. tried to gain India support in opposition to North Vietnamese policy in
 The administration's efforts to find solutions to chronic regional problems failed . Across the board, the administration’s efforts to look at chronic regional issues failed .
 These same activist policies that were to improve relations with India and the UAR precipitated a series of problems between Washington and its allies in the region .
 Neither the Shah nor Ayub Khan were particularly enamored of Kennedy’s campaign pronouncements about increased support for non-aligned states . The Shah and Ayub were less than impressed with Kennedy's policy .
 In Pakistan, pro-India statements by candidate Kennedy necessitated an immediate campaign to reassure Iran and Pakistan of continued U.S. support . Kennedy: "In Pakistan, there was a need to reassure Pakistan and Iran of continued support"
 Kennedy was no less committed as a Cold Warrior than Eisenhower, and he had every intention of keeping Pakistan and Iran in the Western camp .
 Kennedy had to be even more circumspect about maintaining the Western alliance system than Eisenhower . Eisenhower was more cautious about maintaining Western alliance than Kennedy .
 JFK's stature as a famous military figure provided him with a latitude vis-a-vis security issues that Kennedy did not enjoy . The latter’s stature as well as the president, he says, provided him a latitude on security .
 A move by any significant U.S. ally in the Greater Middle East toward neutrality or accommodation with the Soviet Union constituted a major credibility problem for the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration had a credibility problem .
 Word of Ayub’s unhappiness with Washington prompted high-level reassurances that U.S. policy had not changed . With regard to Pakistan, word of his unhappiness prompted reassurances .
 Kennedy’s effusive assurances of support in 1961 for Pakistan and for a compromise settlement of the Kashmir dispute did little to endear the administration to Nehru . Nehru was worried by Kennedy's promises of support for Pakistan .
 In Iran, the Kennedy administration, like Eisenhower’s before it, started off with a crisis . The Kennedy administration has a history of starting a crisis in Iran . Iran has been a source of controversy for decades .
 Eisenhower and Churchill toppled the Musaddiq government, but untested resulted in Kennedy’s open support for Prime Minister Ali Amini .
 This move in favor of a specific Iranian politician departed significantly from past policy . This move is significant change in policy since the 1980s .
 Despite Eisenhower and Dulles’ role in placing the Shah back on the throne in 1953, the United States had refused to provide specific support to any politician in Iran, including the Shah .
 Under Eisenhower, Washington supported only the independence and territorial integrity of Iran . The U.S. did not support only Iran's independence .
 "The administration believed that it needed options, given the political instability of the regime and its disappointing track record with regard to reform," the president said .
 The more limited group concluded that Amini was the ‘last hope’ and that his survival required direct U.S. support . Amini’s survival needed direct United States support .
 The Shah was totally reliant on the Shah for survival . As a result, the administration committed to supporting a particular Iranian politician, who, as it turned out, was dependent on him .
 When Amini fell, the administration found itself tied even more firmly to the Shah . Amini's government was tied to Shah's regime, and Amini was the prime minister .
 United States interests in Iran were irrevocably tied to the Pahlavi dynasty . Now U.S. interests are tied to Iran's rulers . Iran is now the world's most powerful state of power .
 Kennedy’s desire to influence India and Egypt through economic aid mimicked that of Eisenhower and Dulles, as did his conspicuous lack of success . Kennedy was not successful in India or Egypt and Egypt, as was his failure .
 Eisenhower put the Shah back on his throne because he lacked another realistic option . The Shah was re-elected to the throne in 1953 . Eisenhower put him back on the throne .
 In the end, Kennedy’s direct support for Amini backfired, and tied U.S. fortunes directly to the Pahlavi dynasty . In the 1970s, Kennedy's direct support of Amini in Iran backfired .
 The collapse of the Syrian union ushered in a revolutionary surge on Nasset’s patt that ultimately led to the Yemen revolution and strained UAR relations with the UAR and its allies, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Britain .
 The 1963 Ba’thist coups in Iraq and Syria created regimes less objectionable to Washington and independent of UAR control . UAR controlled the Ba'thist regime in Syria and Iraq .
 UAR policy gravitated toward a renewal of closer relations with Moscow in 1963 . Resenting Western support for the new Iraqi regime, UAR wanted closer ties with Moscow .
 With regard to India, the euphoria created in Washington by the border war with China dissipated rapidly . The euphoria in Washington created in India by the conflict with China faded rapidly .
 The thinly-veiled attempt to force an agreement over Pakistan angered Nehru, and when the threat passed, drove India into the close military relationship with Moscow that continues to this day .
 The modest provision of U.S. arms to India and Washington’s failure to pressure New Delhi successfully during the China crisis sparked simmering resent in Karachi, and soured US-Pakistani relations .
 By November 1963, the United States position was weaker than when Kennedy took office . The U.S. position was weakened by the time Kennedy took over .
 The realities of U.S. Cold War commitments came into conflict with the same tegional political realities that had plagued Eisenhower and Dulles . The realities and political realities of the Cold War were in conflict again .
 The U.S. position with the key non-aligned states of the region, India and the UAR, was in tatters . The United States position with India and UAR was in a tatters.
 New Delhi and Cairo had turned to broad military assistance and economic-cooperation programs with the Soviet Union . New Delhi turned to Russia for military assistance .
 U.S. pressure to compromise on Kashmir in return for arms pushed New Delhi into an arrangement with the Soviets . Following the Chinese border wat, undisguised United States pressure pushed India to compromise .
 Upset by limited U.S. military aid to India, Pakistan now pursued closer relations with Beijing . Upset with limited United States military aid, Pakistan is now pursuing closer ties with China .
 Nasser concluded that the combination of Saudi Arabian oil and increasing Israeli domestic political pressure on Kennedy left little to be gained in better relations with Washington .
 In the Arab Middle East, the traditional regimes of Jordan and Saudi Arabia and the clients of the British were now the principal U.S. allies . In the region, the Arab Mideast is now the most important ally of the United States .
 Ties with Israel had strengthened, further isolating the United States from Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq . The U.S. has been isolated from Lebanon and Syria since 2003 .
 In Iran, the fortunes of the Shah would now determine those of the U.S. as well . Iran's fortunes now determine its relationship with the United States as well.
 Kennedy and his advisors misunderstood the broader political context in the region . Kennedy was convinced of his intellectual and management superiority, but his advisors were wrong .
 Kennedy and his advisors seemed oblivious to the fact that their initiatives were almost identical to the failed Eisenhower initiatives of 1953 through 1955 . Often relying on personal diplomacy, Kennedy was often oblivious to how similar his initiatives were .
 Like Eisenhower in 1953, the Kennedy administration imagined itself to be fundamentally different from and superior to its predecessor . The Kennedy administration imagines itself as fundamentally different and superior from its predecessors .
 The United States largely displaced the British as the guardians of Western interests in the Middle East . The U.S. did so with relatively little political or economic dislocation . In the process, the British were largely displaced by the United States .
 They pushed for change in Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan, and settled on a policy of top-down reform . They settled on the policy of 'top-down' reform .
 Where he pushed for more activist apptoaches, he usually repeated Eisenhower’s failures, he often repeated those failures .
 Kennedy learned pressure on Nehru and Nasser brought negative results . Kennedy learned that pressure on Nasser and Nehru brought bad results .
 He learned that neither the Arabs nor Israel really wanted a peace settlement . Neither Israel nor the Arabs really wanted peace settlement, he says .
 He learned that personal diplomacy put the prestige of the presidency on the line, and often backfired . The president learned from the lessons he learned from diplomacy .
 Kennedy learned, as Eisenhower had, that chronic regional problems were largely unsolvable . No amount of economic or military aid could force a settlement, he says .
 Kennedy learned that the maintenance of U.S. containment strategy in the Middle East required a pragmatic, deliberate approach, tempered with limited expectations . Kennedy: "The maintenance of [U.S.] containment strategy] in the Mideast requires a pragmatic approach"
 Political conflicts and regional rivalries took precedence overt any amount of economic or military aid . Economic and military aid did not go far enough to help the country .
 Johnson administration focused on allies in the region and a natrower view of U.S. interests . The Johnson administration took these lessons to heart .
 He paints Eisenhower administration as the real hardcore anti-Communists . The Eisenhower administration was the real hardliners against Communism .
 Churchill advocated getting rid of Musaddiq in Iran and Egyptian government, Neguib or Nasser, because of the opening that, in his view, both provided to the Communists . Larres manages to avoid mentioning the fact that it was Churchill, in 1953 and 1954, who advocated
 Jackson’s Psychological Strategy Board drafted a speech for Eisenhower designed to forestall any Soviet overtures . The speech was drafted by Jackson's psychological strategy board . Jackson's speech was intended to forestan any Russian overtures.
 It called for free elections in Germany, a solution to the Austrian problem, and high-level disarmament talks on disarmament . It also called for the Austrian crisis to be resolved .
 It made any high-level meetings with the new Soviet leadership contingent on the end of the Korean War . The Korean War ended in 1953, but the Soviets ended the war .
 Jackson, as “Eisenhowet’s trusted associates’ and the driving force behind ‘plans for a psychological warfare offensive’ aimed at Moscow, Jackson says . Jackson is described as ‘driving force behind plans for 'psychological warfare offensive' aimed
 Rostow was heavily involved, at the highest levels of the Eisenhower administration, with critical policy issues related to contaianment and anti-Soviet policies . This underscores the fact that from the very beginning of the . beginning of . the . existence of Rostow, who was involved in
 Rostow’s association with both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations also supports the contention that a strong relationship existed between the policies of both with regard to the relationship between economic development, political reform, and the over-arching strategy of containment . Rostow's association with the Kennedy administration also
 Jackson supported a summit conference with the Soviet leadership immediately following the death of Stalin . Jackson, strongly supported the summit conference immediately after Stalin's death .
 He argues that it would have headed off the Soviet ‘peace initiative’ and might have resulted in the unification of Germany on terms favorable to the West .
 Churchill’s intervention and suggestions were believed to be premature, and even Macmillan and Eden expressed concerns . Eisenhower functioned in staff mode and allowed controversial decisions to sort themselves out, thus precluding a decisive initiative from the top .
 The President, Dulles, and the State Department had criticized ‘summitry’ in the form of Yalta and Potsdam . They were afraid of domestic ‘right-wing’ Republican criticism and the rising influence of Senator Joseph McCarthy .
 Rostow played an important part as a ‘Cold Warrior’ in the policy-formulation process in the Eisenhower administration . Rostow was a 'Cold Warrior' who played a key role in the decision-making process in Eisenhower administration. Rostow’s views differ on
 At times, he may have advocated a more aggtessive approach to engaging the Soviets but it was always with the same strategic view of subverting the Soviet empire . He may have been more aggressive at times, but always had a strategic view .
 Rostow's work is well worth reading for a well-documented perspective on the decisions of March 11 . Rostow’s early involvement with Cold War policy and the Eisenhower administration is worth reading .
 Rostow analyzed Soviet society in light of the expected departure of Stalin from the political scene . Rostow analyzes Soviet society after Stalin's expected departure from political scene.
 Rostow revised the last chapter after Stalin's death . Rostow's last chapter was completed just prior to Stalin’s death . The last chapter of the book was revised after it .
 The work provides a useful glimpse into the thinking of policy advisors and the Eisenhower administration in the immediate aftermath of Stalin's death .
 Rostow’s book The Process of Economic Growth also increased the level of his participation in early Eisenhower policy planning . Rostow was a key figure in Eisenhower's early Eisenhower administration .
 Rostow attempts to explain within a historical context the phenomenon of economic development . Rostow explains the phenomenon in an attempt to explain the phenomenon . The author also explains the history of the economic boom in Germany .
 His discussions of stages of growth and the requirements for transition from one stage to another caught the attention of Eisenhower's and later of Kennedy’s administration . His discussions were first discussed by Eisenhower and Kennedy's administration .
 The book provides insight into the importance of economic development as a policy pillar in both administrations .
 Ideology and association with the Communists drove U.S. policy, while economic interests drove the British . Ideology, association with Communists drove United States policy, according to historian .
 Eisenhower, Dwight D., The White House Years: Mandate for Change 1953-1956 . Eisenhower was the president of the United States from 1953-56 . He was the first president to be elected to the White House .
 In 1952, Eisenhower stopped in London for talks with Churchill and Anthony Eden . Eisenhower was leaving his post at SHAPE at the time of his departure .
 Eisenhower informed them that ‘he knew of no other American so well qualified’ to become Secretary of State . Eisenhower said he knew of 'no other American' so qualified for the job .
 Harold Macmillan, in The Blast of War 1939-1945, makes it plain that British concerns about Dulles began with their contacts with him during the Second World War .
 Dulles told the British that ‘it was utterly futile’ for London to try to convince the U.S. public of the benefits of colonialism, he said . Dulles said the British were 'utterly futile' to try and convince the United States of colonialism .
 Only through cooperation with the United States to better the lot of developing nations could something positive be achieved . Only through working with the U.S. to better developing nations, something positive could be achieved. Only through cooperating with the US can be achieved, he says .
 In 1951, Dulles worked on Far East issues for the Truman administration . Dulles also worked for Truman administration in the 1950s .
 British Foreign Minister Herbert Morrison believed that Dulles had acted duplicitously on a series of issues, including the ANZUS Pact with New Zealand and Australia that excluded Britain .
 This lack of trust in Dulles reflected itself in Eden’s relationships with him, he says . Dulles was a trusted confidante of the CIA director .
 On 13 November 1952, Eden met with Dulles, who asserted that the Western nations had to present a united front in dealing with non-Western problems in the developing world . Eden: "Western nations must present united front"
 Eden agreed, but he may have been alerted by Herbert Morrison that Dulles could not be trusted, undermining any real willingness to work with the Secretary of State .
 In traditional British parlance, the ‘Middle East’ referred to the Persian Gulf and what is now referred to as Southwest Asia . The Middle East is now called Southwest Asia and is now the Middle East region .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations treated the region as politically, economically, and culturally connected in the mid-20th century . Just as Britain worried about the political connectivity and the impact of events in the Arab Middle East on the situation in Iran, Afghanistan, and British India .
 The State Department had a desk that had responsibility for Greece, Turkey, and Iran . As a case in point, the State Department lumped Greece together with the Middle East .
 The CIA placed Greece and Turkey in Europe and Iran in its Near East Division . Because of the NATO connection, the CIA placed them in Europe, Iran in Iran . Pakistan and India were also placed in the Near East division .
 The State Department also placed Pakistan and India in the same bureau, that of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs . The State Dept. also placed the two countries in the bureau . The U.S. State Department has also placed India and Pakistan in a bureau .
 The State Department placed North Africa, with the exception of Egypt and sometimes Libya, into the Africa bureau . The CIA placed all the Arabic-speaking countries in the Near East Division .
 At the NSC level, the same set of experts had responsibility for what amounted to the Muslim Middle East — Morocco to Pakistan and India, and often beyond to Southeast Asia . At the same time, these slight organizational differences were totally transparent .
 The historical view of the region contributed not only to connectivity in policy formulation, but also to the bureaucratic organizational structure set up to deal with the region . The organizational structure in the region tended to reinforce this broader conceptualization of region .
 A cohesive core existed based on Egypt, the Levant, Arabia, the Persian Gulf, Iran, Pakistan, and India . While there were peripheral organizational differences, there was a cohesive core of the group .
 Louis’s work lays out the various schemes through which the British hoped to maintain their influence in the Arab Middle East and Persian Gulf under Clement Atlee, 1945-1951 .
 Atlee’s government had no desire to pull out of the Middle East or allow independent states to pursue policies detrimental to British interests . He points out that Atlee's government did not want to pull .
 Labour government hoped to use regional collective security arrangements to maintain its influence and indirect control . The Labour government wanted to maintain control of regional security arrangements .
 Churchill’s overarching foreign policy goals, namely British influence and control, were the same; Churchill was merely more willing to use coetcive means to accomplish them . Churchill was more willing than ever to use means to achieve them .
 Eisenhower fumed that the British ‘went blindly ahead’, and domestic riots forced the Jordanians to withdraw . The United States, as well as Britain, was the focus of local unrest .
 Rostow served as an advisor to the Eisenhower administration from 1953 to 1958 . Rostow also served as a national security adviser for the Eisenhower Administration from 1953-58 .
 Eisenhower recommended that the British attempt to settle the Buraimi Oasis issue with Saudi Arabia by direct high-level talks . Eisenhower reaffirmed American support for the tripartite agreement of May 25, 1950 made by France, Britain, and the U.S. on controlling potential Arab
 Eisenhower sought to warn the British against a more aggressive approach to its regional problems . The exchange leaves the impression that Eisenhower wanted the British to be cautious .
 Eisenhower’s remembrance of events diverges somewhat from the historical record . Eisenhower's memory of events differs somewhat from historical record.
 The Shah’s failure to remove Musaddigq, followed by his abdication, shook official Washington to its core . The Shah failed to remove him, and he abdicated, shaking Washington .
 President Eisenhower’s 1963 reflections on Musaddiq focused more on his ‘stability’ than did contemporary accounts . The Iranian Prime Minister's 'stability' was much more important than contemporary accounts of his life .
 Musaddiq’s habit of appearing in his pajamas perturbed the President — he mentioned it several times in his memoirs . President mentioned the habit several times .
 The 1951 assassination of General Razmara became the feared model for what might happen to the Musaddiq government . The assassination was the feared example of what might have happened to the government .
 In Bill, James A and William Roger Louis . Louis , Musaddiq, Iranian Nationalism, and Oil. Louis . In Bill . James A . Louis, James B. Louis, William Roger L. Louis and William . Louis .
 William Louis Musaddiq, Iranian Nationalism, and Oi. In Bill, James A. James A and William Roger Louis Musadiq . William Roger Lou Louchez: Iran's Nationalism is the source of Iranian nationalism .
 The Shi’a Ulama strongly opposed the Tudeh and secular nationalist forces in Iran . The Ulama played a significant role in the fall of Musaddiq, and played a major role .
 Use of Islamic influence in Cold War struggle against Soviet Union and Communist and Socialist groups became a standard feature of U.S. policy . It reached its apogee in the Afghan War of the 1980s . Opposition to the Shah would follow .
 Ayatollah Abul Qassim Kashani defected from the Musaddig coalition in early 1953 as ‘the major blow’ to the National Front government . Bill describes the defection of Ayatoll Abul Kassan Kashani as a ‘major blow
 Musaddiq's move forced him into a position more dependent on the leftist parties, particularly the Tudeh . The move forced Musaddqi to become dependent on leftist parties such as the leftist party .
 Dulles’ first major trip through the Middle East and South Asia coincided with a ‘crisis’ in Anglo-American relations that became the major topic of an NSC meeting even before the Secretary returned home .
 The British dislike of Dulles reflected a difference in personal style, says the historian . Dulles' personal style is said to reflect a difference of personal style .
 On Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, he holds a press conference . And that on Tuesdays and Thursdays and Saturdays he holds press conferences . He says that on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, he will hold a press briefing .
 The American Embassy in Cairo had imposed itself as the ‘go-between’ for Anglo-Egyptian negotiations . Much to the chagrin of the British, the embassy imposed itself .
 American Ambassador Jefferson Caffery used his relationship with British Ambassador Sit Roger Stevens and the relationship between his political officer William Lakeland, Muhammad Heikal, and Muhammad Nasser himself .
 Lakeland became the intermediary carrying versions of the agreement back and forth between the Egyptians and the British . Lakeland was the intermediary between Egypt and the UK .
 Lakeland’s role would have consequences later, when he was branded by key British officials in the Jordanian crisis of 1960 as too pro-Nasserist and willing to give up on the regime .
 Lakeland stated that only the belief that significant ‘economic and military aid’ would be forthcoming from the U.S. convinced the Egyptians to compromise on the departure date of the British .
 Heikal stated that Nasser took Dulles at his word and sent Ali Sabry to Washington to negotiate for arms . Nasser stated that he sent Sabry at Dulles' word .
 Nasser assured officers in the Egyptian army that the U.S. would provide them with modern arms . At the same time, Nasser promised officers that the United States would provide modern arms to the army .
 All Nasser got back was Ali Sabry himself — an embarrassment to both Nasser and Sabry . As Heikal put it, all he got back from Nasser was himself . As heikal said, "All Nasser had back was himself"
 U.S. became an implacable foe of Egypt and the region in the 1980s and 1990s . Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak was a key ally of the United States in Egypt .
 Dulles rejected Syria and the Shishakli regime as ‘very unpopular’ and potentially unstable . Dulles wrote that the regime was 'very unpopular' and ‘potentially unstable’
 This work provides a very good narrative of the process through which the Baghdad Pact came into being, and of the Egyptian struggle with Iraq for influence in the Arab world .
 Podeh appeats to ignore, or is ignorant of, the CIA’s role in supporting Nasser . In addition, in treating anti-American propaganda on the part of Egypt, he appeats .
 During part of 1954, in order to protect Nasser from internal criticism, the CIA was actually assisting in creating anti-American propaganda . The CIA was helping to create anti-U.S. propaganda .
 In Egypt, various groups opposed the 1954 compromise agreement on two basic grounds . The agreement was signed by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak in 1953 .
 It allowed the British almost two years to complete their withdrawal from the Canal Zone . It provided for the ‘reactivation’ of the British bases in the event of war or a threat to the Canal .
 Nasser used the incident as justification to crush the Brotherhood and his other political opponents . The incident was used to justify the use of Nasser to crush Nasser's other opponents .
 Copeland states that the CIA brought in Paul Linebarger, ‘perhaps the greatest ‘black’ propagandist who ever lived’ to coach the Egyptians . A ‘goodly portion’ of the anti-American propaganda coming out of Cairo was written with
 This article provides an interesting contemporary perspective on the ‘northern tier’ concept, and the difficulties faced by the Eisenhower administration in trying to come up with a containment strategy for the Middle East .
 There was a long discussion of the role of the U.S. Zionist lobby at the NSC meeting on July 22, 1954 .
 Eisenhower's impression of Israel showed a remarkable lack of understanding of the nature of the Jewish state . Eisenhower’s impression of the state was that of Israel, he said .
 Johnston Mission was not anticipated that the Johnston Mission would bring back a clear-cut solution . Mission was intended as an exploratory step to determine whether a basis for agreement existed . Mission not expected to bring back clear-cuts solution .
 The new administration saw the Jordan waters as ‘a central element of American policy in the Near East.’
 With respect to the Arab-Israel conflict, generally, it is clear that we are not leaving the problems to solve itself, says Israel's ambassador .
 Concerns about the influence of the Zionist lobby surfaced in discussions of the Johnston effort . Incidentally, concerns about the lobby surfaced .
 Neff makes an excellent case that the Gaza raid was the key event that ultimately drove Nasser to Moscow for the arms that the U.S. would not provide . Neff: The Gaza raid led to Nasser's move to Moscow .
 The Egyptian Army comprised Nasset’s political constituency and he had to deliver arms, and at least the appearance of military parity with the Israelis, if he was to survive . Nasset's political constituency was his constituency .
 The Gaza raid was as much the result of internal Israeli politics and the gross embarrassment caused by the Lavon Affair as it was about security-related issues on the border . The raid was the result as much of internal Israel politics and as much as security issues related to the border,
 In the Lavon Affair, the Egyptians uncovered an Israeli covert operation in Egypt . Israeli agents in Egypt were to attack British and American consulates and embassies with explosives .
 The goal was to blame the attacks on the Egyptians and increase Anglo-American anti-Arab sentiment . The goal of the attack was to create a negative image of Egypt .
 Ben-Gurion pressed Moshe Sharett to authorize the raid to restore morale in the IDF . The raid was the first to take place in Israel since the Second World War .
 Sharon had previously carried out a violent raid against the Palestinian village of Qibya with numerous non-combatant deaths . Sharon had carried out an earlier raid on the village in which he had killed several people .
 The scale of casualties horrified Sharett and placed Nasser in potentially the same internal political situation as that experienced by King Faruq following the failure of Egyptian forces in the 1948 war .
 Nasser told Sir Ralph Stevenson that he had to have arms to maintain his government, no matter what the source . Nasser said he had no choice but to keep arms .
 Nasser delivered the same message to U.S. Ambassador Byroade in Cairo . Nasser also delivered the message to the United States Ambassador by phone call .
 Vatikiotis credits the combined impact of the Gaza Raid and the Baghdad Pact negotiations as the determining factors causing Nasser to embrace ‘non-alignment’ and seek arms from the Soviet Union .
 Amam focuses primarily on justifying the demise of Egyptian Field Marshall Abd-al-Hakim al-Amir following the 1967 war . Amam was published by Amam in 2007 .
 The author emphasizes the theme of the Egyptian military being out of step with Nasset’s political goals and agenda . Nasset's political goals are not aligned with his political agenda, he says .
 Amam’s view, while something of a rationalization, fits closely with the views of Neff on the subject of the need to placate the military in general .
 With the dismissal of General Glubb from the Jordan Arab Legion, an incipient military struggle for power was added to the already volatile compound of refugees’ hatred for Israel and anti-British, anti-West sentiment .
 Macmillan took pride in his attempt to foster a climate of mediation between India and Pakistan at the Commonwealth Conference, 1957 .
 Nehru, Nehru and Pakistani Foreign Minister Husayn Shaheed Suhrawardy attended the ceremony . Nehru was joined by Nehru at the ceremony in Lahore, Pakistan .
 International Bank’s proposal to settle claims related to Indus River waters . Macmillan encouraged both sides to accept the International Bank's proposal .
 Prime Minister believed that this might be the first step to a negotiated settlement on Kashmir . The Prime Minister said that this may be a first step towards a settlement .
 This very British view is interesting in that it reflects the British view that a unity existed on the subcontinent under the Raj . This is a contention that continues to be debated today . The British view reflects a British view of a unity that existed under Raj .
 Christopher Van Hollen is the former Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs . He is also a former Secretary for State for S.A. Affairs .
 Neither the Truman nor Eisenhower administrations saw any real chance for compromise on India’s part with regard to Kashmir, he said .
 Ralph Bunche of the United Nations discussed Indian attitudes in general and Kashmir in particular with the U.S. Ambassador to India, Ernest A Gross, and his staff . Gross was the United States ambassador to India .
 He said Indians had emphasized the military in a recent National Day celebration . He said this was directed not toward Communism, but toward Pakistan .
 Indian officials 'discouraged' by prospect of years of economic struggle to get the country on its feet . Indian officials also 'discussed' prospect of 'economic struggle'
 Kashmir remained the dominant theme in all discussions in Pakistan, he said . He reported that the military received even greater focus and that Kashmir remained a dominant theme .
 Pakistanis were deeply concerned that India wanted the situation to ‘drift’ and solidify into permanent Indian control . The Pakistanis feared that the situation would 'drift' into permanent India control .
 Nixon said that in his talks with the Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi in Iran, both focused on military aid . Nixon commented that in the context of the discussion on Pakistan, Pakistan, both discussed military aid to Iran .
 Iran's stability in Iran depends on a strong military, Iran's president says . He says the model also applies to other countries in the region . Iran is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 He supported direct immediate aid because he believed that the northern-tier organization would take too much time to unfold . He also supported direct aid because of the need for immediate aid .
 Rostow should get credit for seeing early signs of a Soviet-Chinese split over national interests, Rostow says . Rostow was right to see signs of an early split in the Soviet Union and China .
 Ram highlighted Western opposition to some of the content in Menon’s plan for prisoner of wat repatriation in Korea . Ram also highlighted Soviet attacks on Menon at the United Nations at the U.N.
 Ram was something of an apologist for Menon and attempted to explain away many of his obvious shortcomings . Ram tried to explain Menon's obvious shortcomings in the film .
 Ram called the ‘Jeep Scandal’ a ‘mistake’ rather than malfeasance . Ram appeared to be using the incident with the Soviets to portray Menon as something other than a Communist or Soviet agent of influence . Ram called it a 'mistake
 Adel's comment is all the more significant when viewed in the context of Adel’s interpretation of Korean events . Adel: ‘This comment is important to the Korean people'
 Even those holding radical leftist views of events found themselves taken aback by the vehemence of the Soviet attack on Menon . The point here is that even those holding leftist views were shocked .
 William Phillips Talbot published this work when he was the executive director of the American Universities Field Staff . Talbot's work was published by Talbot at the time he was in charge of the field staff .
 Talbot served in naval liaison in the China-Burma-India theater during World War I . Talbot returned to India after the war as a foreign correspondent for the Chicago Daily News to cover the transfer of power .
 Talbot knew many of the leading figures of Indian politics personally, including Nehru, Gandhi, and Patel . Talbot also knew Gandhi, Nehru and Patel personally .
 The Institute of Current World Affairs published an account of his walk and conversation with Gandhi in the East Bengal district of Noakhali during the turmoil of 1947 .
 Talbot became the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs in 1961 . Talbot was one of the key drivers of regional policy from Cairo to Calcutta .
 Days after the assassination of President John F Kennedy, Talbot would play an instrumental role in the maintenance of the pro-Pakistani tilt in U.S. foreign policy in South Asia under the administration of President Lyndon B Johnson .
 He viewed it as a mistake on the part of the U.S. and Britain to ‘rely more and more on the military aspect’ of alliances instead of focusing on economic development .
 Brown struggles with balancing Nehru’s political theory and practical application . Brown struggles to balance theory and application of Nehru's political theory .
 There is just as sound an argument that the arms agreement provided Nehru with an ‘out’ vis-a-vis negotiations with Pakistan over Kashmir, and that he was more than happy to get that bonus .
 Nehru was nothing if not a practical politician, and as such, principles were usually fine as long as the price was not too high . Nehru's principles were always fine, as well as the cost of being a politician .
 Menon made the cover of Time, with a snake charmet’s pipe on one side and a menacing cobra on the other . Menon is the author of the book, which is based in India .
 Menon resigned in 1952 after scandals forced him to resign in 1952 . Appointed High Commissioner to Britain in 1947, Menon was appointed High Commissioner in 1947 .
 Menon paid over $300,000 for 15 British army surplus Jeeps . None of the Jeeps would run or had spare parts .
 He also purchased a palatial mansion as the residence and a Rolls Royce for the High Commissioner .
 He did all of this at a time when the Indian government faced a monumental economic crisis . The Indian government was in the midst of an economic crisis at the time .
 Ram, a nephew, wrote that the Jeep Scandal was an error of judgment in that Menon arranged the contrast privately and not through government channels . Ram's nephew, Ram, said Menon's decision to arrange the contrast was a mistake .
 The scandal centered on Sudir Gosh, who was Vallabahbhai Patel’s candidate for the London post, and Menon . Another pro-Menon biographer explained the scandal in terms of a controversy .
 This account claims that the Gosh brought the Jeep scandal to light and Patel used it to discredit Menon . This account also claims that Patel used the scandal to discredit menon . Patel is accused of using the scandal as a political weapon .
 Not even even his most ardent supporters offered any explanation of what happened to the money .
 Akbar criticized the United States for ‘sniping’ the Control Commission into ‘impotence’ He felt that the ‘backlash’ against Menon, because of his ‘acerbic, and garrulous speeches’, was detrimental to
 Gopal stated that Nehru obtained a resolution calling for all “Great Powers’ to stay out of Vietnam and to let the Vietnamese settle their differences . Gopal: Nehru called for all "Great Powers' to stay away from Vietnam .
 Cooper describes Dulles as ‘hardly an ebullient personality even under the most salubrious circumstances’ He states that his arrival that ‘gray April day’ lent little joy’ to either the ‘cheerless’ surroundings .
 Interview of Walt Rostow by Roby Barrett on June 12, 2002 at LBJ Library in Austin, Texas . Interview of Rostow was held at the LBJ library in Austin . Rostow died at the age of 92 in 1994 .
 He was treated as an upstart in politics depending on the Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, for support, patronage and sustenance .
 Interview with Nehru published in book form provides interesting first-hand responses by Nehru to a series of questions affecting policy in the mid-1950s . Nehru's answers are published in a book published in India's first book .
 It is a part of a much larger collection of Indian government publications at the Australian National Library, Canberra .
 CIA-RDP8001446R000100170033-3, 10.3.5.6.7.9.5 . The CIA-ledled Library of America is the world's largest library .
 Ceylonese Prime Minister Sir John Kotelawala jumped up and ‘demanded’ that Menon either apologize or ‘leave the Conference’ on the threat to ‘walk out’ if Menon did not do one or the other . Ceyl
 Participants in the meeting discussed the lack of a cleat British position on the conference, citing a lack of any instructions on the matter from London . The participants said there were no instructions from London from the government .
 The Embassy in New Delhi commented that the British attitude toward the conference was one of cautious welcome . The embassy said that British attitudes toward the event were cautious welcome.
 This raises a broader and perhaps in some quarters more controversial point about the Algerian conflict and the present work . This raises an important question about the conflict in Algeria .
 In fact, remarkable unanimity existed between the Western powers, the Arab states, and the non-aligned states that the French needed to get out of Algeria . The French were forced to leave Algeria in 1953 .
 Self-determination should be the basis for the outcome of the struggle in Algeria, says Algeria's president . This unanimity did not always take the same form, but the basic premise was that self-determination was the basis of Algeria's struggle .
 Despite Cairo’s support for the FLN, the U.S. never felt as threatened by Nasserism in Algeria . The Algerian leadership was almost as concerned about maintaining its independence from Nasser as it was about gaining it from France .
 Algerian movement had very strong critical support from pro-Western and anti-Nasserist political leaders in Tunisia and Morocco . In addition, the movement was critical of Nasserist Nasserism .
 Algeria was a special case, and only fit into the Middle East policy models pursued by Eisenhower and Kennedy . Both administrations understood that colonialism in Africa and Middle East was coming to an end and both wanted to see independent non-Communist, if not pro-Western, states emerge .
 Algeria was a stumbling block to NATO policy in Europe and a problem for French political stability . Algeria posed bilateral problems for the U.S. and France, posing bilateral problems .
 The problem was more binary in nature, and revolved around decisions in Paris, not in Arab capitals . The problem is more binary than simply Parisian decisions, not Arab capitals, it is said .
 The importance of the conference and its impact on the Eisenhower administration’s perception of Western interests in the region would become more apparent . Within a matter of months, the importance of this conference would be more apparent, the author says .
 Menon made it clear he was anti-west and anti-United States . Nehru had drifted far from Gandhi. Menon said he was against the west and the United States .
 This is a harsh judgment coming from a sympathetic advocate of the Civil Rights movement in the U.S. This is not the first time a person has criticized Gandhian ideas on non-violent protest .
 It is indicative of many American reactions to meeting with Nehru in person . Nehru's visit to the U.S. in person is one of many Americans' reactions .
 In addition to Powell, Chester Bowles had discussed attending, but was convinced by the White House not to do so . The White House convinced Bowles not to attend the event .
 Nehru compares the respective positions of India and Egypt in the British colonial system . Nehru compared the position of Egypt and India in the colonial system to that of India in India .
 The way imperialism functions in its efforts to suppress these nationalist movements is also much the same, writes David Frum . And the way imperialism works in its . efforts, he says .
 Nasser is the focus of a campaign to bring Egypt into the non-aligned group . It is hardly surprising that Nasser would become the focus .
 In 1955, he became information officer at the Egyptian Embassy in Washington, Egypt . In 1955 he was information officer for Egyptian Embassy .
 He would later work for Muhammad Hussein Heikal at A-Abram during the height of the Nasserist era . He later worked for Hussein Hussein .
 Bandung is the key to understanding Nasser and Nasserist Egypt, Hakki Hakki says . Hakki: Bandung was key to understand Nasser's Nasserism . Bandung has been a key part of the Egyptian revolution .
 This self-image of superiority and importance drove everything he did in the 1950s and 1960s . Self-image and importance was the driving force of his career .
 Nehru and Sukarno told him that he was the leader of the Arab world and he believed it . He believed it. Nehru told him he was leader of Arab world .
 Nasser, like many other world leaders, viewed dealing with Nehru as tedious . Something of a consensus exists that Nasser . Nasser was like many others .
 Eveland provides an excellent description of the arms negotiations with Nasser . Eveland provided an excellent account of Nasser's arms negotiations .
 The United States was willing to provide $20 million in arms and equipment suitable for internal security purposes . The U.S. offered to provide the money to the rebels .
 Eveland commented that Mossad organized the Zionist lobby in Washington to oppose the arms deal even before the exploratory delegation had departed Cairo . Eveland said Mossad had organized the lobbying of the American Zionist lobby .
 The CIA had no legal basis to negotiate a major arms agreement because it required Congressional approval . In addition, the CIA, represented by Copeland and Roosevelt, did not have a legal basis for negotiating a deal with the U.S.
 Eveland stated that Ambassador Jefferson Caffery and Deputy Chief of Mission G Lewis Jones were concerned that Nasset’s expectations had risen to the point that the likely failure of the CIA effort to broker an arms deal would have serious long-term consequences .
 The Soviets took advantage of what they perceived as a moment of ‘weakness and confusion’ in the U.S. administration to renege on their agreements and move into the Middle East . Goodpaster stated that the Soviets took . advantage of the moment of 'weak
 Moscow calculated that should Eisenhower die, the ensuing change in administration would offer additional opportunities to expand their influence, he said . He speculated that if Eisenhower died, it would offer more opportunities for Moscow .
 Goodpaster firmly believed that if Eisenhower had not had a heart attack, the Czech arms deal would never have happened . Eisenhower's heart attack prevented the deal from going ahead .
 China stole the limelight from India because the Chinese and Indian views coincide . People are inclined to think when this happens, that India has yielded to China, rather than the other way around .
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehra’s Speeches and the Final Communiqué from the Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting are found in the India collection at the Australian National Library, Canberra .
 This was published to counter the impression that India and Nehru had taken a back seat to other nations at the Bandung Conference .
 Kermit Roosevelt refused to participate in British-sponsored schemes to overthrow Nasser . Roosevelt was the almost mythic hero of Tehran 1953 . He refused to take part in any British-backed plots to topple Nasser.
 Roosevelt told the White House that the only reason Tehran had worked was because the momentum against the Musaddiq regime already existed . Upon returning, Roosevelt said that the sole reason Tehran worked was that the momentum had already existed.
 In contrast, he pointed out that Nasser was actually popular and that a coup had no chance of success . He said a coup was unlikely to succeed because of the popularity of Nasser .
 You have to have so much going to go your way before you dare undertake them, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "You have to have the vast majority of the people behind you. First and foremost, you have to be behind you," she says . "I'm not going to be scared. I'm going to have a lot of people behind me"
 "You have to have a leadership that is better than the one in power and one that can take control," he says . And you have to be a leader better than a power, he says. And you need to have leadership that's better than that of the current power .
 Roosevelt advised the White House to get used to Nasser because an ‘Iran option’ simply did not exist . Nasser told Roosevelt that an 'Iran option' simply didn't exist .
 Roosevelt quit over persistent attempts to enlist Dulles in attempts to overthrow Nasser . Roosevelt became so aggravated with the elder Dulles that he quit . Roosevelt was frustrated with his efforts to get Dulles to help topple Nasser in Egypt .
 Srodes believes that Roosevelt’s friendship for Nasser played a role in the decision . Roosevelt's friendship with Nasser is said to have been a key factor in decision .
 Allen was upset about it and recognized eventually that he couldn’t take it any longer . Allen’s wife said he was ‘upset’ about it, ‘recognized’ that he was upset .
 Faris Faris was an Americaneducated Palestinian who had served as the Head of the Arab Desk in the Overseas Operations Branch of the Office of War Information . Faris worked for the OII in the Middle East .
 This work provides an interesting perspective on the growing perception that U.S. policy in the 1953-1954 timeframe had fallen under British and Israeli influence . The work provides a perspective on how the United States policy in that period was influenced by the British and Israel .
 This was written prior to the Soviet arms deal with Nasser . Faris predicted that Arab perceptions of U.S. policy would result in major policy gains for the Soviet Union in the Middle East .
 Kyle provides a series of excellent snapshots of the Indian role . Interspersed throughout his narrative, Kyle provides an excellent snapshot of the role .
 Nehru supported Nasser’s right to nationalize the Canal . Despite a disagreement over tactics and concern in India that problems with the Canal would harm the Indian economy, Nehru backed Nasser .
 Krishna Menon told the British that India could not come out publicly against Nasser, but that India would push for an international conference and encourage the Egyptian leader to attend . Menon said that India will push for the international conference .
 Kyle concluded by saying that Nehru’s solution of an international conference appealed to Eisenhower . Kyle concluded that the solution to the problem was that of the international conference .
 Kyle infers that had Nehru taken a more personal role Suez might have been avoided . Kyle says Nehru's role in Suez may have prevented Suez being avoided .
 Lall, a senior Indian diplomat and the self-described ‘closest aide’ to Krishna Menon for 17 years, related Nehru’s disillusionment with Menon . Lall said Nehru was disillusioned by Menon and that Menon’
 The latter failed to gain acceptance of Nehru’s plan for avoiding war over Suez . The latter then voted against the United States resolution condemning the Soviet Union for its actions in Hungary .
 Nehru telephoned Lall every morning with specific instructions for Menon to carry out in that day’s UN session . As a result, Menon was given specific instructions by Nehru every morning . Menon carried out in the UN session in India .
 Heikal argues that Suez underscored waning British influence and the beginning of real problems for the British in protecting their oil interests in the Middle East .
 Selwyn Lloyd, the British Foreign Secretary, offered a systematic, if biased, assault on U.S. policy . Lloyd argued that it was naive and wrong-headed .
 The author discusses the general confusion among presidential advisors and military officers when it became apparent that the Anglo-French attack was under way . The author also discusses the confusion and disagreement among military officers and advisors .
 Admiral Arleigh Burke ordered him to prepare to engage anyone in the Mediterranean, including the French and British . According to Admiral Burke, . Dulles ordered him . to prepare for anyone in . the Mediterranean .
 The Secretary of State then headed off to talk to Allen Dulles and the President . The secretary of state then headed to Washington, D.C.
 The ditection to Burke would later be denied, as would the refusal to float the pound sterling unless the British troops were withdrawn . The decision to float sterling was also denied by the British government in the 1930s .
 Mosley also points out that Dulles was preoccupied with Hungary, exhausted, and would be hospitalized within days for major cancer surgery . Mosley: Dulles would be exhausted, exhausted and would have been hospitalized for major surgery .
 There was an undercurrent in the administration that the U.S. stance against intervention had been a mistake . Nevertheless, there was an . undercurrent that the United States stance against . intervention had was a mistake, the administration said .
 Eisenhower and Dulles had a choice of ‘Nasser or Eden’ and they chose the ‘assassin’ over their old ally . In less understanding accounts, the pair chose the 'assassin' over their former ally .
 Author was British Ambassador to Iraq following the July coup . Later, he was British ambassador to Iraq after the coup .
 Trevelyan stated that he never supported intervention, either in Egypt in 1956 or Iraq in 1958, because both lacked any real chance of success given the post-World War II environment . He said he never backed intervention in Egypt or Iraq .
 Trevelyan clearly viewed the post-1958 period as an ‘epilogue’ to British dominance in the Arab Middle East . The period was seen as the 'epilogogue' to British domination of the Arab Mideast .
 See also Vernon Bogdanor’s article ‘Suez changed everything’ in The Times, 29 October 2006, 21 October 2006 .
 He also pointed to later comments by Eisenhower regretting that the U.S. had intervened in the crisis .
 Views tend to reflect a British school of thought which was prevalent at the time in the Colonial Office that Suez was a net negative for Britain in the Middle East . These views tend to show that the Suez Canal was a positive plus for Britain .
 London no longer had the ability to support the breadth of its former commitments in the Middle East, nor was it necessary to do so . To the contrary, with pretentions about prerogatives in the former colonial empire gone, the British government could focus on downsizing its commitments .
 British foreign policy was hardly ‘ruined’; rather it merely took a different and perhaps more effective and certainly more sophisticated form . Britain's foreign policy is hardly 'ruined', but it merely takes a different form .
 Macmillan shifted the responsibility and the costs largely to the United States . He maintained a very effective program of influence over those policies through Washington .
 Eisenhower’s decision in 1956 was correct in 1956 and even mote correct in the hindsight of 50 years . Eisenhower's decision to keep the U.S. out of Cuba was correct .
 His lament about not supporting the British arguably had as much to do with wishing that the British, as opposed to the US, still had responsibility for the region than it did getting rid of Nasser .
 Thatcher knew that she required the support of the US, politically and with tactical and strategic U.S. intelligence support, and she got it . As for Bogdanor’s comment on the Falklands, Thatcher knew she needed the support .
 Bogdanor also blames Suez for Britain’s estrangement from Europe, and for the French commitment to Europe .
 The Eisenhower Doctrine was ill-advised and served only to inflame local nationalism and anti-Western sentiment . British privately voiced their concern that, given the unlikely possibility of a direct Soviet attack on the Middle East, the Eisenhower Doctrine would be ill advised .
 In November 1956, Ben-Gurion made withdrawal even more difficult by claiming in the Knesset that the Sinai was historically a part of Israel . In 1956, he claimed Israel’s ‘right’ to expand beyond its 1956 borders . In the same year, he
 His intransigence confirmed in Arab minds the aggressive and expansionist aims of the Jewish state . Although partly for domestic Israeli political consumption, his statements were for domestic political consumption .
 Copeland offers an entertaining account of the various reactions to the Eisenhower Doctrine . Copeland: The Eisenhower Doctrine is a good example of American reaction to the doctrine .
 Nasser understood that the Eisenhower Doctrine targeted his version of Arab unity and influence in the region . Copeland points out that Nasser understands that the doctrine targeted his own version of the Arab unity .
 At the same time, it encouraged his enemies, chief among them Nuri Sa’id and the Hashemites in Iraq . The U.S. has never been in touch with Iraq since 2003 .
 At their first meeting in October 1952, during a dinner, Nasser made it clear to Kermit Roosevelt that Neguib was a figurehead by dismissing or ignoring contemptuously everything that the General said .
 Copeland credits William Lakeland, the Political Officer at the U.S. Embassy in Cairo, with being the first official American to grasp that Nasser was the real power in the Revolutionary Command Council and not Neguib .
 It was through Lakeland’s friendship with Muhammad Heikal, then just a reporter in Cairo, that the primary early conduit for communication between the Embassy and the RCC was established . Lakeland was the first journalist to work for the embassy in Cairo .
 Nasser’s view of a ‘sound democratic life’ fell somewhat short of pluralistic democracy, says Nasser . Nasser: ‘Sound democratic life is not a sound democratic life. It is a sound democracy,’ he writes .
 He was suspicious of political parties, particularly after the Muslim Brotherhood attempted to assassinate him in 1954 . Leftist elements strongly supported more radical measures and closer ties with the Soviet bloc .
 Arms from the Soviet Union were one thing, but political challenges from the Left were another . Arms from Soviet Union was one thing from one thing to one from the left .
 Richards, an American student in Cairo in the early 1950s, knew many of the Ikbwan members personally . Richards was an American in Cairo during the 1950s when he was in Cairo .
 His narrative of events in the 1953-1954 timeframe presents an historical narrative that is also a firsthand street-level view of events . The author also gives a firsthand account of events that occurred in the same period .
 Nasset’s Philosophy of Revolution was partly propaganda to establish ideological credentials and partly a reflection of his personal revolutionary nationalism . Nasset's philosophy of Revolution is partly propaganda for his ideological credentials, but also for his personal revolution .
 Nasser believed in the permanence of the revolutionary struggle, and would repeatedly return to revolutionary activities when moderate policies failed . Nasser was a strong believer in revolutionary activities .
 In Karpat, Kemal H . Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East in the contemporary Middle East . Kemal . H. H.
 Various calls for Arab unity over the years had anesthetized official Washington to the possibility of a real union . The United States has long been skeptical of the possibility .
 The degree of surprise associated with the EgyptianSyrian union was attributed to a lack of adequate intelligence . It reflected itself in all manner of speculation, including the possibility of oil-sharing between Iraq and Egypt .
 Nasser apparently confided in Raymond Hare, the United States Ambassador in Cairo, that the union with Syria would become a ‘great headache’ and that most of the RCC actually opposed it .
 Most accounts of Nasser’s reluctance to form the union came from a later period, after its collapse, and as a result ring somewhat false . The accounts of his reluctance to join the union come from a period after it collapsed .
 There is little doubt that by 1962-3 Nasser regretted his decision, but, in 1958, riding the crest of popularity and seeing a future full of promise, there was little doubt he believed that he could manage the difficulties .
 In 1958, the Syrian adventure represented the welcomed first step on the road to Arab unity . Clearly, in 1958, in . 1958, Syria was the first step of the . road to . Arab unity. Clearly, the . Syrian adventure represents the welcomed . first step to the road .
 Stage-managed or not, the crowd clearly reflected the mood in the much of the Arab world . Crowd clearly reflected mood in many Arab countries .
 Nasser believed U.S. assertions about Soviet designs on Syria were disingenuous . Copeland: Nasser found American protestations of innocence in that regard somewhat disingenuous. Copeland points out that Nasser .
 Barry Lampton, the Egyptian desk officer in NEA, provided a briefing memorandum to the Secretary of State . The background paper included a background paper describing the sources for and development of the union .
 He traced the union effort back to a fundamental Egyptian and Syrian hostility to the Baghdad Pact . The Syro-Egyptian military pact of October 20, 1955 provided for a joint military command under an Egyptian general officer .
 The Turko-Syrian crisis of September 1957 created the catalyst for a vote in both the Syrian and Egyptian parliaments on November 17, 1957 to explore political union . In this interpretation, this interpretation is that the Turko and Syrian crisis created a catalyst for the vote .
 Lampton’s argument followed the line of reasoning offered by Nasser, namely that the latter feared a Communist takeover . Lampton argued that Nasser feared a takeover of the Arab world .
 NEA also pointed out that the Syrians granted Nasser virtual dictatorial powers, making it an offer that Nasser could not refuse .
 Nutting provides an interesting evaluation of Abd-al-Hamid Sarraj, the head of the Syrian intelligence and security service or muhabbarat .
 The Eisenhower administration’s frustration with civilian government throughout the Middle East-South Asia region had brought the U.S. government to just such a conclusion . True or not, the Eisenhower administration had already concluded that civilian government in the region was a problem .
 Military rule was preferable to civilian rule that invited plurality and Communist infiltration . Military rule meant stability and meant stability, says President Obama .
 Heikal comments that the Soviets ‘were obliged to give the union their reluctant support’, despite the arrest of Communist supporters .
 Nasser’s April 28, 1958 visit to Moscow was a top-priority item in the Kremlin . According to Heikal, it was the combination of the union and the suppression of Communist elements that made the visit a top priority .
 Washington was not the only Great Power attempting to gauge the potential for a relationship with Egypt's leader . Washington was also trying to gauge potential for the Egyptian leader .
 Heikal believed that the Soviets wanted to calibrate Nasser's relationship with the US and his views on the Arab-Israeli dispute . The Soviets were intent on impressing Nasser, he said .
 The report on the situation in Syria reflected Nasser’s own explanation . Nasser: “The situation is very different. It is not the first time I’ve heard from Nasser,” he said .
 The union with the Arab ‘street’ and its unpopularity in Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Israel and among Syrian Communists was noted .
 No mention of Iraq or support for an alternative union . Interestingly, there was no mention of support for alternative union.
 Exxecutive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume VIII, Eighty-Fourth Congress Second Session, 1956 . 1956 . 1954 . 1956. 1954. 1954 . 1954. 1956 .
 Morse, in arguing with the other Senators, stated that the U.S. should support ‘free states’ which in his view excluded most of the states in the Middle East and Africa . Morse said that the United States should support 'free states'
 Senators expressed concern that Nasser was playing the U.S. off against the Soviet Union on the issue of the Aswan Dam . In the same session several of the Senators expressed concerns .
 Under Secretary of State Herbert Hoover Jr. had made the case earlier that the dam at Aswan ‘would be built’; it was just a question of whether it would be with Western or Soviet aid . Hoover, Jr., Jr. said in a speech at the end of
 Given the lack of support in Congress, whether the administration supported the dam or not may was probably irrelevant . There was considerable Congressional opposition .
 The debate was indicative of the difficulties that the administration had in getting the aid that it wanted to support containment policy in the Mideast . The administration wanted to maintain a balanced policy .
 Copeland’s description of the atmosphere in Beirut matches exactly the reality of double-dealing, so long a part of the Lebanese political landscape . Copeland: “Double-dealtting is a long-running problem in Lebanon”
 While his descriptions of the camaraderie between competing intelligence services is to a degree exaggerated, there is some truth to it . There is also truth to the idea of a shared intelligence between intelligence services .
 Pro-Nasserist operatives built their strategy to mobilize the street mob in Egypt . Sa’ib Salaam, Abdullah Yafi, Adnan Hakim, and Abdullah Mashnuq were behind the mob .
 The Four were supported with money and weapons by Egyptian intelligence and Sarraj . The four were supported by money from the Egyptian government .
 Within the framework of the Baghdad Pact, so-called ‘free nations’ were not allowed to address certain issues that were central to their own security . Suez through Egyptian Eyes (London: André Deutsch, 1986)
 At the Baghdad Pact meeting on February 11, Zionism and Israel were topics that he had no authority to discuss with Pact members . The American representative said he was not authorized to discuss the topics with other members of the group .
 At the time of the Syrian-Egyptian union, Sa’id was not the Prime Minister . He represented Iraq at the Baghdad Pact conference in Ankara, Turkey .
 His thinking was that Sa’id would cause an intensification of Egyptian and Syrian attacks and propaganda against both Jordan and Iraq, he says .
 Hussein did not like Sa’id on a personal level, and wanted his role limited to behind-the-scenes support for any new government . Hussein wanted Sa'id to be behind the scenes, but did not want him to have a personal role .
 The view that Nasser and the Soviets were in league in Lebanon persisted . The view remained that the Soviets and Nasser were involved in Lebanon .
 Dulles’ address to those present in this ‘restricted meeting’ of the Baghdad Pact, if rendered correctly by Bowker, was almost insulting to the delegates . If rendered correctly, it would have been almost insulting for the delegates to hear .
 Perhaps this was a goad directed at Nuri Sa’id, since the initiator of any action had to be an Arab state . He represented the only Arab state present at the start of the action .
 Sir Michael Wright outlined the British view of a JordanianIraqi union in a letter to the British press .
 Wright believed that union would strengthen the two weak Hashemite regimes and undermine UAR attempts to divide them . Wright believed it would strengthen Hashemites' weak regimes . Wright said it would also undermine efforts to divide UAR .
 Wright feared that Nuri was overreaching in his plans, but that the U.S. and Britain could hardly veto his activities for fear of demoralizing anti-Nasser factions . Wright feared the United States and Britain would not veto his plans .
 Johnston attached summaries of Egyptian news accounts to further illustrate the kind of pressure now confronting the Saudis . Johnston said the pressure on Saudi Arabia has been mounting .
 See Page, Bruce, David Leitch, and Phillip Knightley, The Philby Conspiracy . See Page's book, "Philby Conspiracy," for details .
 This telegram included a complete listing of the positions and appointees to the new UAR government . The telegram includes a complete list of appointees .
 Sarraj was the deputy to Nasser as head of the Executive Council for the Syrian Province . He was the head of Syria's Executive Council in the Syrian province .
 Contemporary analysis of the situation illustrates the degree of uncertainty and concern, particularly over Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia is a major source of uncertainty in the Middle East, especially over the situation .
 Saud’s financial position is so bad that world banks ceased several months ago to honor Saudi letters of credit . World banks stopped honoring Saudi Arabia's letters of . credit . Saud's financial position was so bad, world banks stopped recognizing Saudi Arabia .
 Saudi Arabia's move represents a major setback for their perceived role in containing Nasser’s ambitions . This move on the part of Saudi Arabia represented a big setback for them .
 During much of 1957, many viewed King Saud as the most effective opposition to Nasser . Many viewed him as an effective opponent to the Egyptian leader .
 The British understood that the price of relations with Saudi Arabia required the British to withdraw support for Omani claims to the Buraimi Oasis . The price of the price was that the British withdrew support for Saudi Arabia .
 As Riches put it, the British ‘could not abandon our friends’, meaning the Sultan of Oman . The Sultan was said to be the British’s most powerful ally .
 This underscored the level of desperation for good news to which the administration had sunk . The administration is desperate to find a way to get back on track with the good news .
 The administration faced growing pressure in the press on the Middle East, and it was an election year . Obama administration faced pressure from the press over its actions in the region . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the situation .
 He had no control over events, but was being pilloried for doing nothing to reverse the situation . ‘He had to do nothing to change the situation,’ he said .
 Describing Feisal as ‘pro-Nasserist’ emphasizes the unsophisticated view of the Middle East held at the highest levels, says Feisal . Feisal is described as a 'pro- Nasserist' by Feisal.
 Saud was incompetent and arguably a degenerate as well, but the administration had pinned its hopes on him for leadership . Saud was an incompetent but arguably degenerate, as well as the degenerate .
 Feisal would do more real damage to Nasset’s position in the Arab world than any other Arab leader, says Hassan Nasset . Feisal is not the only Arab leader who would damage Nasset's position, he says . Nasset would be the most powerful Arab leader
 Feisal understood reforms had to be made in Saudi Arabia if the Kingdom were to sutvive . Feisal was a realist who understood that reforms must be made .
 Feisal showed his interest in reforming the Kingdom, and explained what he was doing to reorganize the central administration of the government . Feisal also explained how he is reorganizing the central government .
 He also speculated on Yemen and stated that he hoped there would be no outside interference in Lebanon .
 The Alexandria Consulate used Nicolas Rigos, a Greek businessman with excellent contacts in the Egyptian government, as a sounding board and information source . Rigos is a businessman who has excellent contacts with Egyptian government .
 Rigos believes that the US’s ‘new policy’ was so badly timed that much of the potential benefit was lost . Rigos believed that the U.S. ‘New Policy’ had been badly timed and that the potential benefits of the policy was lost
 Nasser and the Egyptians were in the driver’s seat, the Egyptian president said . The trip was close to the Moscow trip . It was the first time the Egyptians had been to Moscow since Nasser left Egypt .
 In the Sudan, the Umma and Mahdist parties generally followed an anti-Nasserist line . In Sudan, they generally followed the anti-Sardanism line .
 Egypt’s proximity to and historical involvement in Sudan made any form of ‘union’ with the UAR a bedrock point of political debate . Egypt's proximity to Sudan made 'union' with Sudan a key point of debate .
 Sudan had historically opposed Egyptian expansion, having experienced Egyptian rule first-hand . Sudan had history of opposing Egyptian expansion .
 The British, having mid-wifed the creation of an independent Sudan, did not want to see it fall under Egyptian domination .
 The Nasserists had the problem of projecting a Sudanese nationalist image within the context of a pro-Nasserist program . The Sudanese nationalists had to project a nationalistic image in context of Nasserism .
 A February 1958 border dispute with Egypt brought the issue of Sudanese nationalism to the forefront . The Sudanese nationalist movement was formed in February 1958 .
 The NUP took the position that Sudan should not surrender territory . Nasserist elements argued that closer cooperation and coordination with Cairo would avoid such incidents .
 Given the upcoming elections, the PDP and NUP recognized that support for formal union with Egypt would be political suicide . The PDP, NUP and the NUP have said they are against the idea of a formal union .
 The internal political situation quickly turned problematic when the PDP demanded half of the cabinet posts, including the Ministry of the Interior for an ardent Nasserist, Ali Abdal al-Rahman . The PDP also demanded half the Cabinet posts for Nasserists .
 All involved anticipated additional Nasserist attempts to gain influence through the coalition government . All involved were concerned about Nasserists gaining influence in the government .
 Imam Ahmad had ruled Yemen since the 1948 assassination of his father, Imam Yahya . Imam Ahmad ruled Yemen until his father's assassination in 1948 . He ruled Yemen for more than 50 years .
 Imam Ahmad was quite the survivor, most probably because those closest to him were not . Imam Ahmad died at the age of 92 . He was one of the world's oldest men .
 Imam Yahya’s fourteen sons survived childbirth . The list of his sons was compiled by Colin Reid .
 It is instructive on the nature of Yemeni internal politics, ordered from the oldest Ahmad to the youngest Abd-al-Rahman . The Yemeni state is divided by the youngest, the youngest and the youngest .
 Ahmad became the Imam; Muhammad drowned (not easy in Yemen, without assistance); Hassan was exiled; Hussein was murdered . Ali moved to Coventry (no doubt motivated by self-preservation); Abdullah was beheaded; Qazim exiled; Qahir exiled; Mutahir
 Lakeland was given the post of Consul General in Aden and accredited to the Imamate in Yemen . Following his tour in Cairo 1951-1955, Lakeland went on to become a diplomat .
 In November 1955, he traveled to Ta’iz and then on to Hudaydah on the coast to meet with Imam Ahmad . Imam Ahmad.
 There was at the time no real road from either Ta’iz or Hudaydah to the capital in Sanaa . Sanaa is now the Yemeni capital of Yemen .
 Holding court in Hudaydah, the Imam, wearing a large turban, sat on a raised dais .
 When an issue of importance came up, Imam would jot down a few notes on a scrape of paper . Imam would take off the turban, put the note inside the Turban, and put it back on . Imam's notes would be placed on a scrap of paper inside the
 Lakeland missed Thanksgiving with his family in Aden that year because the Imam decided that he needed ‘more exposure to Yemeni culture’ and refused to allow him to depart until early December . The Imam refused to let Lakeland leave Aden until December .
 The British Consul in Ta’iz reported that King Saud had expressed his ‘deep concern’ over the presence of Soviet Communist in Yemen .
 Badr believed that with Soviet arms and Egyptian assistance the British could be driven from Aden and the Protectorate . Badr, in fact, believed that .
 Also known as the Imam’s ‘spy and agentprovocateur’, Hadarani excited Kemp's concern that he and the British government were about to be blamed for something . Kemp was worried that he was being blamed for the deaths of the Imam .
 This being Hadarani’s third visit, Kemp knew that something was definitely up . Kemp knew something was going wrong when he saw the news .
 One of the plotters allegedly had a letter on his person that implicated both the Americans and British . The letter allegedly implicated both Americans and the British .
 In making their way down the street to the palace in Ta’iz, the plotters were intercepted and arrested . The plotters made their way into the palace .
 Yemenis believed that the British and their friends the Americans were behind the coup . The Yemenis of course believed that they were behind it . The Yemeniis believed it was a coup .
 Lintcott wanted to inform the ‘Old Dominions’, get Canada, Australia, and New Zealand on board, and then later follow-up with the 'new’ dominions of Pakistan and India, hoping that they would quietly acquiesce . The 'Old Domin
 This also covered a rumor about the imminent demise of the Imam and Crown Prince Badr Badr’s fall .
 Fearing further pressure from Washington, the British attempted to undermine al-Amri's credibility . Fearing pressure from the U.S. contact to be Muhammad al-’Amri, the Deputy Foreign Minister, the UK tried to undermine him .
 The British argued that ‘’Amri had consistently misrepresented their position in order to get the Imam’s permission to talk to the British. ‘Amri’amri is accused of repeatedly misrepresenting their position to get permission to speak with the Imam.
 Radcliffe, 1995; this is an interesting memoir on his career in the colonial service . Radcliffe's memoir, published by Radcliffe in 1995 .
 He was born to a poor Jewish working-class family in Glasgow . Having previously served in Jidda, he became Ambassador to Saudi Arabia .
 Phillips left Saudi Arabia after the incident . King Feisal ordered his credentials withdrawn and Phillips left the country . Phillips' credentials were withdrawn .
 In early July 1958, the Sultan of Lah’j, a member of the Aden Confederation, defected to the Imam . The Imam was the head of Aden's Aden Confederation . The Sultan defected in July 1958 .
 It was unfortunate timing, occurring only two weeks before the Iraqi coup . The Iraqi coup was two weeks earlier than planned .
 This added to the U.S. view that the British had lost their touch in the Middle East . The U.K. believes the British have lost touch with the region .
 In his memoirs, Eisenhower fails to mention the new policy toward Egypt . Eisenhower's memoirs are published today .
 He refers to Nasset’s political leanings as ‘still something of a mystery’ at the close of the Baghdad summit . He speaks of the ‘troubled and confused atmosphere’ of the summit .
 Pressure had also been building in the press for a new policy approach to the Middle East . Pressure was also building on a new Mideast policy approach .
 A Time for Diplomatic Calm’ , had addressed the issue of Arab nationalism . “There is no reason why the United States should oppose the principle of Arab unity.’
 We appear to support the recent Iraq-Jordan federation; we would not object to an eventual link between Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria . Indeed, we inferentially blessed the Syrian-Egyptian union when we recognized it .
 It might be wise for us to make some mild show of approval for Nasser’s new state in order to demonstrate that it need not look only to Russia for help and psychological sympathy . The U.S. might also be wise to show that it needs not to look only
 We have no objection to Nasser’s confederation or to its extension through peaceful, voluntary adherence by other lands, but we cannot tolerate moves to expand it by conspiracy or force . What we must make plain is that while we have . no objection .
 A Change Toward Nasser' concluded that the new policy ‘gamble’ had a good chance of paying off with better relations and Egyptian gratitude for American assistance .
 The United States only released Egyptian assets after the British and French had done the same . The move was viewed as a reaction to Nasser’s Moscow trip .
 Hammerskjold told Dulles that he believed that the Syrians really had more control over the operations in Lebanon than the Egyptians . The Syrians had control of the operations, he said, in addition to the Egyptian government .
 Hammerskjold felt that Nasser ‘was not happy with the situation’ and wanted it to quiet down and wait for the elections, but that Sarraj and the Syrians had their own ideas about the disposition of Lebanon, he said . Hammerskold said that
 Lebanese 'genius for compromise' would work out, he said . He also felt that, left to their own devices, the Lebanese ‘genius . for compromise’ would work things out .
 This is not to say that Nasser would have been unhappy with a pro-U.A.R. government in Beirut . This was not the case for Nasser, but he would have supported the government of Lebanon .
 President Assad's control was probably limited at this point, but it would have been a major plus . Having supplied the arms and encouraged his new Syrian partners to support the revolt, he probably has limited control, he says .
 In the 1950s, he became ‘disenchanted’ with the ‘Moslem politicians of the worst type’ who used Arab nationalism as a smoke screen for supporting Nasserist ambitions, he said .
 Chamoun's support of the Eisenhower Doctrine and the West in general made him a target for subversion . Nasser probably agreed with Chamoun’s concern over linking Arab nationalism and Islam . Chamoun was a target of subversion for subverting .
 Ambassador argued that the press ignored the ‘unanimous vote’ in the Jordanian parliament for union with Iraq . At the same time, the Ambassador said that the media ignored the 'unanimous' vote .
 In light of pronouncements against Nasser, Pack and Richardson state that the Administration’s position on Suez was hypocritical and inconsistent . They say the Administration's position was inconsistent .
 Washington had overthrown the government of Iran, toyed with subverting Nasser’s government, branded Nasser a ‘Middle East variety of international Communism’, denounced the illegal nationalization of the Suez Canal, and preached the dangers of radical nationalism in the Middle
 When the opportunity to get rid of Nasser’s regime appeared, Eisenhower and Dulles failed to act, for presumably domestic political reasons related to the election of 1956, use of the Israelis .
 Despite Chamoun’s ever shriller calls for support, the U.S. and Britain had managed to limit involvement to clandestine assistance .
 Nasib Metni, an effective, anti-Chamoun, pro-Nasser journalist, was assassinated by Chamoun . Chamoun is prime suspect in the assassination of Metni . Nasib's murder elevated Chamoun to prime suspect .
 This set off an all-out revolt, fully aided and abetted by Sarraj, the Syrian security and intelligence chief, and various anti-Chamoun factions in Lebanon . The Syrian security chief and other pro-Lebanese factions aided the revolt .
 The British wanted to make sure that Canada and Australia were on board if a military operation was mounted . The British government wanted to ensure that Canada, Australia and Canada would be on board .
 It was questionable whether Nasserist Syria was the source of the problem or merely supporting pro-Nasserist indigenous Lebanese .
 Macmillan convinced Eisenhower to offer more support to Jordan and Iraq . Eisenhower also offered more support for Jordan, Iraq and Syria .
 The increased aid included $25 million to cover Jordan’s entire share of the costs of the Jordanian-Iraqi union and part of the Iraqi-Jordani union .
 Assistant Secretary of State for NEA Rountree brought up the idea of replacing Chamoun with General Fuad Chehab . Chehab is the Chief of Staff of the Lebanese Army .
 Those present complained that Chehab had ‘recently shown a lack of political astuteness’ But they concluded that he was one of the few acceptable candidates for president .
 The British were clearly aghast at Dulles’ suggestion of getting the French, Turks, and even Pakistanis involved in any potential Lebanese operation . The proposal was made by Dulles in a FO371/134125 in which the British were not impressed .
 On May 2, 1958, Mr Elath brought up the subject of Nasser with Selwyn Lloyd, the British Foreign Minister . Nasser was killed in the fall of the Arab Spring in Egypt .
 Chamoun accused the UAR of providing the funding and leadership for the revolt . Chamoun made a case for outside intervention in the Lebanese revolt .
 The United States administration had difficulty understanding where he stood in the conflict . As a result, the U.S. administration had to be confused about his position .
 Washington assumed that Chehab, a Maronite Christian, would support Chamoun, but the Lebanese imbroglio was not that simple . Washington assumed Chehab and Chamoun would support each other .
 Dulles believed that Chehab was ‘sitting on his hands’ and not prosecuting the war against the rebels and insurgents vigorously . Dulles: Chehab’s 'sitting' on hands, not prosecuting war vigorously .
 Chehab was afraid that Chehab’s failure to act would necessitate intervention . He feared intervention would be necessary if he failed to act .
 Foreign Service cables are usually written so that the officer in question can always argue that they were with right, or at least partially right . In the Foreign Service, cables are written to be with right .
 In July 1958, A David Fritzlan, Counselor of the Embassy, would liked to have had this dispatch back so that he could better choose his wording . No doubt, in July 1958 .
 Macmillan learned of Nuri’s threat from Assistant Secretary of State Richard Rountree during the 9 June meeting with Eisenhower . Nuri's threat was revealed by assistant secretary of state during the meeting .
 The King has appeared as one bearing gifts to a province which has long been deprived of the fruits of the oil it produces . The King, whether by good management or good luck, has appeared to be bearing gifts .
 Sir Michael Wright recommended the consideration of a ‘crash’ program to build a pipeline from Kirkuk to the Persian Gulf and a deepwater offloading facility on the Fao Peninsula near Basra .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume X, Eighty-Fifth Congress Second Session, 1958 . Executive Sessions . Volume X was Volume X of the Foreign Relations committee .
 Batatu provides an outstanding analysis of social and political movements in Iraq and how these movements and individuals interacted to produce the July revolution of 1958 . Batatu also provides an excellent analysis of the movements that produced the revolution .
 He suggests that ‘one must take a wider view of things’ in order to understand the importance of elements other than the military .
 The events of July 14 must be seen in their natural historical context, CNN.com's John Sutter says . The events must be viewed in the context of their historical context .
 From this perspective, they are the climax of the struggle of a generation of the middle, lowermiddle, and working classes . From this . perspective, it is the . climax of a struggle of the . middle, . lowermiddle and working class, says the author .
 The author believes that this class involvement is what made July 14th a true revolution and not just another coup . The author also believes that the class involvement in the revolution was what made it a real revolution .
 Batatu views the coup as the product of class struggle and irresistible historical forces . There is more than a little hindsight in this evaluation .
 The coup was hardly inevitable; arguably it was the result of bad luck and incompetence . The coup is hardly inevitable, but it was hardly the end result of poor luck or incompetence .
 It came as a big surprise, and it happened in an historical window that allowed it to survive — it endured . It happened in a historical window . It was in the historical window where it happened, and survived .
 It could have easily been just another of the many failed Iraqi revolts . The Iraqi uprising was a failed uprising in Iraq .
 The British were able to reestablish control in Iraq because of the poor planning of the plotters, the lack of a solid military concept of operations, no Axis support, and the escape of the regent, Abd-al-‘Tlah, Nuri Sa’id
 In 1941, there was never any doubt in London of what the coutse of action would be. Also, in 1941, in London there was no doubt in 1941 of what was to do .
 Warner’s short book on the coup in Iraq provides solid insight into the events in 1941 that returned Iraq to the British fold . Warner's short book, The Coup in Iraq and the following campaigns in Iraq, Syria and Syria, is available on Amazon.com.com .
 In 1958, Qasim would argue that his ‘revolution’ was merely the fulfillment of 1941 . He would argue in 1958 that his 'revolution' was merely a fulfillment of the 1941 .
 This provides an excellent overview of the entire Iraqi campaign, including maps, diagrams, and pictures . Includes maps and diagrams of the campaign .
 The military analysis is first-rate and the political analysis is also very good . The political analysis, although more limited, is also good, is more limited .
 Eisenhower made his views clear on the British in the Middle East in his first meeting with Churchill after the election . Eisenhower's views were made clear in the first meeting he met with Churchill .
 Qasim met with ‘catastrophic success’, to quote Donald Rumsfeld, but knew how to deal with it . It should be noted that Qasims met with 'catastrophic success'
 The first dealt with plotting against the security of the state, and the second with ‘corrupting’ the state . Both dealt with plots against state security and 'corruption' The second dealt with 'corrupt’ing the state.
 The new regime made the law retroactive back to September 1 1939 . For added leverage against political enemies, the law was made retroactive to September 1939 .
 The U.S. Embassy believed to be prearranged ‘mob’ action in the immediate aftermath of the coup . This is an interesting analysis of what the United States Embassy believed was pre-arranged 'mob' action .
 Sir Michael Wright provided an excellent narrative of events on 14 and 15 July in Baghdad .
 This telegram included a list of those being tried for crimes against the Iraqi people . The list included those who have been convicted of crimes against Iraqi people.
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume X, 572. Executive Session of the Committee of the Foreign Relations .
 The Pentagon suggested that planning also include also Jordan, Iraq, Syria, and the West Bank . The Pentagon said planning also included also Jordan and Iraq .
 General Twining wanted a coordinated approach that included British, Turkish, and Israeli participation . General Twine wanted to include British, Israeli, and Turkish participation .
 Cooler heads prevailed after Ambassador Frederick Reinhardt pointed out that the scale of Western intervention would probably determine the nature and scale of Soviet reaction . Reinhardt said the scale and reaction of the Soviet reaction would probably depend the nature of the Western intervention .
 During the meeting, Vice-President Nixon urged the President to consult Congress and the Democrats . Nixon was no doubt with an eye toward the 1960 elections, he said . The meeting took place in 1960 .
 Others present were reluctant to do this because they feared continued Democratic criticism . Others present did not want to speak out because of the criticism .
 Western embassies braced for more rioting on rumors of plans for intervention . In Baghdad, the Western embassies are bracing for more riots . Western embassies in Baghdad are also braced .
 Wright and U.S. Ambassador Jernegan sought assurances from the Iraqi security chief . They sought assurances that foreigners and foreign installations would be protected .
 Eisenhower commented that India would have issues with the U.S. providing Pakistan with additional military aid . Remembering 1954, Eisenhower commented .
 Dulles provided a fairly accurate account of what actually happened, emphasizing the impromptu, nowor-never aspect of Qasim’s move . Dulles: “I’m not sure what happened,” but it was an impromptu move .
 Iraqi government more lax about security than weaker governments in Jordan and Saudi Arabia . This accounted for their survival, he said . He added that the Iraqi government was more lax than the weaker governments .
 "There are elements of unity but there are great elements of divergence," says David Cameron . "There is a great deal of unity in the world," says Cameron .
 Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Mier explains Tel Aviv’s intentions of moving into the West Bank in the event of a collapse in Jordan . Mier: Tel Aviv plans to move into West Bank if Jordan collapses in Jordan.
 Randall also discounted U.S. fears that an Israeli seizure of the West Bank would bring a general Mideast war . Randall: Nasser was not ready for a general Middle Eastern war, simply because Nasser wasn't ready .
 The Israeli Embassy tried to explain that Ben-Gurion’s remarks had been off-the-cuff, and did not represent a policy statement . The embassy said that the remarks were off the cuff and not an official statement .
 Nasser could not help but take heed of any Israeli threat and of the bellicose editorials in the Israeli press . Nevertheless, Nasser took heed to any Israeli threats and editorials . Nasser had to take heed to the threat of any threat .
 British discomfiture at not being taken into Washington’s confidence on the initial approach to the Israelis was interesting, says Mr. Wilson .
 Dulles refused to warn the Israelis against intervening in that he saw no reason to ‘save Nasser any territory’ in the event of a coup or revolution in Amman . Dulles said he saw 'no reason to 'save' any territory' in that event .
 The United States refused to be a party to any Israeli occupation . Just the same, the U.S. refused to participate in the Israeli occupation.
 Meroz included the assassination of King Hussein or the establishment of a UAR republic . The assassination of the King Hussein was included .
 Meroz had supported a hard line against the Arabs for his entire two-year tenure in Washington . He had been in the U.S. for two years .
 Dulles discussed the Soviet use of nationalism and colonialism to influence the developing world . Quoting Lenin, Dulles talked about the use of colonialism and nationalism in the Soviet Union .
 He stated that the Soviet Union had three great advantages in the Middle East . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most successful statesmen .
 The West needed oil and had to support the traditional regimes that owned most of it . Second, the West needed to support those who owned the oil, they said .
 ‘The USSR has a real asset in the personality of Nasser — who with great ability and fanaticism has given voice to the extreme pan-Arab movement. Third, ‘the USSR has real asset’ in Nasser’s personality. ‘With great ability
 Nasser is the hero who has walked upon the stage which has been set ...’ presumably by the Russians. ‘Nasser’ is said to have walked on the stage . Nasser: ‘I am a hero. I am a survivor. Nasser has walked
 The article argued that America had ‘no conceivable grounds for conflict with Nasser’ or with Arab nationalism . The article said that the U.S. had no ‘practical grounds’ to engage in conflict with Arab nationalists .
 Barraclough represented a left-of-center view of the situation, but the views from right of center were hardly less critical . The views from the left of center of the debate were hardly more critical .
 The article advocated encouraging moderate Arab nationalism that did not threaten regional stability . The article was published in the Arab Spring magazine Arab Spring .
 See also Edward Weintal , lamenting the loss of Baghdad Pact intelligence files . See also . Edward
 Dulles complained to Lord Hood about a ‘great lack of information’ revealing that the U.S. was unclear about British intensions in Iraq and Jordan .
 Riches’ career in the Middle East and Horn of Africa dated back to 1934 . Riches worked for the BBC in the 1930s and '60s . He spent most of his career in Africa and Middle East .
 Two members of the Legislative Council in Aden, named Bashraheel and Bayoomi, sent their comments to London . Sir William Luce, the Governor General in Aden endorsed the comments .
 These two men were co-opted and supported by the British government in Aden . They were hardly unbiased observers, and hardly unbiased .
 Allen Dulles often failed to get justifiable credit for his long-term projections because of his pronouncements on near-term events . Dulles failed to be credited for his predictions for the future, but he was credited for predicting the future .
 Dulles says meetings between the Emir of Kuwait and Nasser signaled that Kuwait might join the UAR . The Emir merely sought leverage against Iraq, he says . Dulles: "To Dulles, meetings between Nasser and Kuwait might have signaled that . Kuwait was merely seeking leverage against
 The coup in Iraq sparked real concern that Iran might be next, and drove sentiment for the U.S. to more closely align with Tehran as a further guarantee against just such an occurrence .
 The frustration came through when Dulles referred to Nasser as being ‘like Hitler’ and when he described Nasser’s ambitions as ‘insatiable’ despite the underlying desire to work something out with him .
 Sir Charles did not like Rifai’ because he was pro-American and did not take Sir Charles into his confidence . Sir Charles was not happy with the pro-U.S. ambassador .
 Willie Morris said the U.S. was more than happy to let Britain handle Jordanian affairs, until the Glubb dismissal and the termination of the Anglo-Jordanian Treaty .
 Morris believed that Dulles and Eisenhower viewed the survival of Jordan as not only important, but also a realistic possibility . NEA believed that British military support for the Amman regime was only a ‘reprieve’ in the process that would lead ‘inevitably�
 Eisenhower administration expressed its frustration at being handicapped by British colonialism and by Zionism . Eisenhower administration was frustrated by colonialism and Zionism .
 Dulles described Israel as a ‘millstone around his neck’ in the Middle East . Dulles said that ‘except for Israel we could form a viable policy' in the Mideast region .
 British expressed concern that Ben-Gurion would use the Jordanian situation and British over-flights to extract new formal treaty arrangements from the West .
 British encouraged U.S. to resist Israeli demands for a guarantee of Israel’s territorial integrity . Fearing that Washington might agree, the British encouraged the United States to resist . The British encouraged Washington to resist Israel's demands .
 The British urged Washington to maintain a ‘free hand’ on the basis of its current relationship with Israel .
 The modifications included a statement on improving US-Yemen relations to counteract Soviet penetration there . The modifications were made to counter Soviet penetration in Yemen .
 In addition, there was an acknowledgement of the problem of the British in Aden . In addition to the British presence in Aden, there were also acknowledgements of British involvement .
 Crawford discusses in detail the strong Communist opposition to any formal alignment with Cairo . Crawford talks in detail about the strong opposition to such a formal alignment . Crawford also discusses the opposition of the Communist Party .
 Communists viewed a 'federal union' like that between Yemen and the UAR as the proper relationship, and not unification . The Communists went on to state that they viewed a federal union like that .
 The declaration went on to argue that the union between Egypt and Syria had its problems as well . The declaration also argued that Egypt's union with Syria was not the only problem .
 By the end of 1958, Nasser had concluded that the real threat to his leadership of the Arab nationalist movement and to his vision for the UAR lay in Baghdad . Nasser concluded that Baghdad was the biggest threat to Nasser's leadership .
 In reporting on his visit to Baghdad, Rountree stated that the Communist-controlled press attacked with equal ferocity any hint of a Qasim-Nasser or QASimUnited States rapprochement .
 Soviet aid to Egypt and the state of UAR-Iraq relations contributed to a real ‘conflict of interests’ for Nasser, he said . He also stated that Soviet aid contributed to the 'conflict between interests' for the Egyptian leader .
 Rountree also briefly discussed the widely-held belief in Baghdad that the U.S. and the UAR were plotting against the Qasim regime . The Communists fostered the belief that both the United States and the United Arab States were plotting .
 Bill points out that during the Eisenhower years, the U.S. provided over $1 billion in economic and military aid to the Shah’s regime . Bill says the United States helped the Shah's regime .
 He believes the aid allowed the U.S. to control Iranian foreign policy and fostered corruption instead of progress . The aid has allowed the United States to control Iran's foreign policy .
 Bill argues that this aid was the basis for the animosity of Iranian nationalists toward the US . This animosity led directly to 1979, leading to 1979 .
 Bill sees U.S. policy as the source for emphasis or imbalance in assistance to military and security functions . Bill sees United States policy as a source of emphasis in assistance for military, security functions. Bill sees the United States .
 This popularized view of Eisenhower’s policy simply fails to give credit where credit is due . Eisenhower's policy simply failed to give the credit where it was due .
 The Eisenhower administration was as concerned as the Kennedy administration and latter-day critics about the Shah’s insecurities, his paranoia, and his preoccupation with military aid . The Shah was as paranoid as the Eisenhower administration .
 Prior to 1958, Washington pressed for reforms, hoping to see the Shah’s rule evolve into a stable constitutional monarchy .
 After 1958, the fear of another ‘Baghdad’ placed the initiative increasingly in the hands of the Shah, making it more difficult to ignore his priorities . The fear of a similar 'Baghdada' placed the Shah in his hands, making him more likely to ignore
 The British made a parallel approach, and Washington cautioned the U.S. Embassy not to leave the impression with the Shah that London and Washington were joining forces against him .
 Iranian government executed members of the Fedayan-e-Islam in 1951 . They were arrested, tried, and executed for the assassination of General Ali Razmara .
 Razamara's assassination led almost immediately to the assumption of power by the National Front under Musaddiq . Razamara’s assassination led to the nationalization of foreign oil assets, nationalisation of foreign assets .
 By early 1956, the Shah felt strong enough to open a broad investigation of events surrounding the assassination and to arrest those responsible . The Shah opened an investigation into the assassination of the Shah in 1956 .
 Rumors floated around Tehran that the swift trials, the executions, and the death of one witness ‘shot while trying to escape’, were to cover up ‘palace’ contacts with the Fedayan prior to Razmara’s assassination .
 This indicated the Shah’s growing confidence, because the government had up to then been unwilling to tackle the problems associated with an investigation of the assassination . Despite pressure from the military, the government was unwilling to investigate the case .
 NSC staff expressed concern that any British or French action against Nasser over Suez would lead to more Soviet pressure on Iran . NSC was concerned that any action by Nasser could lead to further Soviet pressure .
 Shah busily stoked fear in Washington of Soviet efforts to ‘neutralize’ Iran . In order to obtain more aid, the Shah stoked fear of Soviet attempts to 'neutralize' Iran .
 Bowling would become an important figure in USIranian policy in the Kennedy administration . Bowling would later become a key figure in U.S. policy in Iran . Bowling was a key U.N. diplomat in the 1960s .
 The Embassy discussed a growing list of complaints against the Shah’s government, related to rising prices, free elections, and foreign influence . In this report, the Embassy discusses a growing number of complaints .
 Iranians voiced strong criticism that the infrastructure improvements were aimed at projects useful to the Baghdad Pact and the military alliance with the West . Iranians also voiced strong criticisms that the projects were useful to Baghdad Pact .
 The old 'conservative' families would be hardest hit by these reforms, say experts . They point out that the old ‘conservative’ families would have been hardest hit .
 Many senior officials in the Iranian government shared this view of the Shah . The Shah was the prime prime minister of Iran, who ruled the country for decades .
 Ali Amini attempted to convince the Shah to work through his ministers so that they would take the blame for failures . Amini was the Iranian Ambassador in Washington, Iran's ambassador to Washington .
 He was determined to take charge personally and to run the government himself . He said he wanted to run his government personally .
 Amini attributed the Shah's refusal to take advice to the monatch’s ‘fear’ of most prominent Iranians, Amini . Amini said the Shah was afraid of most of the most prominent Iranian .
 Amini learned a great deal about what U.S. officials wanted to hear vis-a-vis stability in Iran and the Shah’s rule . Amini was Ambassador to Iran in the 1970s and '80s .
 "To some degree, by telling official Washington what they wanted to hear, the Ambassador constructed his own American constituency," he said .
 The formidable image of Reza Shah dominates him and he seeks to imitate it, yet his personal characteristics inhibit him . He seeks to emulate his image of the Shah, but his personal qualities inhibit him, says Shah .
 He has no personal staff he feels he can trust and his most frequent contacts are with a corrupt ineffective Court group, which seeks to influence him in its own personal behalf .
 The apparent vacillations and indecision, real and contrived, may in fact have worked in the monarch’s favor . Although these interpretations of the Shah became the standard fare of his Western detractors, they may not have been true .
 Shah was attempting to placate political constituencies as diverse as the make-up of Iran itself . The Shah was trying to appease political constituencies, including the people of Iran .
 The Shah managed to keep his opposition divided and his foreign benefactors placated . Whether by design or merely scrambling for survival, the Shah kept the opposition divided . The Shah was pushing for modernization in Iran .
 Even the end of the dynasty in 1979 was something of an accident, that could have gone in any direction, including that of the Peacock Throne’s survival . The end of this dynasty was an accident .
 Pegov was Soviet Ambassador to Iran until 1963, and later became Ambassador to India during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 . Pegov served as Soviet ambassador to Iran during the Iran War of 1963 .
 Landlord who supplied the land, the seed, the water, and the ‘beasts of burden’ received 80 per cent of the proceeds while the laborers received only 20 per cent . Landlords who supplied land, seed, water and the 'beasts' of burden'
 The Shah’s schedule included visits to Taiwan and Japan prior to his arrival in Washington .
 The Pentagon asked for guidance from the State Department . The concern was so acute that the Pentagon requested it be asked for help .
 NACPM, 788.11/6-658, 1, in which a military program had been agreed upon for the Shah . The Shah's military program was agreed upon by the Shah's regime .
 It included naval demonstrations, Strategic Air Command briefings, and plane rides . The event was held in honor of the U.S. Strategic Air Force .
 This telegram details some of the problems that the Eisenhower administration had with the Shah’s unrealistic requests for military aid . The telegram was sent to the White House in 1953 .
 Shah asked for two destroyers despite the fact that the commander of the Iranian Navy privately told the Embassy that he could not crew more than one corvette .
 Shah then began to talk about Nasset's Philosophy of the Revolution as a parallel to Hitler’s Mein Kampf . Nasset was the philosopher of the revolution . The Shah then spoke of the philosophy as parallel to the writings of Hitler's Meinkampf .
 Dulles’ fascination with comparing Hitler and Nasser belied a more sophisticated grasp of Nasser’s predicament . Their processes in this regard were interesting, and Dulles' fascination with Nasser was interesting .
 The impression emerges that Dulles’ theories in conversations with other leaders were more the arguments of a lawyer attempting to sway a jury than they were his own personal view of the situation . In fact, Dulles' theories were more like the arguments he was trying to sway the jury than
 The Defense Attaché also reported that Reza Afshar, the President of Iranian Airlines, had alerted the American in charge of pilot scheduling to prepare a contingency plan for evacuating the royal household .
 Afshar stated that the army was not loyal to the Shah or its senior commanders, and that trouble from junior officers was anticipated . Afshara stated that trouble was anticipated, and the army would not be loyal to Shah or senior commanders .
 There was genuine concern that elements from the 1954 coup might be active again and that the Iranian security service might not know what was going on . The Iranian government was concerned elements from that coup might have been active again .
 The British were also concerned about Iranian army-unit distribution . In addition, the British were concerned about the Iranian army unit distribution .
 They feared another opportunity like the one in Baghdad, in which no loyal units had been available to support the palace . The palace feared it would be another opportunity .
 Tehran expected increased tensions and problems with the Qasim and with whatever government came after it . In the short-term Tehran expects increased tensions with Qasims .
 Sir Roger recited the rumors of dissatisfaction in the officer corps and the outspoken opposition to the regime on the street . Sir Roger then recited reports of dissatisfaction with the army .
 This lengthy and alarming report reflected concerns, British and American alike, about the future for the regime . The report was published by the U.S. State Department .
 Shah's concerns served to support further demands by the Shah for military and economic assistance . These concerns were supported by further demands from Shah .
 At least one Arabicand Farsi-speaking Foreign Service officer should be trained in Kurdish, a memo says .
 The Baghdad broadcasts complemented broadcasts from the UAR designed to attract Kurds to a broader nationalist base . The UAR broadcasts were intended to attract Kurdish nationalist nationalists .
 In a meeting with the Kurds in Baghdad, Eagleton pointed out that the word ‘assimilation’ should be avoided . The United States wanted to point out to the Kurdish leadership, Mulla Mustafa, a Barzani leader, and Shaykh Latif of Sulay
 President Eisenhower and Prime Minister Nehru met in 1950s and 1950s . Eisenhower and Nehru were the prime ministers of India and India respectively .
 State Department officials were concerned that Eisenhower would have difficulty engaging the notoriously difficult to-talk-to Nehru and that ‘problems might result .
 Nehru was notorious for sitting silently for long periods even in one-on-one meetings . Nehru sat silently for a long time during meetings .
 Nehru made unintentionally amusing and at the same time ‘disparaging’ remarks about Nuri Sa’id and Iraq . Nehru also made some unintentionally amusing remarks .
 The Indian aggravation with the Baghdad Pact and its implications for arms and Pakistan mirrored the Egyptian annoyance over Baghdad as a competing center of Arab power . Here again, the Indian aggravations with Baghdad Pact .
 Desptie Nehru’s concern over the closing of the Suez Canal, ideologically and geopolitically he, like Nasser, had problems with the Western alliance system . Nasser had a similar problem with the West .
 President Eisenhower attempted to get Nehru to bring up the subject of Krishna Menon . During the meeting, President Eisenhower tried to get him to discuss Menon's death .
 Menon had become a target of Western wrath after he voted against UN resolutions condemning the Soviet Union for the invasion of Hungary . Menon was a target for Western wrath because of his vote against the resolution .
 Nehru knew the complaints that would follow any mention of Menon, and skillfully avoided the subject . Nehru: "I'm not sure what I'm going to say about Menon"
 The United States wanted Britain to take the lead on the Kashmir issue, promising support in the UN Security Council . The U.S. promised support in a vote on Kashmir in Kashmir on Kashmir .
 Noon came expressly to line up support for the Pakistani position on a plebiscite in Kashmir . Noon came to line-up support for Pakistan's position on Kashmir .
 Noon claimed that the Indians were using a Nazi-trained officer, Allama Mashriqi, to train pro-Indian irregular troops in the region . Noon was supposed to be a brief courtesy call to Under Secretary Herter .
 London viewed Washington's assessment and planned course of action as broadly similar to London’s position . But the British saw no upside to leading the charge .
 Of London was ‘anxious to know what happens in the meetings’ so that they could influence U.S. policy .
 The cartoon appeared in Murasoli, a pro-DMK Tamil-language weekly, on May 10, 1957 . It was published in the pro- DMK Tamil language weekly, which published the cartoon .
 Gandhi predicted that Jinnah would drop his demand for Pakistan . Gandhi predicted in the first, Gandhi predicted he would drop the demand . Jinnah was assassinated in the early 1900s in a gunboatboatboat attack .
 Jinnah's image appeared next to a map of India showing an independent Pakistan . Jinnah’s image was shown next to an image of an independent India in the second image .
 DMK leader would drop his demand for a separate Dravidian state . Annadurai would drop demand for separate state of Dravidians .
 The fourth displayed a map of India with a separate Pakistan and Tamilnad with Annadurai looking on . The map was shown to a separate India with an independent Pakistan and an independent Tamil Nadu state .
 Tamil Madrasis saw a parallel with Jinnah and the Muslims . Talbot did not invent the comparison .
 Ambassador Langley emphasized his excellent rapport with President Mirza and the latter’s willingness to listen to the his advice .
 Washington’s response provides an even more instructive view of the trepidation in the U.S. government concerning the situation in Pakistan . Washington's response to the situation is an example of the growing concern in the United States about Pakistan .
 A close relationship with any particular politician or group could place the U.S. on the wrong side if the government changes . Because of the unstable situation, a close Embassy relationship could be risky .
 Anti-British attitudes in Pakistan resulting from partition manifested themselves during the Suez crisis . Anti-UK attitudes resulted from partition of Pakistan .
 First the populace wanted the Pakistani government to do something substantive to show solidarity with Egypt . First the government wanted to do a little more than show solidarity .
 They demanded withdrawal from the Baghdad Pact, or ejection of Britain . Lastly, they demanded a withdrawal from Iraq, or the ejection from the Iraq Pact .
 American demands that the French, British, and Israelis withdraw temporarily raised the U.S. image . American demands raised the United States image .
 Talbot: Rise in “Pan-Islamic feeling’ foreshadowed more animosity toward Britain and new challenges to Pakistan’s pro-Western foreign policy . Talbot anticipated no overt action by Pakistan, he said .
 The issue of impartiality on the part of Mountbatten continued as a hotly-debated subject .
 The Pakistani Times claimed Mountbatten was in ‘active command’ of Indian troops confronting Pakistani and Muslim tribal forces in Kashmir in 1947 .
 This assessment was optimistic given the circumstances, and the overall tone tended to reflect an interest or perhaps even a bias on the part of Talbot . The overall tone of the interview with Talbot was optimistic .
 U.S. Ambassador Horace Hildreth, whose daughter was maried to Mirza’s son, departed Pakistan in the summer of 1957 . Mirza's daughter was married to his son .
 Hildreth had a real affection for Pakistan and avoided negative evaluations of the situation . He avoided negative reviews of Pakistan .
 Ayub Khan, Chief of Staff of the Pakistani Armed Forces, convinced Allen Dulles at the CIA and DOD officials that India threatened ‘containment’ policy .
 Ambassador Langley may have had excellent access to the administration, but Ayub had his own Washington advocates . Langley had access to President Ayub's White House .
 Real concern existed about the problems India faced in its the Second Five-Year Plan . Given the anti-Western, pro-Soviet elements in India, real concern existed .
 New Delhi had already reduced the plan’s goals, but without immediate additional foreign aid it would fail . New Delhi's plan would fail without immediate foreign aid, says New Delhi .
 MEA 50 AMS/59. Dalal, First Secretary] to MEA New Delhi, 15 April 1959’, INA, MEA . Dalal was the first secretary to the MEA to New Delhi .
 This letter, with its attached memorandum, clearly underscored the nature of the relationship between the U.S. and India . The letter, along with the memorandum, was sent to the White House .
 Bunker presented a letter from President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Nehru explaining U.S. reasons for intervention in Lebanon on the heels of the coup in Iraq and asking for ‘moderation’ in Nehru’s public comments on the situation . Bunker presented the letter from
 Nehru rejected the idea that Nasser was behind the coup in Iraq or instability in Lebanon . Nehru: Nasser had nothing to do with Nasser's involvement in Iraq .
 Lebanese Christian President Chamoun had attempted to amend the constitution and succeed himself as President . He stated that it appeared that the more direct cause of the Lebanese problem was a political breach of faith on the part of Chamoun, .
 Nehru bluntly stated that the important issue was to get U.S. troops withdrawn as soon as possible . Nehru: "The important issue is to get American troops withdrawn"
 U.S. support for Pakistan left Nehru with an ‘uneasy mind’ about the lengths to which the United States would go in pursuit of its Cold War objectives .
 Malcolm Kerr, in his excellent essay The Arab Cold War, devotes a scant dozen pages to the discussion of the events of 1959 and 1960 . Malcolm Kerr's essay, The Arab Winter War, is published by The Arab Spring .
 He focuses instead on the revolutionary events of 1958, and then begins again with a more detailed narrative in 1961 . He focuses on events in 1958 and 1961 .
 To be sure, he hits the highpoints of 1959-1960, but his treatment skims over much of the complexity and confusion of the period . He hits the highs and lows of the '60s and '70s .
 Kerr provides little detailed explanation of this or its longer-term consequences . Kerr's explanation of the situation is not detailed enough to explain it further .
 The author focuses primarily on the bilateral issues between Syria and Iraq, and particularly on the radically different mutations of their Ba’thist governments .
 From Revolution to Dictatorship capture the situation in Iraq during the period by using the coup attempts against Qasim as the backdrop for their historical narrative . But the complexity and continually shifting nature of the overall situation is alluded to but largely missed .
 The story is much the same for Charles Tripp’s 4 History of Iraq, although the author does provide limited additional insight into the external as well as the internal players . The author provides limited additional insights into Iraq's history .
 Anthony Nutting’s Nasser is the best biography of Nasser . Although somewhat dated, Nutting's Nasser was the best .
 Nasser was at the center of the political storm, and thus a biography of the Egyptian leader touches most of the events of 1959-1960 . Nasser's biography touches all the events that occurred during the Nasser regime .
 Nutting's book is a biography of Nasser and focuses on Nasser, not the situation in the region . Still, the biography is a biopic of the Nasser regime .
 Phillips Talbot, General Andrew Goodpaster, William ‘Bill’ Lakeland and Walt Rostow, each used the term at one point or another to describe the U.S. evaluation of Nasser . Nasserist wave was sweeping the Arab Middle East .
 This work provides excellent detail on the ups and downs in the Egyptian-Soviet relationship .
 Heikal was certainly a witness over the years to this rollercoaster ride between Moscow and Cairo . The two countries have been at odds for decades .
 Despite his prejudices, his views have to be taken seriously within the context of other official documents on exactly what transpired . Despite his prejudice, he should be taken to account for his views, he says .
 Heikal’s views on the events of the period provide a quasi-official record of the positions of the Egyptian government and must be weighed and evaluated against what actually occurred, just as official U.S. and British government records are evaluated .
 Nasser chided Khrushchev pointing out that he had been a party to persecuting and executing numerous Communists . He called ‘very bad men’ because they had deviated from an acceptable political course .
 Hakki was an Egyptian Information Service officer attached to the Egyptian Embassy in Washington, DC from 1957 to 1958 . Hakki worked for the Egyptian embassy in Washington DC .
 In early 1959, he joined the staff of A+Ahsram, where he worked closely with Muhammad Heikal . He worked with Muhammad Sheikal in the early 1960s .
 Hakki stated that Anwar Sadat tapped him to head the Information Ministry, but the appointment was cancelled following Sadat’s assassination . Hakki said he was tapped to head Information Ministry in 1973, but appointment was later cancelled .
 He was brutal — witness the slaughter of the Hashemites and mutilation of Nuri Said, as compared to King Farouk and General Neguib departing into exile .
 All of this reflected parochialism indicative of an Iraqi, the antithesis of progressive, Arab nationalist regimes .
 These differences would have been much easier to overlook had there been a political meeting of minds . These differences, of course, would be easier to ignore .
 The Syrians opted for unity believing that they will be equal partners with Egypt . They joined the unity believing their own surrender of freedom was but a prelude to the general realization of an Arab entity .
 There has been a debate about whether Sarraj was acting on his own,e.e. without Nasser’s knowledge, and whether Nasser really would have taken the risks associated with a coup attempt against Qasim .
 It strains credulity to believe that Nasser did not know and approve of Sarraj’s preparations for the coup against the Qasim regime . However, it is unlikely that he knew and approved of the coup .
 Given Nasser’s predisposition for intrigue and skullduggery, it absolutely lacks credibility that he did not know and approve of Sarraj's actions and plans .
 Neither Nasser nor Sarraj knew the exact timing or exercised tactical control, but both were behind it . Since the Iraqis in Mosul acted prematurely, obviously neither knew the timing .
 The withdrawal would also remove a major issue that Nasser could use in attacking the Qasim regime, while at the same time paving the way for more Soviet support . Although not stated, the withdrawal would remove the issue .
 Britain still had troops and Royal Air Force personnel at Habbaniya Air Base in Iraq in March 1959 .
 Ambassador Trevelyan immediately stated that Britain would now want to remove its military personnel as soon as possible . The ambassador said Britain would want the military personnel removed from the UK .
 At this meeting of the NSC, the resignation of John Foster Dulles was announced . Dulles' resignation was announced at this meeting . The resignation of Dulles is announced .
 British Mission NATO to FO to FO, 8 May 1959, FO371/141011, 1.1.1 .
 Nasser also used the speech to cast doubt on Qasim’s credentials as a revolutionary . Nasser credited Abd-al-Salaam al-Aref as the leader of the 14 July coup .
 Egyptian reliance on Soviet military hardware and spares referred to Soviet hardware . This was a reference to Egypt's reliance on the Soviet-backed military .
 This telegram is a memorandum of aconversation between the U.S. Ambassador in Iraq, Jernegan, and Qasim . The United States ambassador in Iraq is in Iraq .
 Nutting had just returned from Iraq after a round of meetings with Iraqi officials . Nutting has just returned to the country to meet with officials in Iraq .
 Jawad Jawad, the Iraqi Foreign Minister had raised this issue with Trevelyan, who discounted it . Jawad said the Iraqi foreign minister had raised the issue .
 Jawad also raised it with the Pakistani Ambassador, who naturally blamed it on an Indian diplomat . Jawad: "The Indian diplomat was responsible for the incident."
 Trevelyan believed that Jawad’s concern was the end result of rumors emanating from the talk about a UAR/Lebanon/Jordan antiCommunist front . The UAR and Lebanon are believed to be involved in the anti-communist front front .
 One of the assassins, 22-year-old Saddam Hussein, would flee to Cairo, where at UAR government expense he earned a university degree . Saddam Hussein would also flee to Egypt, where he would study in Cairo . UAR: Saddam Hussein was killed in the fall of 1991
 The information on the current situation in Baghdad came from Australian Embassy discussions with William Lakeland , Jordan-Iraq desk at the State Department .
 Lakeland pointed out that once responsibility for the assassination attempt had been firmly established there would be ‘serious trouble’ internally .
 There is little doubt that most observers would have largely agreed with this assessment . But there was little doubt about this assessment of the outcome .
 In this lengthy report, they denigrate Qasim’s contribution to the revolution, giving others including Abd-al-Salam Al-Aref, more credit . The report also gives credit for the revolution in Syria .
 Batatu's work is an unrivaled tome that deals in minute detail with the revolution and its aftermath . Batatu’s work is a tome of minute detail about the revolution, its aftermath and aftermath .
 It is hard to imagine another work in more detail on any set of political events in recent Arab history . The work has been published on the Arab world's Arab Spring .
 Batatu carefully covered the internal political conflicts in Iraq . He did not have available at the time some of the documentation since declassified by the U.S. and British governments .
 Qasim authorized Foreign Minister Hashim Jawad to convey to the U.S. Ambassador the message that he was bringing the mainline Iraqi Communists to heel . It is clear that Qassim authorized the move .
 This lack of access hardly detracts from the internal political story, but more recently released sources place events in a broader context . Sources say events have a broader impact on the country's future .
 In Od Social Classes, 844, Batatu states that Jawad was a Sunni, born in 1911 . He was born a Sunni .
 Speculation existed in relation to the Mahdawi’s reaction to the commutation of the many of the conspirators’ sentences . Speculation was raised about the reaction of the commutations of the sentences .
 Mahdawi, the chief judge and Qasim’s brother-inlaw, refused any comment . He reduced his own profile significantly in the aftermath of the incident .
 Nuruddin Khahala was Vice-President; Fakher Kayyali was Minister of State . Faid Zainuddin was Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs . Nuruddin was also a Vice-Minister of State and Minister for State .
 This work was the first attempt at a quasiofficial explanation of the coup in Syria . It was first attempt to explain the coup .
 Sartaj was in prison in Damascus, having had the misfortune to time his return from Cairo just before the 28 September coup . He was in jail in Damascus .
 Heikal’s book was an attempt to lay the blame at the feet of anyone but the Egyptian government and Nasser . Nasser was the prime minister of Egypt in the 1970s .
 Written in a typically Arab newspaper editorial style, the book presents series of questions and answers to explain the coup . Written in typically Arab style, it presents questions and answer to explain coup .
 The power accumulated by Sarraj was not for personal gain but for the defense of Arab unity . He points out that King Saud attempted unsuccessfully to bribe King Saud, and he points out .
 The book explains the years 1959 and 1960 as ones in which Nasser and the loyal supporters of Arab nationalism and unity in Syria, of which Sarraj was the most prominent, attempted to preserve UAR unity against the forces of imperialism .
 The idea of Arab unity was part and parcel of Syrian attempts to free itself from imperialism, they say . They then argue that the union with Egypt was a natural step in this progression .
 Authors quote voting returns on the various referendums on unity . For support, these two authors quote voting results on the referendum on unity in the UK .
 This was an apparent attempt to combat criticism that the union showed signs of disintegration at a very early stage . The union has been criticised by some for its early disintegration .
 They recited the list of Syrian calls for unity, including 1955 and 1956 . They also recited a list of Syria's most recent calls to unity .
 This work and Heikal’s, although focused on explaining the split between Syria and Egypt and justifying the Egyptian position in this matter, provide an interesting insight into how the Egyptians chose to interpret events of 1959 and 1960 .
 These are period pieces providing a window on Egyptian attitudes toward Syria . They also reflect the inability of Egyptians to understand the problems that the UAR administration created for itself in Damascus in Syria .
 This also provides an insight into Nasser’s own inability during this period to really understand Syrian resentment, and thus the dangers posed to the union . This also in some sense provides an . insight into his own inability to understand Syrian resentments .
 In Nasser, 266, Sarraj probably had the most telling response of all . Sarrraj: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to play that character in this way."
 When asked if he had been too heavy-handed and repressive in his tactics in Syria during the 1959-1960 timeframe, he stated that ‘allowed a free hand’ the coup would never have occurred .
 As early as September 1959, rumors abounded that because of Sarraj’s prickly relationship with Nasser and clashes with Amer, he would be promoted to Vice-President and moved to Cairo .
 Virtually all of the British information came through the American Consul Reams, in Damascus, in Syria .
 This particular report came from the American Embassy via the Regional Information Officer in Beirut, who had visited Damascus, Syria . The report was made by an American Embassy official in Beirut .
 Given Jordan’s precarious and highly vulnerable position, Salibi provides very little substance and even less analysis of the situation . Salibi has been criticized for his comments on the situation in Jordan .
 The author's presentation of what he calls “The Difficult Years’ overlooks Hussein’s contributions to his own problems in the propaganda war with Nasser, and Jordanian concerns about the sincerity of U.S. support for his regime .
 Influential elements in the U.S. government viewed Jordan as a lost cause and a waste of aid money . Jordan was considered a failed cause by the United States government .
 This study will attempt to better place Jordan within the context of the Arab Cold War . This study attempts to place Jordan in the Middle East .
 The situation in Jordan differed from that in Iraq in that the U.S. Embassy in Amman took a mote antagonistic line toward British pressure to support the Jordanian regime .
 Ambassador Jernegan ‘reflected too closely’ London’s view of the situation in Baghdad, the U.S. State Department told the British Foreign Office . The State Department actually informed the UK Foreign Office that the ambassador had ‘relected too close’
 Jernegan’s British view of the situation and, in general, his recommendations ran counter to the views and policy direction that the Eisenhower administration wanted to pursue . The Eisenhower administration sought to pursue a more aggressive approach .
 Following his tenure in Amman, he was posted to Aden as Governor-General . He has been in Aden since 2007 .
 This occurred during the border wars in which Yemen received Egyptian support . Yemen received support from Egyptian government during border wars .
 He was there during the Yemen Revolution of 1962 and the introduction of Egyptian troops into the Yemen civil war . He was in Yemen during the revolution and introduced Egyptian troops to Yemen .
 The British were relieved when they learned that there would be no ‘switch’ in sources of supply . The British government was relieved when it learned there would not be no 'switch'
 The British made a concerted effort to see what kinds of military equipment were on the list prepared by the Americans in order to protect orders for high-dollar equipment that the Jordanian government had already made .
 They were very concerned that the United States survey would not include radars . The U.S. would not have included radars, they said . They said they were concerned about the lack of radars in the survey .
 Jordan had placed an order for an expensive Marconi radar system, and intended to pay for it with U.S. aid . Jordan placed the order for the expensive radar system with the United States aid .
 By deleting radar from the list, the U.S. military mission placed the onus on the Jordanians to come up with the money or the British to provide aid . The United States military mission deleted radar from its radar list .
 British radar was purchased with U.S. aid dollars . It was part of a large-scale sale of British radar .
 British concern about the rapprochement between Jordan and the UAR came from conversations in Washington with William Lakeland, the Iraqi desk officer in Washington . British concern comes from discussions in Washington, Washington .
 Lakeland’s close relationship with Nasser and the Egyptians during the negotiation of the 1954 treaty for the removal of British troops from the Suez Canal Zone tended to raise British suspicions about Lakeland's presumed pro-Egyptian sentiments . Lakeland and Nasser had a close relationship
 Nasser, Amer, and Heikal were guests at Lakeland’s apartment on al-Gazira island from time to time . Lakeland was on a first-name basis with Nasser during the period 1952-1954 .
 The British were highly concerned because a link with Nasser would severely weaken their influence in Amman, Amman . They believed it might, they believed, start a change of events that would result in the loss of their petroleum interests in Iraq .
 Morris pointed out that Lakeland was sometimes ‘out of line’ with the powersthat-be in the State Department . But that clearly there was a debate going on about the degree of support Nasser’s anti-Communist campaign should receive .
 Johnston described internal scenarios that he believed could occur in the absence of the King and Prime Minister . Johnston described a series of internal scenarios he believes could occur without the King or PM .
 Bedouin element in the army and the armored brigade that they controlled. All centered on the Bedouins . The armored brigade controlled .
 Johnston feared repression by Bedouin army units or replacement of the al-Rifai’ government with a military dictatorship would lead to a Nasserist revolt . Johnston feared that the Jordanian army might take the Qasim route and overthrow both al-rifai and the
 See also ‘British Embassy Amman to the FO, 16 March 1959, PRO, FO371/142102, 1.02 March 1959 .
 This informant stated that when approached by the group Nasser had offered his assistance . This informant said Nasser offered his help to the group .
 Johnston worried constantly about playing second fiddle to the U.S. Johnston worried that he would have to play a major part in the team's success . Johnston: "I'm not going to be able to play my part in this country's biggest sporting event."
 He saw every new development as a threat to British interests in Jordan . He was well aware of who really paid the bills in Jordan, and saw every development .
 Rifai’ went so far as to state that if al-Shara was arrested or replaced that he would resign from the government . He would resign if he was arrested, replaced or arrested .
 Informed speculation can make a very case for the possibility that Lakeland knew about Shara’s plotting against the Hashemite regime through U.S. intelligence .
 This information was undoubtedly available to MI6 through liaison contacts or its own sources within the Jordanian security services . MI6 was undoubtedly aware of the information from its liaison contacts .
 This is a reference to Sulayman al-Nabulsi, the former pro-Nasserist Prime Minister in Jordan . He was the former Prime Minister of the Nasserist-era Jordan .
 They believed they could use the Israelis and Jewish organizations to guard against a change in U.S. policy toward Jordan . They believed that they could . use Israel and Jewish groups to . guard against change in United States policy .
 Johnston was extremely concerned about the British position in Jordan, particularly with reference to the Jordanian military . Johnston said he was concerned that the British military was in the region .
 At a dinner party in May 1959 the United States military attaché accused the British of undermining Prime Minister Rifai' because he was too pro-American, and replacing him with the pro-British Majali .
 Johnston reported that the American military attaché stated that he was sick of paying the bills in Jordan while the British got the credit . Additionally, Johnston also said that the U.S. military attach .
 Johnston stated that he was concerned that the Americans were saying these things to the Jordanians, and perhaps even to the press, and asked for instructions on any action the he might take . Johnston said that he would take action against the Americans .
 His paranoia about growing American influence and his fundamental dislike of any who disagreed with him, particularly if they were American, would also emerge in the Kennedy administration .
 A few months earlier, London had had its fingers burned with regard to the situation in Iraq when the American Ambassadot’s judgments had been called into question because they were too optimistic .
 Instability in Jordan has become a widely-followed regional topic . British Embassy in New Delhi felt to explain to Indian government the nature of proposed British and American aid to Hashemite kingdom .
 The issue of Majali’s ‘liberal nature’ centered on the fact that the two perpetrators of the bombing plot apparently had known anti-government views and had previously participated in anti government activities .
 William ‘Bill’ Lakeland was the Iraq-Jordan Desk Officer from the summer of 1958 to summer of 1960 when he became the political officer in Baghdad . William 'Bill' Lakeland worked in Baghdad from 1958 to 1960 .
 Lakeland viewed the Jordanian regime as a nuisance and a waste of foreign aid, a view widely-held view in the foreign-policy establishment . Lakeland views Jordan as a "nuisance"
 The United States desire for good relations with Nasser had not gone unnoticed in Amman . The U.S. desire for a good relationship with the Nasser regime has not been unnoticed in the region .
 Turkish Ambassador to the U.S. Melih Esenbel said many Jordanians blamed the United States for the assassination of Majali . Esenbal: Many Jordanians blame the country for Majali's assassination .
 U.S. believed that only the United States had the actual influence in Cairo to deter Nasser’s aggressive intentions toward Jordan . They believed only the U.N. had the influence in Egypt to deter the Egyptian regime .
 They surmised that the United States had condoned Nasset’s activities . As a result, they surmished that the U.S. condoned the activities .
 Jones responded that while the allegations were absurd, the U.S. would do everything in its power to calm the differences between Jordan and the United Arab Republic . Jones responded to the allegations that the allegations are absurd .
 Americans and British asked the Shah of Iran to use his influence with King Hussein . The concern had reached such a high point that the Shah used his influence to influence Hussein .
 The fact that Talal, Hussein’s father, was certifiably mad was a point lost on few in the Arab world, and almost no one in Jordan . Talal was known to be mad, but few in Jordan knew that he was mad .
 President Eisenhowet’s memoirs describe the meeting with Nasser as ‘a highly interesting experience’ while not even mentioning a meeting with King Hussein that occurred at the White House after the UNGA .
 The British had managed to get the United States committed to the idea of maintaining the Jordanian state . Now they wanted to limit their exposure to the U.S.
 For London, despite its old ties to the regime, Jordan had never been the real issue . The heart of the matter was Iraq, the IPC and Kuwait, says London . London's old ties with the regime have never been a problem .
 Total United States aid to Jordan from 1951 to 1960 totaled $188 million . Total U.S. aid from 1951-1960 was $188million .
 Erhard attended a dinner on the same evening as the Dillon-Lloyd meeting . Erhard attends a dinner at the same time .
 West Germany has become the largest commercial supplier to Jordan . Both sides press the Germans on the issue of aid, pointing out that West Germany is the biggest commercial supplier .
 Erhard replied that he ‘thought something would be possible’ along the lines of $5 to $7 million in direct aid . Erhard said he thought something would have been possible' along with the $5-7 million aid .
 The Chairman of the Deutsche Bank, Karl Blessing, also present, concurred that they could probably manage the problem .
 The author offers a set of chapters that provides a wellorganized domestic and international context for the period of the Arab Cold War . The author of the book offers a well organized and well-organized context .
 The chapter on ‘Colonel Nassetr’s New Way’ gives an overview of the impact of Nasserism on the Saudi world . Although brief, the chapter gives a brief look at the impact on the country .
 It briefly discusses the role of Egyptian teachers in Saudi Arabia and the grassroots influence that they exerted on the Kingdom . First, it briefly discusses how they exerted their influence on Saudi Arabia .
 Lacy also takes a look at the exact circumstances in which the decision to place Feisal in charge of the government occurred . Lacy looks at the circumstances surrounding Feisal's appointment .
 Lacy states that the meeting occurred immediately after Nasser’s radio broadcast announcing Saud’�s attempt to bribe Sarraj and wreck the Syrian union . Lacy says the meeting took place after the broadcast of Nasser's radio broadcast . The meeting occurred after Saud�
 No reference is made to an Arab Cold War, but the substance of these two chapters, and to a degree also the ‘OPEC’ chapter, place the internal situation in Saudi Arabia in the broader context of the Cold War period . The 'OPEC' chapter places the
 It deals with the period of the Arab Cold War in terms of the problems besetting the Saudi royal family, during the transition from Saud to Feisal . The film is based on the transition between Saud and Feisal, which is called Saud .
 The book also provides a useful outline of the controversy surrounding Tallal ibn Saud . Tallal's attempts to secularize the Saudi state along Nasserist lines .
 David Holden, a correspondent of The Sunday Times, was shot and killed by unknown assailants on a trip to Cairo on December 7, 1977 .
 Richard Johns then took over the partially-finished manuscript and completed the work .
 The authors treat the 1959-1960 period as the beginning of more disciplined rule by Feisal following the erratic actions of King Saud in 1957 and 1958 .
 Feisal’s rapprochement with Nasser sharply reduced the shock of the Iraqi coup of 1958 . They pointed out that Feisal's . relationship with . Nasser . sharply reduced shock of Iraqi coup .
 The book provides a useful look at the transition of authority in Saud Arabia during the late 1950s and early 1960s . But not much analysis of the broader context that drove these events, it says .
 Feisal defended the revolution in Iraq prior to his falling out with Qasim . Like Nasser, Feisal supported the revolution . Feisal was a key figure in Nasser's regime .
 Feisal mirrored UAR thetoric and attacked Qasim . After the Egyptian-Iraqi break, Feisal attacked Feisal . Feisal was killed by Feisal, who was killed in the fall .
 The Times argued that diplomatic relations with Egypt would bring diplomatic relations between Saudi Arabia and Egypt . The UAR was strong enough for The Times to argue that Egypt would have diplomatic ties with Saudi Arabia .
 The Saudis’ retention of Azzam Pasha, the former Secretary General of the Arab League, reinforced this view . The Saudis' retention of Pasha reinforced the view, he says .
 An effort through the UN was underway to find a compromise on the issue of Buraimi . The UN was working on a solution to the issue .
 Beaumont finally decided that Ayub could assure the Saudis of Macmillan’s desire to see a settlement . London wanted Ayub to point out the process of solving this problem was a long one, and one that had proven intractable for eight years .
 Truman administration often backed away from Mideast positions under Israeli pressure . Truman administration had a tendency to back away from a position on the Middle East, Truman said .
 This work argues that Eisenhower faced no such handicap in pursuing Middle East policy . Eisenhower was elected by a landslide with the vast majority of Jewish voters supporting the Democratic candidate, Adlai Stevenson .
 Eisenhower embargoed $26 million in aid to Israel in reaction to Suez . Threatened to end tax exemption for contributions to American Zionist organizations, in order to pressure Israel to accept UN observers .
 The authors take a highly negative view of Israel’s ability to influence U.S. policy . The authors say Israel has little influence in the United States policy .
 Both give Eisenhower high marks for his unwillingness to budge in the face of Israeli and American Zionist pressure . Eisenhower issued an ultimatum to Israel to either withdraw from Sinai or face a total cutoff of U.S. monetary and aid support .
 The authors present a picture of frantic and fanatical American Zionist political efforts to force the President to back down, and laud his refusal . The authors also laud the President's refusal .
 The Balls argue that a comprehensive Middle East peace was the only real protection against Soviet inroads . The Balls say the Eisenhower administration was obsessed with Communist influence in the Middle East . They say a comprehensive Mideast peace is the only protection .
 The authors state that the death of John Foster Dulles weakened the drive for a solution in the region . Additionally, the authors say that Dulles' death weakened the efforts to find a solution .
 This work is largely an indictment of Israeli and American Zionist influence on the policies of the U.S. toward the Mideast .
 Israel used Holocaust politics and the cry of anti-Semitism to deflect any real attempts to solve the problems in the region, argues the Israeli government . It argues that, fundamentally, Israel used the Holocaust politics .
 The authors view Eisenhower as the last American president to pursue U.S. national interests in the Middle East . While critical of Arab missteps, the authors say Eisenhower was the last to pursue American interests in Mideast .
 Many of the quotes used in this short chapter came from Neff’s Warriors at Suez . Many of these quotes were used in the short chapter .
 Neff obtained the notes from the notes and minutes of meetings made by Eisenhower’s chief of staff Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster .
 The overall work is clearly anti-Zionist, anti-Israeli and highly concerned with what it views as the undue influence of Israel and the American Jewish community over U.S. foreign policy . It is also highly concerned about what they view as the influence of the Israeli community over
 Mark Tessler, in A History of the IsraeliPalestinian Conjlict, makes little mention of the 1959-1960 period . He argues that despite Israel’s military performance during the Suez war, it was Nasser that reaped political gains in the region .
 Tel Aviv continued to view Nasser as the primary threat, the period is hardly mentioned . Other than brief comments about the impact of the Syro-Egyptian union on Israel, there are few mentions of the period .
 Nasser's papers included a list of all Nasser’s transgressions in the region . These papers were published in the Arab Spring in the 1970s .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs prepared the paper for a visiting representative of the Italian Prime Minister .
 The Ministry liked it so much that they handed it out to other Western embassies and legations . The Ministry was so pleased with the project that it was handed out to others .
 From its very inception, the Israelis viewed the UAR as the primary threat . From the very inception of the Israeli government, Israel viewed it as a primary threat to the U.S. UAR was viewed as a threat to Israel .
 The Israelis predicted that Syria was only the first step, and that attempts to include Lebanon and Jordan would surely follow . They predicted that Lebanon, Jordan and Lebanon would also be included .
 Alteras's work examines the complicated relationship between the Eisenhower administration and Israel . Alteras’s work is a good narrative, examining the complex relationship between Eisenhower and Israel.
 Hoever, it does not discuss the last two years of that administration, and the author makes sweeping judgments that are in fact incorrect in that regard, Hoever says . Hoever: The author's sweeping judgments are incorrect, and that's not the case .
 As we have seen, Nasser and not Israel was the chosen vehicle for stemming the Communist tide in 1958-1960 . Nasser not Israel, but Nasser was chosen vehicle to stem Communist tide .
 Washington viewed Israel as a policy albatross, an impediment to Western interests in the Mideast . While useful from time to time, Washington viewed it as an albross . Israel was a key ally of the U.S. in the Middle East .
 Between 1959 and 1960, the Israelis gained something of a break from violent Nasserist attacks . Israel saw its principal benefactor as what the British called the U.S. ‘the rich uncle’
 Alteras fails to ask hard questions about issues like Ben-Gurion’s fear of a Soviet attack . Alteras failed to ask questions about the fear of an attack on the Soviet Union .
 The high probability, almost a certainty, is that Israel had little or no fear of a Soviet attack . Israel used Soviet bluster in an attempt to gain a policy goal, namely a security guarantee from the United States .
 This is an interesting work that is reasonably good on facts up to 1958, but woefully short on analysis . This is a good work, but short of analysis, says author .
 Israelis and Zionist organizations held antipathy for Byroad . He outspokenly supported a solution to the Palestinian refugee problem . He refused to criticize Arab efforts to use the refugees as a political issue against Israel .
 Byroad saw no difference between Zionists using the stateless-person argument to justify the founding of Israel and Arab leaders using the plight of Palestinian refugees for their political ends .
 Early years remain sketchy due to the non-availability of documentation . Cohen does a solid job of outlining the highpoints in the decision process that made Israel nuclear power .
 Cohen relates the story of how the U.S. intelligence community had information that could have led them to discover Israel’s intent in the 1958-1960 timeframe, but failed to put it all together .
 Cohen use of interviews provides an interesting dimension to the story . Cohen's use of interview interviews provides a new dimension to his story .
 It is particularly useful in understanding the process by which intelligence organizations seem to overlook the obvious due to an imperfect intelligence ‘fusion’ process .
 NPIC says evidence offered by NPIC consisted of a large site with a security fence around it, a large road network, significant provision for electrical power and, most suspiciously, what appeared to be an attempt to ‘hide the dirt’ from the excavation . Cohen points out
 While it had all the earmarks of a nuclear site, there was no way of telling what the exact nature, scope and purpose of the site would be . No way of knowing what the nature of the facility would be.
 NPIC personnel briefing senior government officials tended to be very conservative in their presentations, according to the report . NPIC people briefing senior officials tend to be more conservative in presentations .
 They presented only the facts and offered little speculation about a given site . The site is located in the Mojave Desert .
 'probable' nuclear site was going about as far as NPIC personnel would go in a senior briefing . Saying that it was a ‘probable’ nuclear site is not the norm for senior officials in the U.S.
 Had the President or Strauss been privy to the private conversations at NPIC then their concerns would have no doubt been heightened considerably .
 The information received in early 1958 from all sources did result in a focused attempt to get an answer from the Israelis . In any case, the information received by all sources led to an effort to find out what happened .
 James Jesus Angleton was one of the primary reasons that the ‘dots’ went unconnected . Angleton’s death was the result of a lack of contact with the public .
 Angleton was an orchid-growing, bizarre figure given to regular mole hunts and counter-intelligence theories so convoluted that many thought him mad . Angleton wielded enormous power in the agency .
 He carried compartmentalization to the point that it was virtually impossible to share information with others . "He was very compartmentalized, compartmentalizing, he said, and he was very secretive"
 He saw himself as the ultimate authority on counter-intelligence and on the Israelis, he said . He said: "He also saw himself . as an ultimate authority"
 In the former persona, he failed miserably in detecting one of the greatest double agents of that period, Kim Philby . In the past, he has been accused of being a double agent in the past . He failed to detect the double agent of that time .
 Philby was stationed at the British Embassy in Washington and was Angleton’s British counter-intelligence contact . Philby worked for Angleton in the CIA during the Cold War .
 Angleton never suspected that Angleton was a Soviet spy . Angleton found out that he was also a spy . He was never suspected .
 Angleton believed that his contacts were so solid that Israel could not undertake a major effort in any national security area without him knowing about it . Angleton thought that Israel would not be able to undertake major national security efforts without his knowledge of it .
 Either Angleton knew about the nuclear weapons program and did not tell anyone in Washington, or once again, he was fooled by his own secretive arrogance .
 Its objectivity has made it something of a lightning-rod for Israeli government criticism . It debunks many of the myths about the Jewish state .
 Recently, a private individual paid for the translation and publication of this article .
 Shlaim does not go into depth in discussing the Isreali nuclear weapons . Because it is a very broad work, it provides an overview of the period 1959 to 1960 .
 This is unlike the detailed account of the program in the Alteras book . The Alteras account is unlike that of Alteras' Alteras .
 Membership placed Turkey on a level that none of the other countties in the Middle East or South Asia could match . Turkey is now one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 NATO was a real military alliance designed to fight a war with the Soviet Union . NATO was formed in 1950s to fight Soviet Union with Soviet Union. NATO was created to fight against Soviet Russia .
 The Baghdad Pact, CENTO, and SEATO were organizations intended to maintain the pro-Western orientation of their members at a minimum cost in economic and military aid . Iraq was one of the most successful military-industrial nations in the world .
 Turkey’s membership of NATO provided vast quantities of military aid and arms . In contrast, Turkey's membership of the alliance provided vast amounts of arms and weapons .
 Since the Sputnik coup of 1957, Khrushchev had periodically crowed about Soviet missile superiority and the Soviets’ ability to attack the United States . Since the 1957 coup of the Soviet Union, the U.S. has been at odds with the Soviet leader .
 The administration took this threat seriously, particularly when political opponents capitalized on it . Obama administration took the threat seriously .
 Senators Stuart Symington and Henry Jackson bombarded the administration with accusations of Soviet superiority . The two senators accused the administration of being superior to the Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower administration used available means of collecting information on Soviet missile development . Eisenhower administration was concerned about Soviet missile capabilities .
 Two sites in north-eastern Iran and the two in Pakistan, including U-2 operations, provided vital information Soviet test facilities in Central Asia and on missile deployment . The two sites in Pakistan and Iran were also used to provide vital information on missile deployments .
 These sites collected telemetry data and optical information on Soviet missile capability . These sites contributed directly to the defense of the continental United States .
 The airfield at Peshawar in Pakistan was also a center for U-2 operations . Peshawar airfield was used to launch U.2 missions .
 Much of the U.S. policy toward Iran and Pakistan was predicated on the sites . Given the limited technology of the day, the United States felt that those sites were critical .
 Krishna Menon supported the move to modernize the Indian armed forces with Soviet arms because he feared a coup . Arora states that Menon was concerned about a coup against the Indian government . Menon's support for the modernization of India's armed forces came from the Soviet arms .
 Menon may have genuinely feared the military because senior commanders detested him and many had served the British . While this was no doubt a rationalization in large part, there is some indication that Menon feared the army .
 The intelligence estimates, concerning the Shah, reflected the administration-wide overreaction to perceived intelligence failures, of which Iraq was viewed as a massive example . The estimates reflect the administration's overreactions to perceived failures .
 Many feared that the Badhdad Pact intelligence files lost to the Qasim government provided a bonanza for the opponents of Western interests in the region .
 Intelligence estimates lurched in the opposite direction, taking a more pessimistic view of the situation . The intelligence estimates are based on the data .
 The intelligence community wanted to be able to say that the administration had been warned . Should Iran succumb to a revolution or coup, the intelligence community would say that .
 Warning of impending implosion in Iran was in vogue in 1959 . Warning of disaster and listing all the potential reasons for implosion was in style . Iran was ruled out of existence by the West in the 1950s .
 On June 4, Ambassador Rundall, in Tel Aviv, cabled that the Israelis were once again asking for British help in getting Tehran to recognize Israel .
 Iran has always rejected the idea of a nuclear deal with the U.S. President Barack Obama . The Iranians have always rejected it .
 Israelis viewed the Shah’s negotiations with the Soviets in January and February as an indication of Iranian insecurity and isolation, according to the report . Israel was preparing another attempt at recognition of the Shah .
 British in Tehran took the view that such a move by the Shah could happen and might be a positive thing . The Shah was Shah's prime prime minister in Iran .
 U.S. Ambassador Jernegan says he intends to recommend sale of arms to Iraq . British Ambassador Trevelyan says he wants arms sales to go ahead despite a downturn in relations with Iraq .
 Trevelyan stated that the Iraqi army constituted the only stable, reliable force, and the arms might cultivate pro-Western sentiment . Treveleyan said that the arms could be cultivated by the arms .
 Trevelyan argued that because the actual delivery dates are well into the future, the arms agreement could always be broken if the situation in Baghdad worsened . He said that because of the agreement, it could be broken .
 Ambassador Wailes wanted the British to approach the Shah, as a courtesy, before the official announcement of arms sales to Iraq . The British wanted to reduce the potential for an angry reaction .
 Iranian talks on a non-aggression treaty with the Soviets had collapsed . Wailes expressed concern after Iranian talks with the Soviet Union collapsed .
 Wailes was no doubt concerned that arms sales to Iraq would spark even greater demands for arms from the Shah . The Shah was worried arms sales would lead to even greater demand from him .
 Washington informed all posts in the region that Prime Minister Macmillan and President Eisenhower had talked and that the United States concurred with the British plan to sell additional arms to Iraq . NACPM, 787.00/3-1459, 1 .
 The United States has no intention at this time of selling further arms to Baghdad . The circular stated that the United States had not raised the issue of previously-approved military assistance . The U.S. had no intention of selling more arms to Iraq .
 Report stated that the Shah was probably trying to get a limited agreement with the Soviet Union to reduce pressure on his regime from that quarter while not rupturing his relations with the United States . The report said the Shah wanted to get the deal to reduce the pressure on the regime from the Soviet
 SNIE concluded that an agreement with the Soviets would be a major propaganda coup, but that they only real casualty would be the Baghdad Pact arrangement . SNIE: Baghdad Pact would be Baghdad Pact, but only the real casualty was the Baghdad pact arrangement .
 This document offers the best blow-by-blow account of what actually transpired between the Soviets and the Iranians in February 1959 .
 At this point pressure from the Western powers and Baghdad Pact allies forced the Shah to reconsider . The Shah was forced to withdraw from the country .
 The Soviet delegation contacted Moscow and on the specific orders of Chairman Khrushchev gave in on both points . In a surprise move, the Soviet delegation called Moscow and gave in .
 The Russian pointed out the ‘dangerous consequences of Iran’s actions’, accused the Shah of ‘bad faith’ and left for Moscow the next day . The Shah left the Shah in Tehran the following day .
 Washington feared a ‘Kurdish land-bridge’ from the Soviet Union across Turkey and Iran into Iraq . The U.S. feared a 'land-bridge' from the USSR across Turkey, Iran and Iran .
 The Iraq Desk concluded that the immediate target of any instability fomented by the Soviets would be Iran . Iran was the focus of the Iraq Desk .
 The Iraq Desk followed up with a report on the Kurds that outlined a brief history of the issues and conflicts .
 The report did not have an addressee on it, but given the content, it probably resulted from a request at the Secretariat level . The report was probably prompted by a request from the secretariat .
 It provides an interesting overview and assessment of the situation in Iran as well as that in Iraq . It also provides an overview of the country's situation in Iraq and Iran .
 The Kurds of Iran were ‘quiescent at present’ and ‘still entertain a traditional loyalty to the institution of the monarchy’ for the most part .
 Report says poor quality of Iranian administration coupled with endemic corruption bred resentment . But, the report added, it added that the poor quality had bred resentment among Iranians .
 Herter also mentioned that there were issues yet to be ironed out with regard to the wording of the bilateral agreements . Herter said that there are issues still to iron out regarding the wording .
 Iran wanted the agreement to state that the United States would deal with an attack on Iran as if it were a U.S. attack on United States territory . Washington, of course, declined .
 Pakistan wanted to include any attack upon Pakistan. Most interestingly, Pakistan wanted any attack on Pakistan. Pakistan wanted the attack to be included in the list .
 It was an obvious attempt to enlist U.S. aid in the event of an Indian attack, it said . It was the obvious attempt .
 The wording was rejected, but it clearly demonstrates the linkage between Iraq 1958 and relations on the subcontinent . That wording was also rejected . It clearly demonstrates that Iraq 1958 was rejected .
 Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan wanted to see the Baghdad Pact adopt a formal military commandstructure . Turkey and Iran, Pakistan wanted the Baghdad pact to be formalized into a military command structure .
 Shah wanted something to show for his cooperation that included increasing his own stature in the region and at home . The Shah wanted to show that he had achieved his own success .
 Ayub also pointed out that, in his view, British opinions vis-a-vis Baghdad Pact policy were suspect . Ayub says British opinions on the Baghdad Pact are suspect .
 Ayub obviously saw British involvement at the policy level as an impediment to greater U.S. military support for Pakistan . Ayub wanted greater support for the United States in Pakistan .
 London wanted to protect its economic and commercial interests in India . The Baghdad Pact was not the way to do it, says historian Peter Bergen .
 See also ‘Letter DOD to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs , 20 February 1960 .
 DOD reported that the Shah had greatly overstated his requirements and the potential threats from Afghanistan and Iraq . DOD said he overstated the threat posed by the Shah to the U.S.
 The cost of the Shah’s proposed military aid would exceed $600 million, the report said . The report added that the cost would be more than $600million .
 This dispatch contains a very detailed look at both parties and the principal politicians in each party . This dispatch includes a detailed look into both parties .
 The assessment in Washington and at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran agreed that land reform had only succeeded in alienating the landowners in Iran . The assessment is based on the fact land reform has only failed to alienate landowners .
 FO371/140856 chronicles the impressive British study and tracking of land-reform efforts in Iran and the practical effects of the program . See also the files contained in .
 Shah faced increasing pressure from many of his most loyal supporters . It charts the demise of fundamental reform as the Shah faced increased pressure .
 Some argued that Bakhtiar’s plan in fact constituted preparations for a coup . Some argued it was preparation for a military coup .
 The Shah survived the turmoil of the failed election . Just that fact that the Shah survived some surprised some . The Shah is now the prime minister of Iran .
 The Soviets made another proposal for a ‘demilitarized zone’ on the Iranian border . The United States and Britain were trying to come up with an argument against such an arrangement .
 The Soviets kept Washington and London on edge with a barrage of proposals to the Shah . The Shah was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 He, quite naturally, made certain that Western allies knew about them . He made sure that the Western allies of the Middle East knew .
 Langley asked that his name not be put on Mirza's calendar because local newspapers published the calendar . Langley was in Mirza’s office almost every day, and asked that it not be on his calendar .
 Other U.S. agencies, not under the control of the Ambassador, were quietly reassuring Mirza and Ayub of United States government support .
 Despite some misgivings in Washington, the Ayub takeover obtained quick American support . Ayub took control of the Soviet Union in 1972 .
 Bhargava provides a useful overview of the development of Pakistani politics . He analyses the link between the ‘controlled democracy’ of the Ayub regime and the outright military dictatorship of later regimes .
 His analysis explains the development of Ayub’s concept of political participation . His analysis also explains the concept of participation in politics .
 Ayub had an approach to political parties that was similar to Nasset’s, i.e. it progressed from no political parties to officially-sanctioned ones that could be controlled by the state .
 Ayub hoped to bolster central authority without being constrained by parties and politicians with provincial bases of support . The Origins of Pakistan’s Political Economy of Defense , . 303: ‘Ayub wanted to bolster . central authority’
 Goodpaster stated that in the same vein the Iranian military was viewed as the key not only to the Shah’s rule but also to continued pro-Western policies in Iran . The military was seen as key to Shah's rule and the Shah's pro-western policies .
 Military rule would be perhaps the only viable option if Shah was unable to govern effectively . Military rule was the only option in the Shah's rule .
 The military coup in Turkey on 27 May 1960 fell into the same category as had Ayub’s . Ayub's coup was the same type of coup that took place in 1960 . The coup in 1960 was the first to take place in Turkey .
 Ziircher points out that military elements had planned the coup for years . He says the coup had been planned for years by military elements in the country .
 Tiirkes had no confidence in the politicians or the political process, and demanded reforms in the shape of curbs on political activities . Tiirke had demanded curbs to political activities in order to make political reforms .
 Key Cold War allies could not be allowed to succumb or be incapacitated by irresponsible political elements . ‘Temporary’ military rule was both acceptable and desirable, writes David Frum . The U.S. military ruled in the Cold War era .
 In the discussion of what to do about Iraq, Nixon wanted a ‘Mossadegh type operation’ to overthrow Qasim and put pro-Western military officers in power . In the 1970s Nixon wanted to overthrow the Iraqi government .
 The U.S. agreed not to increase aid to Pakistan above the levels of the 1954 agreement . The Indians would view modern weapons as a serious breach of faith .
 The use of ‘revolution’ to describe the coup was mote sleight-of-hand to improve Ayub’s image . Ayub used the phrase to improve his image .
 When Dupree wrote this article, he was working for Phillips Talbot, Executive Secretary of AUFS and soon to be Assistant Secretary of State for NEA in the Kennedy administration . It should be noted that when Dupree was writing this article he was .
 Rostow was interviewed by Rostow at the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library in Austin, Texas . Rostow's book was published in 2001, and Rostow is credited with the book "Rostow"
 President Eisenhower and Walt Rostow apparently spoke after the latter had begun to work with the Kennedy campaign . This conversation was apparently between Eisenhower and Rostow . Rostow had been working for the Kennedy administration .
 It seems to provide another indication of the interchangeability of key Eisenhower and Kennedy advisors and policies . The Eisenhower-Kennedy relationship seems to be an example of their interchangeability .
 Ayub argued that Pakistan could only maintain de facto neutrality with regard to Israel by continuing its policy of non-recognition of Israel .
 Pakistan’s official position was that Israel was a foreign provocation that exacerbated Arab problems, and as such should not be recognized by Pakistan . Pakistan's official position is that Israel is a foreign provocation .
 This was directed at weakening the government of Pakistan and creating leverage in the border areas . This was aimed to weaken the government and create leverage in Pakistan's border areas, officials say . The government has been accused of using its influence to weaken Pakistan .
 The situation was so acute that the United States and Britain discussed the possibility of tripartite talks with Pakistan on the Pushtunistan issue . The U.S. and Britain have been in touch with Pakistan for decades .
 Khrushchev viewed the Pushtunistan issue as a means of pressuring and punishing the Karachi regime for its cooperation with Washington . The issue was meant to punish Karachi for cooperation with U.S.
 The Soviets called for a referendum by the tribes in the border region on the creation of a state . The Soviets call for the tribes to create a state of their own .
 Russian pressure on Ayub had the side benefit of generating pro-Soviet sentiment in New Delhi . This Russian pressure led to the death of Ayub, but it did not lead to a pro-Russian sentiment .
 The border flare-ups between Pakistan and Afghanistan evolved into an issue that was addressed in a meeting between President Eisenhower and Prince Naim, the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan .
 President encouraged Naim to seek an agreement with Ayub and align Afghanistan more closely with Pakistan and Iran . Naim was also encouraged to seek a deal with President Ayub .
 Recent defeats of Afghan Lashkara by Pushtun tribesmen have raised the possibility of a wider war . The regular armies may be involved in the fight, perhaps involving the regular armies .
 Washington feared that attempting to remain neutral in the dispute had hurt its relations with Pakistan . It wanted to avoid that development by not making any moves that would appear to legitimize Pushtunistan claims .
 Washington feared that a Soviet aid offensive in India, targeting high-visibility projects, would be a propaganda bonanza for Moscow . Washington feared the aid offensive would be an aid offensive that would be propaganda for Moscow.
 The aid situation came under review in an attempt to identify ‘useful’ but ‘more visible’ development projects for which the U.S. could get more political credit . As a result, the aid situation was under review .
 Concern existed that the diffusion of U.S. aid throughout the Indian economy reduced the ability of the Embassy to ‘get across’ the extent of United States aid to the average Indian. The embassy was concerned that it would not be able to get across the full extent of the
 Neville’s work on the Sino-India border dispute that led to the border war in 1962 is the most comprehensive and best-balanced on the subject . Neville's work is the best balanced view of the dispute between China and India .
 Nehru and En-Lai exchanged significant correspondence and discussed the matter on more than one occasion . As the author points out, the Indians and Chinese, specifically Nehru, specifically .
 Neville says Nehru raised the issue of the currency of Chinese maps of the area . Neville also suggested that the Chinese change their maps to reflect India’s view that the McMahon Line accurately represented the border .
 Chinese were ceding nothing unilaterally, and expected negotiations prior to a confirmation of borders . In short, the Chinese were expected to confirm their borders with the Chinese .
 The idea of negotiation over territory flew directly in the face of the Indian policy since 1950 . It is the first time the Indian government has tried to negotiate over territory .
 The obvious implication of negotiations with the Chinese would set a precedent and provide Pakistan ammunition on the issue of Kashmir . The obvious specific implication of the negotiations would set the precedent .
 Mullik was the director of the Indian Intelligence Bureau from 1950 to 1964 . Mullik served as the head of the bureau between 1950 and 1964 .
 This work provides an excellent insight into not only the actual events and relationships leading up to the Chinese War, but also the Indian governmental processes . While obviously colored by his own interests and opinions, this work provides a great insight into the Indian government .
 The lack of any real bordermonitoring in the regions adjacent to Tibet in the mid-1950s resulted in New Delhi learning of the Chinese penetration through the local rumor mill .
 It took almost 18 months, from the confirmation of the Chinese presence to March 1958, for a formal report with recommendations to be issued by the Bureau .
 Mullik states that Nehru was motivated by the need to maintain security on the northern frontier . Mullik: Nehru also wanted to keep security in the Ladkah area, particularly in Ladakh .
 The central government hoped that sympathy toward the Dalai Lama would increase its support among Buddhists in Dikkim, Nepal and Bhutan .
 In what were planned to be ‘fortnightly’ letters, Nehru lays out his position on the revolt in Tibet . Nehru: ‘Fortnightly letters’ were intended to be letters of support for Tibet .
 He states that while he is sympathetic with the Tibetans, the situation is fundamentally an internal Chinese matter . He says India has no case for direct involvement in Tibet .
 He also states that the Indian government is not suppressing stories of the uprising to reduce the pressure on his government to get involved . He says the government is suppressing stories to reduce pressure on the government to take action .
 It is a clear attempt to be viewed as sympathetic, while maintaining separation from the dispute . The move is a move to appear sympathetic, but not to be seen as a political party involved .
 See also ‘British Embassy WDC to FO, 4 December 1959’, PRO, FO371/141264, 1, in which appears Eisenhowet’s answer to a question .
 The President replied that no one really knew where the border or the McMahon Line was . No one really knows where the line is, he said .
 President appeared to agree with Chou En-Lai and Mao Tse-Tung . Ironically, the President agreed with Mao's views . Mao's view of Mao's Maoism is similar to Mao's of Maoism .
 The date on this letter is somewhat confusing because Gopal refers to the letter dated 17 December from Chou in a footnote . Gopal (in Nehru, Volume III, 127) refers to another letter dated December 17 December .
 The source of the British copy of the letter was the Chinese Chargé d’Affaires in London, raising the possibility that the Chinese published the letter in advance of any Indian announcement that they had actually received it .
 Foreign Office says letter was a 'clever move' designed to place China in a favorable light . This supports the Foreign Office’s view that the letter is a ‘clever’ move .
 Nehtu clearly expected the Chinese rebuff; ‘If we get a favourable reply to our proposals, then the question will arise of my meeting Chou En-lai.’
 The CRO is ‘encouraged’ by the Soviet attitude on the dispute and the fact that they have not automatically sided with China, the letter says .
 The text of the memorandum pointed to the fact that the Indians were also pleased with the Soviet position . The text also pointed out that the Indian people were pleased with their support for Russia .
 Akbar argues that the responsibility for the Chinese war and subsequent debacle lies squarely with Nehru . Akbar: 'The responsibility for this war and the subsequent debacle is squarely with him'
 The perception from London failed to take into account the possibility of the Chinese ploy for bargaining purposes, while later Indian biographical accounts did . It is interesting that the perception . from London did not take account of the possibility .
 This memorandum indicated that Menon was feeling the political pressure, and some degree personal insecurity, from criticism leveled at him in New Delhi . The memorandum indicated Menon felt political pressure .
 He downplayed any differences with the Indian armed forces Chief of Staff, General Thimayya . He said that ‘he could not understand the criticisms made of him’ over his handling of the military .
 He also stated that he was willing to accept the Chinese incursion in the Ladakh area, but that the McMahon Line should be held everywhere else . He also said he would accept the incursion, but not the Chinese line .
 He was highly concerned about his personal position, requesting that the British Secretary of State support his contention that British unwillingness to see him on his last trip was a result of scheduling problems and not British ire .
 Gopal’s view of the events leading to the Chinese war is highly critical of Nehru . He is critical of his faith in Krishna Menon and his theoretical views on Asian cooperation . Gopal's view of events leading up to the war was highly critical .
 It had yet to dawn on the administration that India might go to the Soviet Union for modern military equipment . India had not yet dawned on the government that it might have gone to Russia for modern equipment .
 Speculation was that if the U.S. did not sell the equipment to the Indians, then the Indians would buy it from the British . The speculation was that the Indians might buy the equipment from the United States .
 The Kennedy used the dubious claims of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev about Soviet missile superiority over the U.S. The Kennedy campaign turned the claims into a campaign issue . The Kennedy administration used the claims of the Soviet Union's missile superiority .
 Allen Dulles, Director of the CIA, flew to Hyannis, Massachusetts on July 30, 1960 to brief Kennedy on intelligence matters . Dulles was the CIA's Director of Intelligence and Director of Operations .
 Dulles referred Kennedy’s questions to the Pentagon rather than putting the ‘missile gap’ issue to rest, as the Nixon camp wanted .
 From Nixon’s perspective, his friend Allen Dulles had let him down, and the non-existent ‘missile gap’ lived on as a campaign issue . From Nixon's perspective, the 'Missile gap' was an issue of his own .
 Attacks on Eisenhower policy in the Middle East and South Asia were of the same ilk, if not so prominent, as were attacks on Eisenhower .
 All contributed to a strategy that painted the U.S. as bogged down and strategy-less in a world where the Communists were gaining on all fronts .
 Iran Desk requested excerpts from campaign speeches to use with the Shah of Iran to show that all the candidates were committed to confronting Soviet aggression . The Iran Desk asked for excerpts from speeches to be used in the campaign .
 Nixon quote came from U.S. News and World Report, 13 June 1960, 51 . Nixon quote comes from United States News & World Report .
 The Kennedy campaign carefully avoided mention of Eisenhower policy in the post-1958 environment . The facts did not fit their campaign strategy. Kennedy avoided mentioning Eisenhower policy .
 There was virtually no difference between the policies advocated for the Middle East and South Asia by Senator Kennedy and those that had been in effect, to one degree or another, since early 1958 .
 New Secretary of State Christian Herter had a close association with a principal Kennedy foreign-policy advisor, Chester Bowles . Those post-1958 policies did not make good campaign issues for Herter .
 As a result, differences had to be almost manufactured, or the focus would have to be kept on the turmoil of the 1955-1958 period . Differences must have been almost manufactured in the 1950s and '60s .
 This quote is an excerpt from a statement given by Senator Kennedy in Democratic Digest, May 1960, 4 . Senator Kennedy was a member of the Democratic Party's Democratic Party .
 Rostow was an important advisor to the Eisenhower administration on foreign economic development from 1953 to 1958 . Rostow served as a key advisor to Eisenhower administration from 1953 until 1958 .
 Rostow stated that during Herter’s tenure there was ‘no difference’ between Republican and Democratic foreign policy goals . Rostow said there was 'no difference' between GOP and Democratic policy goals in foreign policy .
 Rostow: The amount of foreign aid included in the last Eisenhower budget was so substantial that the incoming Kennedy administration did not have to ask for more than Eisenhower had provided . Rostow says the Kennedy administration didn't need to ask more than the Eisenhower administration had provided.
 President Kennedy, in common with his brother Robert, ‘had a rather deep sense of skepticism about the Foreign Service and the State Department.’ In this account, Bowles states that President Kennedy had a ‘rather deep sense . of skepticism’ about the foreign service and
 Freedom of Communications — Final Report of the Committee on Commerce, U.S. Senate. Freedom of Commerce . Final Report was released by the Committee of Commerce, United States Senate .
 S.R. 305, 86th Congress. Prepared by the subcommittee on communications, pursuant to S.C. 305 .
 A Political Life, 248, provides an unflattering picture of Krishna Menon’s eccentricities and erratic behavior . Menon's eccentricities include eccentricity, erratic behavior and eccentricity .
 Brown's explanation smacks more of a rationalization for Nehru’s lapse in judgment . While this was true, it was true . Brown’ explanation was true.
 It also overrode Nehru’s personal political interests, and ultimately the interests of India, Nehru said . Nehru's decision to take India to avenge his own political interests over the years .
 Lengyel’s short, superficial biography of Krishna Menon was published in 1962, and thus forms something of a ground-level view of him .
 It also contains a brief explanation of Menon as the focal point of media ire, particularly in the United States .
 Lengyel's description of Menon’s relations with the press continued with further observations on the British press as well . The point well made is that Menon was a public-relations disaster of the first order for India .
 This might have been true up to a point, in the British environment he was familiar with, but in India, he had no roots due to his long absence . He made no effort to publicize his accomplishments .
 Janaki argues that as a result, Menon was treated as a ‘political upstart’ totally dependent on Nehru’s ‘patronage’ for support . He argues that Menon had been treated as an upstart . Janaki: Menon
 Of course, he was dependent on Nehru’s patronage, and did lack a political base in India . He was dependent upon Nehru's patronage and did not have political base .
 Brecher attempted to map Menon’s ‘hostility statements’ in a piece of 1960s-esque social science research . Brecher, in Krishna Menon's View, attempted to find out what Menon said .
 The characteristics of “Capitalist and “Interventionist” justify the designation “Imperialist’s” for the United States, says Menon . Menon: “The characteristics of Capitalist and Interventionist" justify in Menon�
 George’s book provides some interesting insight into what may have been Nehru's motivation in returning Menon to New Delhi . George's book, while overstating Menon's accomplishments as Defense Minister, overstates the accomplishments as defense Minister .
 His election in 1957 to the Indian Parliament gave Nehru the opportunity to bring him into the government as Minister of Defense . Nehru was the prime minister of India's first cabinet minister .
 The Congress as a party was committed to s socialistic pattern of society, but the Cabinet contained no one, barring of course the Prime Minister, who was in earnest about it . The Congress is committed to socialistic patterns of society .
 Kennedy's team did not diverge significantly from that of Eisenhowet's on the respective aid packages for India and Pakistan . Kennedy’s team also did not agree significantly on the aid packages .
 Rostow stated that the last Eisenhower foreign aid budget needed no additional funding . Rostow: The last Eisenhower budget was no more than $1.5 billion . As pointed out earlier, Rostow said that the Eisenhower budget had no need for additional funds .
 A substantial amount of the United States grant required that India use it to purchase U.S. goods and products . The grant was required to be used to purchase United States goods .
 Bill draws several conclusions about differences between Kennedy and Eisenhower’s policies that are just not supported by the facts . Bill draws conclusions about the differences between the two presidents' policies that just aren't supported by facts .
 Both administrations believed that ultimately the Shah had to have a powerful military and security apparatus to ensure his continuation in power . The Shah had a powerful security apparatus, both administrations believed .
 The tendency to see differences between Kennedy's and Eisenhowet's policies results from giving too much weight to Kennedy image-building and not enough scrutiny of the differences between the 1958-1960 period and that of the Kennedy administration .
 Eisenhower administration faced what it perceived to be the immediate emergency of the post-Iraq petiod . Eisenhower faced what he perceived was an immediate emergency . The Eisenhower administration had to deal with the problem .
 The initial part of this period focused on security and military issues . This is the first time the government has been involved in a major political crisis .
 Kennedy administration’s stand on status-of-forces agreement for U.S. advisors in Iran would result in a littleknown cleric, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, becoming the symbol of opposition to the Shah's regime and to the United States presence in Iran
 Khomeini's imprisonment and exile to Iraq would lead in the end to the Shah’s fall in 1979 . The Shah was overthrown by the Shah in 1979, but the Shah was eventually overthrown in 1979.
 These included maps showing the spread of Soviet influence in the Middle East . caricatures of Dulles, the lightning rod for criticism of the administration .
 An article and map in Newsweek of May 5, 1958 is an excellent example of the criticism of the map .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume XIX, Eighty-Fifth Congress First Session, 1957 . The Committee is a bipartisan bipartisan committee .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Volame XIX, 1957, 321, 321. Executive Session of the Committee was held in 1957 .
 NEA informed Christian Herter, the Secretary of State, that the overall situation in the Middle East had improved but that the improvement was precarious . NEA told Herter that the situation had improved, but the improvement is precarious .
 If the Arab-Israeli dispute becomes an open campaign issue then efforts to solve the refugee problem could be compromised, he says . He points out that if the issue becomes a campaign issue, it could compromise progress .
 He alluded to an informal understanding with the Democratic Platform Committee about avoiding references to the Arab-Israeli problem .
 Bass makes the case that the Zionist lobby in the U.S. lacked the clout to influence policy . Bass says that Republican claims that Kennedy found himself pressured to take a pro-Israeli stance was unsupportable .
 Israeli influence in Washington was not what it is today . President Eisenhower had to go on national television to explain his reasons for demanding that Israelis withdraw from Sinai in 1957 .
 Eisenhower took a courageously independent stand and refused to bow to political expediency . This should not be used to understate Israeli political pressure and influence peddling .
 In contrast, Kennedy had no choice, as he told Phillips Talbot when he blocked plans for a state visit by Nasser . Nasser's visit to the UK was a 'no-choice' for Kennedy to block .
 Talbot also stated that Feldman used Israeli and Zionist influence to block pressure on Ben-Gurion over the Johnson Plan for a solution to the Palestinian refugee problem, and to prevent a state visit by Nasser Nasser . In a later interview, Talbot said that Feldman also used Israeli
 Ben-Gurion and Kennedy met at Waldorf-Astoria during UNGA in September 1961 . Kennedy thanked him profusely for Israeli and Zionist support in 1960 election .
 Allegedly Kennedy also stated that he recognized that without support from Israel and the Zionist community Nixon would have won . Kennedy also said that he also recognized that . Without support from . Israel, Nixon would not have won, Kennedy said .
 Ben-Gurion, via Bayne, promised that he would not forget that debt in the future . Kennedy promised to not forget the debt, according to the Israeli prime minister . Ben-gurion: Kennedy promised not forgetting that debt .
 Kennedy felt obliged to have Feldman in the White House and to adjust his Middle East policy, including the state visits of Arab leaders, to placate the American Zionist community . Because of the importance of Jewish votes, Kennedy .
 Bass’s attempt to argue a minimal Jewish influence in the Kennedy White House seems misguided . In light of this, Bass's attempts to argue for a Jewish influence seems misguided, he says .
 In 1957, Eisenhower had a major heart attack, the seriousness of which was kept from all but a few aides . In May 1959 Dulles died of cancer, Eisenhower died of heart attack .
 Robert W Komer, Staff Member, National Security Council . Robert W. Komer was a National Security Adviser at the U.S. Department of Energy .
 Komer recalled a conversation with Phillips Talbot the night after Kennedy’s assassination that accurately summarized the formulation of U.S. Middle East policy under Kennedy . Komer recalls the conversation .
 "We didn’t have to deal with the Seventh Floor on Middle East Policy very much," he says . "I'm glad we didn't have to do so much with Middle East policy very much"
 The brief section on the Middle East is interesting for its impressions of personalities and relations . The brief sections on the region are interesting for their impressions .
 Bowles stated that it was he who had brought Talbot into the administration, and that he viewed this as a mistake . Bowles said he viewed Talbot's appointment as a 'mistake'
 Badeau emphasizes his distaste for Dulles’ policy in the Middle East and Kennedy’s desire to bring ‘new blood’ into the diplomatic corps .
 In light of policy statements and commitments in speeches this is curious, but it reflects the President’s intention, confirmed by Chester Bowles, to conduct his own personal foreign policy and use his Ambassadors as implementation tools .
 Al-Atasi, Jamal, A+Thawra li Jamal Abd-al-Nasser wa ala Fikribi al-Istratyi wa al-Tarikhi . Al-Al-Atasis, Jamal was a member of the royal family .
 In Karpat, , Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East in the contemporary Middle East, 202.2.2 . Political and social thought in the Middle East is debated in the region .
 Chester Bowles wrote an assessment of Nasser and Egypt's relations with Egypt on February 21, 1962, following a fiveday visit to Cairo when he met with Nasser .
 The campaign and later the administration ignored the ideological warning indicated by past behavior and later by Bowles’ telegram. “The campaign’s ideological warning was ignored,” the president said. ‘The campaign, later, ignored that warning.’
 Hubert Humphrey's visit to the UAR and meeting with Nasser illustrated Badeau's attempts to manage Nasset’s image . The UAR was the first Arab Arab state to meet with the Egyptian president .
 This was just after the Syrian coup, for which Nasser blamed his intelligence service and the fact that unlike in Egypt, where he locked up the capitalists whose property he confiscated, he had not done that in Syria and they had forced the coup against him . The coup against Nasser was
 He also predicted another coup within six months in Syria — which did indeed occur, backed by Nasserist Syrians . The coup was a coup backed by a group of Nasserists Syrians .
 Nasser, like Ayub in Pakistan, was concerned about the perceived influence of the Israeli lobby . Nasser was worried about the political rhetoric and the perceived Israeli influence .
 This is evidenced by the UAR reaction to the appointments of Averell Harriman and Chester Bowles . The UAR reacted strongly to the appointment of Chester Bowle . This is shown by the reaction of the public to their appointments of the pair .
 The real question would be how the aid dollars would be split between Tel Aviv and Cairo . The appointments encouraged Cairo to believe that a balanced policy would continue, and that the real question is how aid dollars are split .
 When asked if he had recommended funding of the Aswan Dam following the announcement of the Soviet-Czech arms deal, he stated that he had not been consulted directly but that it was politically untenable .
 Key advisors like Rostow who were well-acquainted with both administrations understood the similarities between Eisenhower and Kennedy policy . Kennedy's administration, like Eisenhower’s, simply could not bring itself to give their predecessors credit for having pursued what they themselves viewed as sound policies .
 Rostow said Eisenhower was simply unwilling to make “command decisions’ on foreign aid in the face of Republican opposition . Rostow stated that he believed that he . believed that Eisenhower was just unwilling to . make ‘command . decisions” in the . face of GOP opposition
 Rostow: Eisenhower’s final foreign-aid package was so generous that Kennedy administration found it unnecessary to ask for additional funding . Rostow added that the Kennedy administration didn't need additional funding. Rostow said that Eisenhower's final foreign aid package was generous .
 Karpat: Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East in the contemporary Middle East, 202. Karparat: The Middle East .
 Talbot had suggested to President Kennedy that despite ‘pain to Israel’, the President needed to take a more overtly pro-Arab stand to protect U.S. interests in the Middle East .
 Talbot blamed Myer Feldman, in his role as special counselor to the President on Jewish issues, for blocking the Johnson Plan and a solution to the refugee problem . Talbot blames Feldman for blocking Johnson Plan .
 Talbot stated that Feldman kept the Israeli embassy informed of everything that went on in the White House . Talbot said Feldman kept Israel informed of what went on during the Obama administration .
 Rostow: Yemen war in Yemen was a perfect example of this tendency . Rostow’s view: War in Yemen is an example of the tendency to engage in conflict in Yemen .
 Rostow’s frustration was real, and reflected the disappointment felt in the Kennedy administration concerning their UAR policy . Rostow: "I’m disappointed with the way the government has dealt with the issue of UAR in the U.S. This is not the first
 They sincerely believed that Nasser had passed through his revolutionary stage and was ready for an inward turn . Nasser believed that he was ready to turn inward turn.
 They did not interpret the situation as one in which another cycle of heightened revolutionary activity was about to begin, they said . The situation was not as severe as possible, they added .
 Rostow had suggested to Kennedy that the U.S. should make a real effort with Nasser, Rostow says . Rostow: "When it occurred, it came as a major disappointment to Rostow, because he had suggested that the United States should make an effort"
 This boosted aid to Jordan from seven million dollars to eight million dollars for Jordanian fiscal year 1962 . The aid boost boosted Jordan's budget for the same year .
 U.S. and British aid for fiscal year 1961 totaled $47. million . United States footed 85 per cent of the cost of the bill .
 In February 1961, King Hussein sent a letter to Nasser suggesting that they meet to consider settling their differences . King Hussein suggested they meet in order to settle their differences in the Middle East .
 Even pro-Nasserist elements that had applauded the letter were unhappy that a more prompt, positive reply had not been forthcoming . This was taken as an insult by the Jordanian government .
 These telegrams raise concerns that Nasser would get the best of King Hussein in exchanges of letters . Nasser's letters were exchanged between Nasser and Hussein .
 Anti-Nasserist elements in the Jordanian government did not believe that the exchanges with Nasser were a good idea . They also point to the concerns of antiNasserists in Jordan .
 King Hussein expressed his chagrin over the fact that Nasser published the correspondence after being asked not to do so . The correspondence was published in a letter to King Hussein .
 Badeau speculates that the Iraqi move was to compensate for the lack of financial success resulting from the IPC nationalization . The Iraqi move may have been a response to the nationalization of IPC .
 The Iraqis are not the only ones who use that decision-making process . The Iraqi government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 railway flatcars loaded with British-supplied Centurion tanks departed Baghdad area along with various Iraqi army units for the Kuwaiti border . The British Embassy reported that on the night of 30 June .
 Qasim’s actions were motivated by the very Arab unity that he had always resisted . The implication is that he was motivated by Arab unity, which he resisted .
 Qasim’s motivations vis-a-vis Kuwait had nothing to do with pan-Arabism and everything to do was personal goals, the economic mess in Iraq, and Iraqi nationalism . It completely ignores that the fact that the . fact that Qasims . vis-
 Aburish goes on to insinuate that the UAR position was in some way part of an American plot against Arab unity rather than a grossly stupid misstep by Qasim . He insinuates that the position was part of a plot against UAR .
 Aburish forgets that not only the Americans but also most of the Arab world ultimately applauded the UAR position on the dispute .
 King Hussein’s bizarre proposal was for a union between Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq . King Hussein proposed the union between the four countries .
 It can only be described as a feeble, illogical attempt by the Hashemite monarch to isolate Egypt . Egypt had made the decision to dispatch troops to Kuwait, which had sent them to Kuwait .
 Hussein attempted to include Iraq, the perpetrator of the crisis, puzzled everyone . Hussein's attempt at inclusion of Iraq puzzled everyone, including the Iraqi government .
 This move tended to discourage foreign oil companies from investing in the new exploration because of political uncertainties . Foreign oil companies tend to hesitate to invest in new exploration projects .
 IPC retaliated by decreasing oil production and thus curtailing Iraqi government revenues . The IPC also decreased oil production to curb Iraqi government revenue .
 He lost revenues that worsened Iraq’s economic situation but gained some prestige lost in the Kuwaiti adventure . He also lost some prestige in the country .
 Kennedy administration attempted to contain Egypt’s African adventures . Kennedy administration tried to contain Egyptian adventures in Africa .
 On February 5, 1961, Nasser wrote to Kennedy complaining about the assassination of Lumumba . Nasser called for a greater United Nations role in stabilizing the country .
 Nasser argued that the current recognized regime in the Congo was illegitimate, and propped up by foreign powers . Nasser: The current recognized government in Congo is illegitimate .
 He was referring to the Congolese regime backed by strongman Joseph Mobutu, and strongly supported by the U.S. He was pointedly referring to a regime supported by strongmen Joseph Mobutsu .
 Kennedy made a strong case for non-aligned support for the UN mission in the Congo as a means of averting civil war . In response, Kennedy made the case to the UN .
 Bass identifies the Kennedy administration as the beginning of the special relationship between the U.S. and Israel . Bass misapprehends the significance of domestic politics and pressure by Jewish groups in support of Israel .
 It may not have been ‘foreordained’ but it was certainly highly predictable, given Jewish electoral support and the close election . It was also highly predictable given Jewish support and close election.
 Bass cites Kennedy’s concerns over Dimona and the exclusion of U.S. Jewish soldiers from Saudi Arabia as examples of a lack of Jewish influence . Bass says Kennedy's concerns about Dimona are examples of lack of influence .
 Bass argues that the Israeli lobby during the Kennedy period was not strong enough to heavily impact U.S. policy . Bass says the lobby during that time was not as strong as it was in the 1960s and 1960s . Bass: The Israeli lobby was not enough powerful enough to influence
 Author seems not to comprehend what had actually occurred during the late Eisenhower era . Author seems to not comprehend what happened during that era .
 Kennedy believed that the Arab leader had ‘moderated’ because of the rapprochement with the Eisenhower administration . The Arab leader was believed to have 'moderedated' because of his relationship with the administration .
 On this basis, Kennedy and some of his advisors made assumptions that were simply not based in reality . Kennedy and others made assumptions based on reality, he says .
 Eisenhower administration pursued an even-handed policy out of principle; Kennedy pursued a pro-Israeli policy . Kennedy pursued the pro-Israel stance out of naiveté .
 It was Eisenhower’s policy of 1953, but with additional domestic political considerations . The policy was the same as the 1953 policy of Eisenhower . It was also the policy of 1952, Eisenhower said .
 There are strong indications that indeed the Zionist support and Jewish votes figured prominently in Kennedy’s policy decisions . Kennedy's policy decisions may have been influenced by Jewish support, says historian .
 Kennedy appointed Myer Feldman as his Special Counsel to represent Jewish and Israeli interests in the White House . Kennedy appointed Feldman to represent Jews and Israel in the 1980s . Feldman was appointed as the Special Counsel for Kennedy .
 It begs the question of why Nasser did not also have a lawyer on the White House staff . Nasser should have also had a lawyer, White House aide says .
 Komer also states that Feldman was instrumental in propagating ‘the great Egyptian rocket scare’ The story fabricated by the Israelis that Egypt was developing rockets and nuclear weapons was fabricated by Israel . Komer says Feldman was a key figure in the story .
 President Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s Speeches and Press Interviews, JanuaryDecember 1963 . Jamal Jamal was assassinated in December 1963 . He was the son of President Nasser .
 This is the basis for the Rusk memorandum to the President, and clearly shows who is pushing an aggressive UAR policy . The Rusk memo to the president clearly shows that .
 Nasset’s role in support of the FLN was significant and pugnacious . This work has not focused on the Algerian war, because it was peripheral to the main thrust of this narrative . However, Nasset's role in supporting FLN in Algeria was significant
 Nasser authorized Heikal to print that portion of his letter to Kennedy in which he laid out Egypt’s support for the Palestinian cause . Nasser: "To counter this, Nasser authorised [Heikal] to print this part of the letter"
 Heikal stated that Saudi Arabian and Jordanian actions required it; otherwise they would not print the excerpted letter . The letter was printed in response to the Saudi Arabia and Jordan's actions .
 Heikal told Badeau that this was the equivalent of the U.S. providing a courtesy warning on the Syrian recognition issue following the coup and the sale of Hawk missiles to Israel .
 It is clear that Badeau was seriously aggravated and concerned by this development because he sent his communication NIACT and Top Secret/Presidential Confidential . It was clear that he sent NIACT, Top Secret Confidential, to the White House .
 Feldman told Jewish leaders ‘in confidence’ about negotiations over the Hawk issue and the Johnson Plan .
 Komer expressed concern that the situation with the UAR over the Hawks could get out of hand as the news spread . Komer said he was concerned that the news could spread quickly as the situation spread .
 The United States Consulate lodged a formal complaint with the Yemen government about the arrival of Soviet tanks in Ta’iz . The trip from Hudaydah on the coast had ‘torn up’ the American-built road between the two cities .
 One of the tanks had been driven over a cliff, killing the driver and reducing by one the number that participated in a military parade the next day . The Consul also described Yemeni proficiency in driving .
 He recounted rows of tanks, trucks, armored cars, and guns parked in a large field near Bajil . He also recounted rows in the field of tanks and trucks .
 The British found themselves frustrated with U.S. progress on various aid projects . They were concerned that Washington did not take the situation in Yemen seriously enough .
 British frustration included what, in their view, was a lack of suitable U.S. progress on its two major aid projects, the Ta’iz to Hudaydah road and the Ta'iz water project . The British frustration was that the United States did not progress on
 The House of Sand and Lacey’s The Kingdom is a concise reference that provides a chronological framework around which the researcher or reader can arrange anecdotal but often more detailed accounts of specific events found in The Kingdom . Despite this, it is useful as a . concise reference .
 Author states that the Sudayri Seven were allied principally to Feisal in the power struggle of the late 1950s and early 1960s . She provides little explanation for why they were allied with Feisal, but she provides little .
 Feisal indicated that he had been Nasset’s friend, but that Nasser had deceived him . Feisal said Nasset had lied to him, saying he was Nasset's friend, Nasset was his friend .
 President Kennedy sent a note to Secretary of Defense McNamara asking why it took so long for promised military aid . Slow deliveries of arms also concerned President Kennedy .
 Ben-Gurion refused to accept Pinhas Lavon in a government coalition between the Maipai and Histadrut parties . Lavon was the prime minister of Israel's first government in the 1950s .
 Both parties refused to enter a coalition headed by Ben-Gurion because of his handling of the Lavon affair . As a result, both parties refused a coalition . The Lavon scandal led to a rift between the two parties .
 Summitt's article on Iran and the Kennedy administration deals better with the reality of the situation from 1961 to 1963 . Summitt’s article on the Iran situation is better than the reality .
 Summitt correctly states that the Shah manipulated the Kennedy administration into continued support for his regime . Summitt states, correctly, that the government supported the Shah's regime .
 The author leaves the impression that she believes there was some teal alternative . The author's book is published by Simon Cowell, a British author .
 Eisenhower, Dulles, Herter, and Kennedy knew that the Shah exaggerated external threats . The Shah exaggerated outside threats, they knew, but the Shah did not .
 "They understood that he had serious faults that might bring regime collapse at any time," says the regime . They understood that they might bring collapse any time, he says .
 They wanted a reform-minded, more liberal alternative to the Shah, but they were dealing with Iran . "No such alternative existed. No such alternative exists. They wanted to be reformists, but there was no such alternative," she says .
 Kennedy’s ill-advised decision to identify the United States with Prime Minister Ali Amini was a major shift in U.S. policy . In fact, Kennedy's decision to name Amini with Amini in Iran was an important shift .
 Eisenhower administration avoided identification with any Iranian faction . Eisenhower administration had steadfastly avoided identifying with any Iran faction .
 Ambassador Wailes, a holdover from the Eisenhower years, lobbied strongly against the Kennedy decision . Ambassador Wailses is a longtime holdover of the Eisenhower administration .
 He urged that Washington go no further than Eisenhower’s position, guaranteeing the territorial integrity and independence of Iran . He urged the U.S. to guarantee the territory of Iran's territorial integrity .
 Kennedy’s decision to back Amini personally drastically altered the dynamic of US-Iran relations . Kennedy's decision to support Amini changed the dynamics of US and Iran relations .
 It led Washington down a torturous path to making similar commitments to the Shah, it has been said .
 It placed the interests of the U.S. squarely in the Pahlavi basket, it says . The U.K. placed it squarely in Iran's interests, it adds .
 This decision lashed Johnson, Nixon, Ford, and later Carter to an inherently unstable regime . It left the U.S. with no alternatives in 1979, the author says .
 The problem is ‘American diplomats’ did study and understand, but they could see no alternative given the Cold War and the commitment to containment,’s author says . ‘U.S. diplomats did study, understand and understand. But they were forced to see no
 The Shah, not the United States, should be viewed as the proactive driver in the equation . In addition, the Shah is not the U.S. President Barack Obama should be seen as the driver of the situation .
 The Shah’s understanding of the Iranian situation allowed him to survive until 1979 . It was the Shah's miscalculations that led to his downfall . The Shah's understanding of Iran's situation was crucial to his survival .
 The mullahs of 1979, who are still in charge in Iran, say that the Shah’s regime fell because he was not harsh enough in his suppression of the opposition . They say the Shah's regime fell due to his lack of harsh suppression .
 Fischer points to the very reform programs supported by Washington as the catalyst for anti-Shah activities . Fischer: The reform programs were the very programs that led to anti-Iranian activities .
 He cites the election issues of 1960 and 1961, and nullification by the Shah because of corruption . The Shah was nullified because of the Shah's corruption .
 Ayatollahs Behbahani and Borujerdi opposed land reform, he says . He points out that Ayatullahs were opposed to land reform in Iran . He says the land reformers opposed land reforms .
 In November 1962, the w/ama launched a campaign against the Shah’s attempt to create a grass-roots political movement through the Local Council Election Bill . The bill allowed women to vote and did not mention the Koran .
 Many of the liberalizing reforms that the U.S. urged on the Shah became the catalyst for growing traditional and religious opposition to the regime . In effect, many of the reforms became the catalysts for growing religious opposition .
 Chester Bowles relates the views of Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State under Truman . Bowles, JFK Library, 6: 6, is published by Ora/ History . See Ora for more .
 Acheson believed that Kennedy was “unqualified and simply the wrong man’ for the presidency’s presidency . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1961 .
 The new White House knew about these views in various quarters and was most sensitive about them . The White House is sensitive to the views of some of the world's most prominent figures . The new administration is most sensitive to these views .
 Bill's work on Iranian-US relations distorts the real relationship between Eisenhower and Kennedy’s policies toward Iran . Bill's research on Iran-U.S. relations shows that Kennedy and Eisenhower had different policies on Iran .
 State Department memos and telegram traffic of John W Bowling, the Iran desk officer in the NEA Bureau . Bowling was a State Department telegram officer in Iran . Bowling is a former State Department official who worked on Iran .
 Bowling wrote the same kinds of plans for Iran during the Eisenhower administration . Bowling wrote a similar kind of plan for Iran . Bowling also wrote a plan for the country in Eisenhower administration.
 A closer reading of Bowling's positions during the Eisenhower administration would have revealed that Bowling was a weak choice to use to support the idea that Kennedy’s focus and plans for Iran was different from those of his predecessor .
 The problem with the Shah was only too well known to the Eisenhower administration, as were Young’s views on the situation . Young's views on Iran were only too common to the administration, he says .
 Many if not most of his views on the situation in Iran were shared by the Eisenhower administration . Eisenhower administration actively tried to push the Shah toward reform .
 Bill cites Kennedy efforts to alter aid to the Shah from military to economic . Eisenhower administration used the same tactics . Bill also cites Kennedy .
 Bill laid the controversial ‘Status of Forces Agreement’ of October 1964 at Lyndon Johnson’s doorstep . The U.S. positions on the agreement were clearly established on Kennedy's watch . Bill also laid . the controversial 'Status of Force Agreement' at the doorstep .
 This is misleading vis-a-vis what had gone before and what actually occurred during the Kennedy years . Be that as it may, this is misleading . This is not the first time I've seen this .
 As in the Eisenhower years, pressure from the U.S. for social and economic reforms and political liberalization caused the Shah to go through the motions of reform, just as he had under Eisenhower . Pressure from the United States for social, economic reforms led to reform .
 "In reality, he worked assiduously to undermine any real attempt to alter the s/afus quo or to liberalize the political system," he says .
 Kennedy followed the same policy path trodden by Eisenhower and learned that reform in Iran could not be purchased at a price that threatened the stability of the country . Like his predecessor, Kennedy learned that .
 Shah was just as determined not to relinquish his power, and to use whatever means were available to extract military aid that he desired for the regime . The Shah was determined to extract the military aid he desired from Iran .
 U.S. military support finally reached a crisis point during the Kennedy administration . The solution insisted upon by Washington would ultimately lead to 1979 .
 The idea that the U.S. could have controlled the Shah smacks of ‘salvationist’ superiority . The idea of the United States being able to control the Shah is a sign of 'salismist superiority'
 At a minimum, it infers that the Iranians were not responsible for their own actions . The Iranian government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 Most Iranians, including the clerics, supported the 1953 coup against Musaddiq . It should be remembered that most Iranians supported the coup, including clerics . Most Iranians are against the overthrow of the Iranian president .
 Shah had a better policy strategy, and that a better situation would have emerged if he had fallen, the Shah's critics say . It also infers that better policy strategies existed .
 In all likelihood, just another corrupt regime would have taken power, touting the interests of its supporters over the rest of the country . "In all likelihood" would have been a corrupt regime, says CNN.com .
 U.S. owes something to Iran, says Obama administration . But most of all, it insinuates that United States owed something to the country .
 The Iranians understood the game from their support of the 1953 coup to the 1979 revolution . Iran's support for the coup was evident from 1953 to 1979 revolution, says Iran's president .
 Without that support, the coup would never have succeeded, just as the U.S. was unable to prevent 1979 . The United States was able to prevent the coup in 1979, but failed to prevent it .
 This is the document on which Bill relied heavily in his interpretation of Kennedy administration policy and the ‘so-called’ fourteen-point ‘blueprint’ for Iran by Bowling .
 Shah had managed to circumvent most of the options, most of which had been tried under Eisenhower and all of which were circumvented by the Shah .
 Bowling offered analysis about the nature of Iranians and of Iranian society at that particular juncture . Bowling's analysis was very interesting and perceptive, Bowling said . Bowling: "The analysis that Bowling offered about Iran and of Iranians is very interesting"
 Bowling concluded that there was no element of Iranian society capable of leading the country and preventing chaos other than the Shah . Bill also overlooks the fact that he concluded that .
 Turkey and Pakistan are key anchors for political stability along the northern tier, analysts say . In Washington, intelligence and foreign policy analysts had two anchors for stability in the region .
 In both countries, unstable but democratic governments succumbed to more reliable military dictatorships . In both, unstable, democratic governments had succumbed to the more reliable, benevolent dictatorships.
 Analysts looked for patterns when practicing the ‘art’ of intelligence and foreign political prognostication . Analysts used to look for patterns in order to predict foreign political outcomes .
 The assumption was that the potential for a military takeover was not only possible but also likely . Fundamentally, the assumption was . that the . potential for the potential . takeover was . not only . possible but likely .
 During this period, the new nationalist governments that came to power by military coup tended to be composed of younger officers with radical nationalist ideas and ideals . Nasser and Qasim were examples .
 These types of military governments created problems for Western policy, particularly given their penchant for non-alignment or even left-of-center policies . These military governments have caused problems for the West, especially in Syria .
 These types of coups seemed to occur in countries where the higher echelons of the military had become closely associated with the ruling elite . These countries have seen coups where the military has become more closely associated .
 Senior military leadership became as much of a target to be disposed of as the political regime itself . In other words, the senior military leadership was a target for the regime's overthrow .
 Senior military leadership took the initiative to change the government before pressure from below had reached critical mass . In countries where coups occurred, the political orientation remained largely pro-Western .
 General Iskander Mirza, President of Pakistan, overthrew the government of Prime Minister Noon in 1958 . General Mirza overthrew Noon's government with the support of the Pakistani Chief of Staff .
 The coup became something of a model for ‘controlled democracy’ in the region . While ostensibly opposed by the U.S. government, the coup became a model of 'controlled democracy' in the country .
 The new Abboud government reinforced the idea that the pro-Nasserist plotters included mid-level officers in the military . The new government says the Nasserist plotsters included officers in military .
 You are in a better position than I to understand meaning of constant interference of a certain state in internal affairs of its neighbors. You are better than me to understand the meaning of such interference, I said .
 The point learned in Washington was that coups by conservative general officers were preferable to those of their potentially more radical subordinates . In Washington, the point learned .
 Bowles lamented Holmes had become an impediment to new policies with regard to the Shah because he 'wanted to bring all these planes in all the time to please the Shah' Bowles said Holmes wanted to bring planes in 'to please' the Shah .
 Allen Dulles and three former Ambassadors to Iran were also included in the payments . Also included in payments were Allen Dulls, three former ambassadors to Iran . The payments were also made in Iran .
 The McClellan committee is investigating the Foundation . The committee is also looking into the allegations against the foundation .
 Rostow’s search for answers netted responses that were just as unpalatable . Rostow: “I’m not sure what I’ve heard from people who’d like to hear from me,” Rostow said . ‘I�
 Talbot was a naval liaison officer based in Bombay, India during the Second World War . Talbot served in India as an officer during the war .
 Her office was in the same building and near that of Dean Rusk, who was an OSS officer . She was also in the building near Rusk's office .
 Rusk and Talbot met from time to time when Talbot was in Calcutta visiting his wife . Rusk met Talbot when he visited his wife, who was visiting her from India .
 There was no lasting or close relationship that flowed from this prior to the Kennedy years, but they did know each other personally and by reputation .
 Author argues that under Derakhshesh, opposition to the West took root in the Iranian educational system . Derakhshhesh was the prime minister of Iran's first government . The author argues that systematic opposition to Western education took root .
 Derakhshesh formed the Commission on the Aim of Iranian Education in 1961 . He was appointed in May 1961 .
 Jalal Al-e Ahmad, a polemicist, wrote a report for the Commission, which was reviewed in November 1961 and again in January 1962 .
 It was a ‘nativist’, anti-regime, and anti-Western work, the Commission decided against publishing it . The Commission decided not to publish the work .
 Following this rejection, Al-e Ahmad managed to get it published under the title Gharbzadegi . The book was rejected by Iranian authorities .
 Boroujerdi describes Gharbzadegi as the first to seriously attack Western intellectual modes of thought and to offer an Iranian alternative . Borujerdi says Gharzadei was the first Iranian to attack the West .
 There is simply no way that any American administration could understand the variables in attempting to change the fundamental nature of Iranian society, and that is exactly what Kennedy and his White House hoped to do . Kennedy and the White House wanted to change Iranian society .
 The United States failed to realize how limited U.S. options were in this regard, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They tied themselves directly to the programs and person of Amini, who was in turn just as tied to the Shah . Amini was the prime minister of Iran in the 1980s .
 When Amini failed, the only option was an even tighter relationship with the Shah or, at best, a neutralist, anti-Western Iran . Amini's only option is a tight relationship with Shah or an even more neutralist Iran .
 The events of 1961-1962 would set in motion the ultimate unraveling of the pro-Western regime in Tehran . At the same time, the events of that time, would set . motion the unraveling . of Iran's pro-western regime in Iran .
 In early June 1961, Julius C Holmes replaced Edward T Wailes as Ambassador to Tehran . Holmes was the first Ambassador to Iran . He was replaced by Edward T Holmes in June 1961 .
 Arsanjani had long been an advocate of land reform, calling for it in an article in Darya on January 15, 1951 . He wrote that land reform was necessary in order for the future .
 The administration used these ‘special task forces’ to circumvent the normal diplomatic and intelligence channels . ‘Special task force’ circumvented the usual diplomatic channels .
 This often resulted in ‘hyper-active’ reactions to anything resembling a crisis and in some less than balanced interpretations of various situations . This has resulted in some 'hyperactive' reactions to any crisis, such as a crisis . This led to some less balanced interpretations and less balanced
 The key to Vietnam may be found as much in the information-interpretation processes emanating from the ‘task force syndrome’ as from other sources . Vietnam is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Holmes knew Bowles would express a very positive view of Amini and complain about the Shah’s focus on the military . Holmes knew that Bowles knew that Amini would have a positive view .
 By sending a telegram straight to the White House and Secretary, he made certain that they heard his version of the discussion with the Shah before Bowles had an opportunity to comment on it .
 He then went on to say that he needed Talbot's help in advancing the date of the Shah’s visit, because that might improve the situation at the palace .
 MAP Steering Group had decided to offer Iran $300 million in military aid over the fiscal year 1962 through fiscal year 1967 . In effect, the group offered Iran a total of $400 million in aid .
 This included training and logistics support, but not a thorough modernization program . The U.S. military has been criticized for its lack of a thorough program .
 Iran's military modernization program included a reduction in overall force levels from 205,000 to 150,000 men . Overall force levels will be reduced to just about half the size of the Iranian military force .
 The Shah’s presence in Iran and his support of a reformist government is essential . The Shah's presence is essential for the country's reformist regime to succeed, says Iran's president .
 Holmes' message that the Shah was the essential element for reform had now taken root . Holmes’ message that . the Shah is the . essential element of reform had . taken root, Holmes said .
 Turkey had a larger population, and as a member of NATO provided a potential staging-area for United States troops and intermediate range ballistic-missile sites . The briefing memorandum points out that Turkey's population was larger than the United States' .
 In talks with McNamara, the Shah made it clear that the 150,000-man force envisioned by the U.S. was insufficient and that higher force-levels would be required . The Shah said higher force levels would be needed to protect the country .
 McNamara agreed that a 10,000-man increase over that number might work . McNamara said that this could be discussed, and implied that it could work .
 The Shah readily accepted a ‘planning team’ from the Pentagon proffered by McNamara . The Shah accepted the Pentagon’s request for help in Afghanistan .
 Keddie’s work on Iran is a general history, but in a brief eight pages she attempts to provide detail on the relationship between Amini and the Shah . Amini's relationship with the Shah is described as a relationship between the two men .
 In reality, Amini was little different from the Prime Ministers that went before him . Amini's tenure was tied to the Shah's jealousy over U.S. support for Amini’s reforms, and his clashes with the Shah .
 A careful examination of the source materials reveals considerably more calculation on the part of the Shah . The Shah is not the only person to blame .
 The Shah is clearly in control of the situation with Amini from the very beginning . The Shah was in charge of the Shah when Amini was assassinated in 2009 . Amini is the prime minister of Iran .
 Amini was appointed instead of Teymour Bakhtiar, the Chief of SAVAK, to the Prime Minister’s position because he believed that more U.S. aid would result . Amini appointed Amini because he thought that more United States aid would come from
 The fact that Kennedy held one-on-one discussions with foreign leaders left the substance of the meetings open for discussion .
 It gave foreign leaders the opportunity to ascribe something personally to the President, says President Obama . The White House has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 This memorandum from Komer to President Kennedy illustrates the problem in selecting documents for publication .
 Komet's suspicion that ‘Amini had to turn to blaming the US’ because of the ‘Shah’s refusal to back him in cutting the military and civil budget’ contributes to the view that the Shah was entirely to blame .
 Holmes predicted the possible fall of Amini two weeks earlier . Holmes, ever mindful of his prerogatives as Ambassador, made sure that Washington 'remembered'
 Holmes believed almost from the beginning that the Shah, not the Prime Minister, was the right political horse to bet on in Iran . Holmes had believed almost . from the . beginning that he was not the PM, but the Shah . The Shah was not Prime Minister .
 Bill portrays Johnson as ‘particularly blunt’ with the Shah over the need for reform . He quotes Ambassador Holmes as saying that progress toward economic and social justice was the only real insurance against subversion and the Communist threat .
 Johnson: U.S. had to demobilize two army divisions because of budget considerations . Johnson: Even the United States with its global commitments and the Berlin Crisis, the Berlin crisis had to be demobilized .
 Johnson left no doubt about the thrust of the U.S. message to the shah’s government . Johnson: “The message was clear. It was a message of support for the United States. The message was not clear.
 Bill makes a series of ‘Kennedy Legacy’ statements, insinuating or stating outright that the Shah duped Eisenhower, Dulles, Herter, Johnson, and Nixon but not John Kennedy, a position at considerable variance with documentary evidence .
 Kennedy’s personal support for Amini was out of concern that the Shah would fall and that the U.S. would need a strong anti-Communist alternative . In addition, Kennedy's personal support of Amini involved the United States more deeply in internal Iranian politics than ever
 Once the hysteria in the NSC and White House subsided, the Shah became the ‘indispensable’ element for stability in Tehran . The Shah was ‘an indispensable’ to the Shah’s regime in Iran .
 Shah's rule, and for that matter, Amini's as well, always had used heavy doses of repression . The Shah’s rule, as well as that of Amini, always used heavy dose of repression, says Shah .
 Amini banned demonstrations and authorized the use of force on university students . Shortly after his government came to power, Amini's government banned demonstrations . Amini was the prime minister of the late 1960s .
 The Shah and Amini jointly agreed upon the tough antiriot measures of January and June 1962 . Amini, with strong Kennedy backing, ruled unconstitutionally by not calling for elections .
 Shah’s survival and ability to ‘control’ the situation were essential to stability . The bottom line is that those American officials with an understanding of the Iranian people believed that the Shah's survival was essential to the country's stability .
 Asian dictators are always preferable to instability or Communist expansion . Asian dictators were always preferable than instability or expansion .
 Ngo Dinh Diem would earn a bullet in the back of the head, with the knowledge of President Kennedy, for entertaining an arrangement with the National Liberation Front in Vietnam . In fact, there is a good argument to be made that at least one Asian dictator, Diem,
 We will also get around to discussing how impressed Kennedy was with Ayub Khan . Kennedy was impressed with Khan during his visit to Washington in 1961 .
 The point is that Kennedy, like his successors, was trapped within the confines of U.S. interests . Kennedy was like his predecessors, but he was trapped in the United States interests, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy's problems with the Shah were no different from those of Eisenhower or Johnson . Kennedy’s problems with Shah were similar to those with Eisenhower and Johnson, he says .
 In reality, the U.S. never had any real control over events in Iran . The United States never had real control of events in the country .
 For 25 years everyone in Washington wanted an alternative to the Shah . It took until 1979 for the Iranians to produce one . Iran produced one in 1979 .
 This document is a history of the status of the U.S. military personnel issue, including the informal arrangements for jurisdiction . It argues that the time had come for a more formal arrangement had come .
 Bowles was well known for his pro-Indian views and sentiments . Bowles had a long history of anti-Indian sentiments .
 He made it clear that he believed that Nehru was the teal influence in Asia . He said Nehru believed that he was the prime minister of India .
 Jalal argues that Pakistan’s growing involvement in the U.S. defense structure after 1954 severely hampered economic development efforts . Jalal says the growing involvement of the American defense structure in Pakistan severely hampered development efforts in Pakistan .
 Maintenance and administrative costs placed a serious burden on already limited amounts of economic investment funds . The author states that maintenance and . administrative costs . placed a . serious burden . on already . limited amount of economic . investment funds.
 National Commission on Historical and Cultural Research, 1976, traces the development and programs of the principal Pakistani political parties . The party's programs include those of Pakistan's main political parties. The parties' programs include the Pakistani Taliban .
 Ayub took the only course possible in abrogating the 1956 constitution . He argues that the nation did indeed face political chaos and paralysis . Ayub says that Ayub abrogated the constitution .
 Both Jalal and Aziz are probably correct in the sense that each man identified elements that contributed to the 1958 coup and ‘controlled democracy’ But each, having an individual axe to grind, over-simplified and excluded other contributory factors that might complicate their particular arguments
 Ayub had toyed with the idea of ‘controlled democracy’ as eatly as 1954 when he was Defense Minister in Bogra’s cabinet . Ayub was defense minister in 1954 .
 Jalal speculates that that that the idea might have been prepared with the backing of senior Punjabi civilian bureaucrats . Jalal says the idea may have been put forward by senior Punjab government officials .
 Bhargava argues that the entire structure of Pakistani foreign policy revolved around a desire to obtain a military advantage over India, and the ‘megalamaniacal ’ designs of the Pakistani military .
 Author is undoubtedly correct about the real purpose of Pakistani military programs and about Ayub’s view of economic aid to India . Author is over-the-top in his accusations leveled at Ayub Khan .
 Talbot was probably the most experienced and best prepared of all the Kennedy appointees to deal with the intractable problem of India and Pakistan . Talbot is probably the best prepared and most experienced of all of the Kennedy appointments .
 "He displayed remarkable appreciation of the situation in both countries, while never forgetting that his primary mission was to act in the best interests of the United States," he said . "In addition to the fact that he showed remarkable appreciation ... he also never forgot that he acted in his best interests
 Talbot understood and appreciated the conflicted emotions that drove Muslim separatism . Despite his many ties to India and his sympathy for Indian nationalism, Talbot also understood the conflicted feelings . Talbot: "I'm not an Indian nationalist, I'm a Muslim. I'm not a Muslim."
 Talbot provided Talbot’s view of the emerging Pakistani national identity and the motivations that had driven the creation of the Pakistani state . Talbot's view of Pakistan's emerging national identity was published in the 1930s .
 Talbot consistently provided the policy balance missing among those who more blindly supported the pro-Indian position within the Kennedy administration . Talbot was a key figure in the administration's policy .
 Grafurov’s work provides a discussion from the Soviet perspective on the relationships between NATO, CENTO, and SEATO . The key role of Pakistan in the alliance system directed at the Soviet Union is Pakistan's key role .
 The author cites the February 1959 visit of McGhee and Admiral Radford to Karachi as an example of the close collaboration within the western alliance system . To emphasize the linkages, the author says the visit was an example .
 The author also points to the massive influx of U.S. aid to Iraq . The author says the situation in post-coup Iraq is linked to the influx of United States aid .
 The overall work, of coutse, is an indictment of Anglo-American imperialist designs on the region and of the Ayub regime’s complicity in those efforts .
 Grafurov argues that Anglo-American designs on the region and exploitation of economic need and military dictatorship flew in the face of the ideas embodied in the Colombo Plan . He also argues that exploitation of military dictatorship and economic need in the region was a violation of the plan . Gra
 Political unrest and economic dislocation created a situation in which Menderes found itself attempting political reforms and launching an anti-corruption campaign that included formerly influential army officers . In effect, political unrest and political dislocation led to political reforms .
 These moves further alienated an increasingly estranged army, segments of which had been attempting to piece together a coup since 1955 .
 The coup occurred the day before a planned state visit by Indian Prime Minister Nehru . Ironically, the coup occurred a day before Nehru's state visit to India .
 Brecher’s article provides an excellent insight into Krishna Menon's highly anti-Western views . Brecher's article is a rare insight into the views of Menon and his views .
 Brecher provides a solid overview of the inconsistencies of Menon’s views, and of how they influenced and in many cases drove Indian foreign policy in the 1950s and early 1960s . Brecher says Menon's views are inconsistent, but he says they are consistent .
 Gundevia in the Indian MEA on 19 June, which is attached to the same document, was attached to a document sent to the MEA in India . The document was sent in the same way to the Indian Foreign Ministry of Foreign Office in India on June 19 . Gundev
 He served as Ambassador in Switzerland 19531954; High Commissioner in Sri Lanka, 1957-1960; Commonwealth Secretary, 1961-1964; and rose to become Foreign Secretary, 1964-1965 .
 The problems between India and Pakistan appear to have entered an almost dormant stage at this point . They did not come to the fore again until 1962, but pressure was building . Pressure was building, but it was not until 1962 .
 Afghanis argued that because of Pakistani ‘taunting’ Pushtun tribes and Kabul, with United States weapons barring military and economic aid from the US, they had no alternative but to turn to Soviet Union .
 Desai's report on Galbraith’s grousing about the political opposition in Washington provides insight into the Indian perception that the Kennedy administration found itself constrained by the Republican opposition in its dealings with India .
 See also Lall, Emergence of Modern India, 144, in which Lall apparently oblivious to Harriman’s total disdain, commented that there was ‘excellent cooperation’ between Kennedy’�s representative Averell .
 Lall claimed he had been selected to succeed Menon as Minister of Defense, when the Chinese War resulted in Menon's ouster, thus destroying Lall's opportunities as well . Lall also claimed that he had succeeded Menon when Menon’s ouster resulted in
 Cooper's work on the Vietnam conflict provides some interesting, if limited, views of India’s role in the conflict . Ambassador Galbraith was also involved in the administration's early involvement .
 It reinforces the view that Galbraith was a duck out of water as a diplomat . It also reinforces the views that he was a 'duck out of his water' as an ambassador .
 Galbraith suggested ‘strong medicine’ for the Diem regime in the form of a demand that they liberalize politically or face reduced U.S aid .
 Galbraith did suggest that a change in government might be in order, as long as the United States did not initiate 1t. Galbrith suggested that a new government was in order .
 SarDesai: Indian Foreign Policy in Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, 1947-1964, 1947 . India's foreign policy in Laos, Cambodia, Cambodia and Vietnam was 1947-64 .
 Kennedy requested Nehru not respond to Kennedy’s letter until after Nehru and Galbraith had talked . Desai was impressed by the ‘rather disturbed’ demeanor of the two men . Kennedy's request caught Desai's attention .
 If Rusk, Talbot, and Rostow had been waiting for an opportunity to bring Galbraith down a notch or two, the latter could not have done a better job of offering himself up . Rusk: "If Rusk and Talbot were waiting for a chance to
 We should take a passive attitude on the Chicoms, making a token vote against them but no impassioned pleas . The Chicoms should be seen as a good example of a passive vote against the government .
 Talbot stated that Galbraith never understood the bureaucracy or how to use it . Talbot said he never understood how to deal with the bureaucracy . The former secretary of state of state said he was disappointed by the decision .
 Talbot believed that Galbraith ovet-estimated and over-stated his influence with the President and, when he became aware of this, he grew more frustrated with the situation and ultimately left India .
 Talbot also commented that Galbraith’s personal behavior bordered on the bizarre at times . Talbot: “Galbraith's personal behavior was bizarre at the times.”
 Talbot stated that Galbraith had an ‘enormous ego’ and was totally inept at managing the bureaucracy . Talbot also stated that Talbot had a ‘massive ego,’ which was ‘totally inept’
 "He seldom achieved his goals because he alienated the very people with whom he needed to work," he says . "As a result, he often failed to achieve his goals. As a result of that, he seldom achieved . He said. "I'm not going to be able to
 In addition, he had some ‘unproductive ideas’ about how policy with India and China should be conducted .
 Rostow believed that his suggestion about allowing China into the UN was ‘ludicrous’ given Mao’s domination and his policies at the time in Southeast Asia . Rostow said that Rostow's suggestion was 'ludicrous' given Mao's domination and policies in the region
 Akbar lays the blame for the failure of the talks with Kennedy squarely at Nehru’s feet . Akbar blames Nehru for failing to negotiate with Kennedy .
 The only animated conversation that the two men had pertained to religion, was during a banquet at the Indian Embassy in Washington .
 The President’s rude behavior to him had not been directed against him personally, but against the Prime Minister, he said . The PM's behavior was not directed against himself personally, he added .
 Talbot points out that Galbraith thought that the Indians would not move on Goa . Talbot: "I didn't think that Goa would be able to move on" Talbot says that he didn't believe Indians would move on .
 Galbraith provides detailed account of a telegram from the State Department telling him that the Indians were about to move on Goa . He says he rushed around trying to convince the Indian government to stay the operation .
 On December 21, four days after the Goa operation, the Indians approached the United States about military aid . The U.S. approached the U.K. about military assistance four days later .
 The timing was so bad that Galbraith believed Menon intentionally arranged it in order to justify the Indian plan to produce supersonic aircraft . Menon is believed to have deliberately timed the timing to justify India's plans to produce supercars .
 In reality, Menon probably proposed the military purchases knowing that Washington would turn them down . Menon's proposal was likely to be rejected by Washington .
 He could then argue that the United States had refused military aid once again, and thus begin his planned campaign to find another source in Moscow . The U.S. could then begin its planned campaign against Russia again .
 Air Force Magazine, June 2005, 74, for an explanation of one aspect of the value of the intelligence sites in Pakistan and Iran .
 Khrushchev threatened the U.S. with missiles that would approach North America from the south, thus evading early warning radars directed toward the North Pole . The missiles would evade radars aimed at the North America .
 Low-trajectory missiles armed with 2.2-megaton warhead could strike U.S. command and control targets with less than five minutes’ warning from US-based space surveillance assets .
 This is one example of the strategic United States requirement for information-gathering and missile early warning across the ‘northern tier’ in Pakistan and Iran that directly contributed to the U.S. strategic defensive posture . This is a one example .
 The Administration had formed another of its vaunted working groups, the Kashmir Working Group .
 The group viewed the potential for Security Council debate as damaging to India and Pakistan, as well as to the interests of the U.S. The group said the debate would be damaging to both Pakistan and the United States .
 The objective was to get an alternative proposal on the table before the Kashmir debate began at the U.N. The Kashmir debate begins at the United Nations .
 Report: It might be very difficult to determine who started the conflict and, therefore, whom the U.S. was obliged to support . Report: The United States might be obliged to back the rebels in Syria .
 Talbot met with the Indian Ambassador the same day that the letter arrived from Prime Minister Nehru . Talbot says he met the Indian ambassador the day after the letter was sent .
 Nehru, in an attempt to put the best face on matters, ‘praised’ the straightforward nature of the letter . Nehru said he was 'praised' by the letter, which he said was straightforward .
 INR speculated that Menon, perhaps for the first time, actually thought that succeeding Nehru might be possible .
 This is a collaborative survey that has little interpretive value, but it is a period work . Some of the commentary reflects contemporary evaluations of the situation .
 Ayub appeared to have brought stability to a failing state . His apparent success brought him much acclaim as a model military ruler . Ayub was assassinated in 1991 .
 His article portrayed his paternalistic approach as the only reasonable methodology for representative government in the region . His article in Foreign Affairs portrayed his . approach as a paternalistic . approach .
 Ayub's experiment was the model that the Kennedy administration pursued in Iran . Ayub’s experiment was modeled on the model of the Kennedy Administration .
 There is an argument that Galbraith had always intended to leave after two years . There is also that his resignation was not a direct result of the failed U.S. arms deal for India .
 Galbraith most likely was simply fed up and decided to quit . Given the frustration, not only with the policy issues but with the bureaucracy as a whole, it's likely he was fed up with the issues .
 There is no record of anyone in the administration being upset to see him go . There are no records of anyone being upset by his departure from Washington .
 Ayub and the First Lady spent a well-publicized afternoon horseback-riding at a farm .
 In September 1962, Ayub stopped briefly in Washington on his way to a Commonwealth meeting in Canada . Ayub was visiting the U.S. in September 1962 when he died .
 Ayub accused the Indians of overstating their problems with China . According to Komer, nothing really transpired during the meeting with the exception .
 This did not particularly help Ayub’s credibility, because a border war broke out within a matter of months . Ayub's credibility was tarnished by the border war, which broke out just months later .
 Baydani was born in Cairo, and his wife was a close friend of Anwar Sadat’s wife . He was also close friends of Sadat's wife .
 Sadat became Baydani’s friend and a powerful patron within the Egyptian regime .
 Nasser could hardly be expected to look the other way when his Yemeni protégés took a Ba'thist tilt . The Ba’thists had supported the September 1961 coup against Egyptian rule in Syria; thus Nasser couldn't be expected .
 Jidda pointed out that the new YAR Prime Minister, Abdullah al-Sallal, could not have pulled it off without UAR support . The new Prime Minister will not be able to pull off without support from UAR .
 Nasser stated that the revolution in Yemen was a historical necessity and that the ‘feudal’ regime could not be allowed to return . In another meeting a year after the coup, Nasser said the revolution was a historic necessity .
 A paratrooper officer who was a member of the prominent Yemeni Zabarah family stated that he supported the Republic despite the fact that they had shot some of his relatives . The officer said that he supports the Republic .
 He believed that the revolution was a necessity, but perhaps all the executions were not . The revolution was not a necessity for the revolution, perhaps .
 He predicted that the Royalists would ‘cause trouble’ but that the YAR would survive . He also predicted that they would 'cause trouble' but that they wouldn’t survive .
 He urged U.S. recognition of the YAR as a counterbalance to the Soviets and Chinese . He urged United States recognition of YAR in a typical UAR argument .
 Reports from Yemen following coup influenced Washington’s view . This was typical of numerous reports coming out of Yemen following the coup .
 Jordanians threatened to act on behalf of the ‘legitimate’ government of Yemen against foreign intervention if asked to do so . The Jordanians said they would act in favour of Yemen's 'legitimate' government .
 Most Jordanians believe that the government is backing the ‘wrong horse’ in Yemen . The United States Embassy in Amman commented that most Jordanians believed the government was backing the 'wrong horse' in Yemen. The U.S. Embassy said that most of Jordanians are
 The Saudi Royal family must have shuddered at the thought of the Hashemite Arab Legion protecting the Holy Places . The Saudi royal family shudders at the prospect of protecting the holy places .
 Saudi Arabia drove the Hashemites out of Mecca and Medina in the 1920s . It was the Saudis who had driven them out of the city . The Saudis were direct decendants of the Prophet .
 Prince Talal, either on October 17 or the following day, renounced his royal title in protest . Talal renounced the title in October 17, 2013 . He is believed to be the son of Prince Charles .
 Washington told Ta’iz to ‘categorically assure’ the Yemenis that the U.S. was in no way supporting Saudi efforts to assist Yemeni loyalists . The United States told Ta'iz that the United States was not supporting the Saudi effort .
 SAG published a new series of laws and reforms, perhaps the most sweeping in history . The SAG has published a series of new laws and reform measures .
 This letter was responding to a letter from Kennedy on November 8, 1962 which strongly encouraged Feisal to continue with his program of reforms . Feisal responded to Kennedy's letter urging him to continue his reforms .
 He noted Kennedy’s advice that Saudi Arabia should not contribute to the ‘tense atmosphere’ in the region, all while supporting and supplying the tribal elements fighting the YAR government and the Egyptians .
 Ambassador Badeau was in Washington ostensibly on consultations but presumably pressing for just this recognition . Ambassador is in the U.S. to push for the recognition of Canada's Canadian heritage .
 He was figuratively, if not literally, at Strong’s elbow when this memo was written . Strong was at Strong's elbow when he wrote the memo .
 Badeau met with President Kennedy, so a direct appeal to the President was undoubtedly made . In addition to meeting with Kennedy, he also met with the President, so an appeal was made .
 The rapidity of the YAR’s recognition following this memo suggests very high-level involvement . It is believed to be the first time YAR has been recognized by a government agency .
 The Administration obtained no guarantees from the YAR, and little in the way of Egyptian goodwill . Badeau and Talbot, with the support of the President, pushed their agenda forward .
 Aden requested that London mount a diplomatic campaign to counteract Egyptian propaganda about the RAF bombarding the 'peaceful population' in Yemen and Oman .
 Krishna Menon’s army protégé, General Brij Mohn Kaul, is particularly interesting . He discusses the role of Menon and his protéé General Kaul in the war with China .
 Maxwell’s narrative of Kaul's relationship with Nehru and his rapid rise through the ranks is instructive . Perhaps most instructive is his narrative of his rise as an officer .
 Maxwell believes that General Kaul and Menon pushed Nehru into the occupation of Goa when he might have chosen a different option . While there is some debate about Nehru’s exact role in the decision-making process, Maxwell believes .
 Brown believes Nehru had little option but to end the Portuguese anachronism . Brown believes that Nehru was forced to do so . Brown: Nehru did not want to be seen as a colonialist .
 Whether Nehru decided on his own to take Goa or was maneuvered into doing so is immaterial . The fact is that without consulting Parliament, Nehru acted without consulting .
 They saw no downside in taking a provocative position with the Chinese, believing that it would merely increase domestic support for the government . As a result, they saw no upside in taking such a provocative stance with China .
 Maxwell argues that General Kaul and Krishna Menon intentionally hid those deficiencies from the Prime Minister . Maxwell argues General Menon and Krishna Kaul intentionally hid the deficiencies from Prime Minister Narendra Modi .
 Nehru conducted Indian diplomacy without significant input from others, with the exception of Krishna Menon . Nehru's diplomacy was conducted by himself alone, the exception being Menon.
 Maxwell states that Beijing used the argument that Ayub and the military dominance of Pakistan represented a more developed stage in the progression toward a Marxist state than that of India . Pakistan was ruled by Ayub in the early 1960s .
 As far as India was concerned, the Chinese viewed New Delhi as falling more and more under the influence of the United States . New Delhi is seen as falling under the influences of the U.S. as well as India, China says .
 The Chinese concluded that Soviet policy actually favored India, and that Moscow approved of the Indian alignment with the U.S. To add insult to injury, the Chinese concluded the Soviet policy favored India .
 Mullik, the erstwhile ‘intelligence chief, states that the policy was later criticized on the grounds that India was militarily weak . Mullik: The policy was then criticized for the reasons that it was criticized for being weak .
 Mullik states that the real problem with regard to the Chinese was the fact that the policy had not been implemented two years earlier, in October 1959 . Mullik: "The real problem" is that the Chinese policy was not implemented until October 1959, when it was implemented .
 Mullik defended both himself and Menon against charges that they had ‘caused’ the Chinese debacle . Mullik: ‘I’m not the only person to blame for what happened in China’ Mullik said .
 He argued that Menon was not responsible for the state of the army at the time of the invasion, nor was responsible for ‘forward policy’ that precipitated the Chinese attack .
 Mullik also defended himself against ministerial level charges of failure . Mullik defended himself from ministerial level level charges against him .
 Mullik hotly denied this; he claimed that the minister was upset became Menon had had him watched by one of the security services . Mullik said Menon was upset that he was being watched by a security services member . Menon said Mullik was angry that he had been watched
 During the conversation, Rusk raised Krishna Menon as a major issue in US-Indian relations . Rusk also raised the issue of the death of Menon, a former Indian diplomat .
 Rusk stated that Menon had been the ‘principal face and spokesman of India’ in the U.S. for many years . Rusk said Menon was a considerable problem in obtaining aid for India from the United States .
 Gandhi said it was impossible for her father, Nehru, to ‘handle’ or ‘dismiss’ Menon given his visibility and the U.S. criticism of him . Gandhi replied that she sympathized with the United States position on Menon .
 Talbot said Galbraith allowed personal issues to affect his conduct of government business in New Delhi . In an interview with Talbot on 31 May 2002, he stated that he allowed personal matters to affect government business .
 Talbot said Galbraith turned up at an army hospital in Hawaii with some unspecified medical ailment . Talbot commented that one of the reasons for his absence from the Embassy in New Delhi without notifying Washington and turned up in Hawaii .
 Talbot also commented that the Chinese victory in the border war left Nehru ‘a broken man’ and contributed to his rapid decline and death . Talbot said the Chinese won the war in India and left him a 'broken man' Nehru .
 This document provides the United States assessment of the London meetings . This document is remarkably similar to the Foreign Office and CRO documents .
 It reflected the Anglo-American agreement to coordinate assistance to India and work together to lessen the impact on Pakistan . The deal reflects an agreement to work with the U.S.
 Ambassador Galbraith had already received notice from sources in contact with the Second Secretary in the Political Section, Albert Lakeland, Jr., that the Indian cabinet and had met and called for Krishna Menon’s removal and that Nehru would ask for his resignation .
 Ambassadot: Something good had come out of China's military efforts . Ambassador: "Something good has come out" of Chinese military efforts.
 Galbraith took some pleasure in meeting with Menon later and seeing him desperately fighting for his political life . Menon's political life is on the verge of an end .
 Komer wanted Harriman to make it clear to Ayub that the aid would continue even in the event of a ceasefire . Fearing an end to military aid to India before it began, Komer feared it would end .
 Gundevia served in various capacities in the Indian Ministry of External Affairs from independence from independence to 1969 . He served as a diplomat in India's Foreign Office from independence until 1969 .
 During the period of the Chinese Border War, he was the Commonwealth Secretary . He was Commonwealth Secretary during the period during the Chinese border war .
 He provides a particularly interesting description of the climate in the Indian government during the Chinese Border war .
 He is very complimentary about Duncan Sandys’ efforts during the process of establishing a basis for further discussions on Kashmir . Mr Sandys says he hopes to establish a basis to further discussions .
 His description of Sandys’ meeting with himself, Nehru, and Desai on 29 November 1962 is particularly entertaining .
 Gundevia described it as ‘three-cornered pencil ding-dong’, with Nehru looking on in amusement . Nehru looked on in amused. Gundeviia described the incident as a 'three-cornered pencil dong'
 Feisal wanted the UAR to withdraw to its bases immediately . Feisal also wanted a withdrawal of all supplies, tanks, and ammunition supplied to the YAR government . The UAR government was supplying supplies and ammunition .
 Under the rules of engagement, pilots were not authorized to shoot except in self-defense, and could not pursue UAR aircraft . Pilots were not allowed to shoot at UAR planes .
 Egyptians unaware of restrictions and unwilling to press the issue to see what would happen . Egyptians were unaware of the restrictions .
 It did however constitute a highly visible symbol of U.S. support for Saudi Arabia . It was a tangible signal to Nasser that Washington would protect the Saudi regime .
 Sabry became Nasset’s ‘alter ego’ to deal with foreign missions and emissaries during the early 1960s . Sabry was Nasset's 'alter ego' during the time .
 Ali Sabry was humiliated in 1952 when, on a mission to the United States for arms, he returned empty-handed . This is that same same same Sabry who was humiliated when he was humiliated .
 U.S. officials told Sabry that the decision had to await the arrival of the new administration . During the last months of the Truman administration, United States officials said it had to wait .
 Batatu also put Communist dead between February 8 and 10 at more than 5,000 . King Hussein of Jordan of Jordan said he knew ‘for a certainty’ that the coup had the support of United States intelligence .
 With reference to this last statement, the entire United States government supported the coup . The entire U.S. government supported this coup .
 The United States lacked the capability to organize and carry out the coup, but certainly after it had occurred the U.S. government preferred the Nasserists and Ba’thists in power .
 Syrian Ba’thists had outmaneuvered their Nasserist allies by announcing the coup for March 7 . The coup was announced by Ba'thists and their allies .
 They told their Nasserist counterparts that it had been postponed until March 10, and then executed it on March 8 . They told Nasserists that they had been postponing the execution until March 8, then executed .
 The upshot was that the Ba’thists were in control before the Nasserists realized what had happened . The Ba'thists had been in control of the country before they realized what happened .
 Ba’thist unity talks between the Iraqi and Syrian branches of the party had already been under way . Ba'thists unity talks are now picking up steam .
 Syrian Ba’thists had one eye cocked over their shoulders, determined to prevent a repeat of their 1958-1961 debacles with Nasser .
 The Syrian delegates called Nasser “Your Excellency’ or “Mr President’, while he called them by their first names . Nasser called the Syrian delegates by his first names, while the delegates were called “You Excellencies’
 The meeting was ‘theater’ planned by Nasser for public consumption without the knowledge of his Syrian counterparts . Nasser planned the meeting without knowledge of Syria's government .
 This set of documents, transcripts of the meetings published by the Egyptians, was an obvious attempt to completely undermine the position of the Ba’th in Syria and the region as a whole . The Egyptian government published the documents in an attempt to undermine its position in Syria, the author says
 Transcripts were printed in Al-Ahram between 21 June and 22 July 1963 and broadcast over Radio Cairo . The transcripts were printed and broadcast in Cairo .
 Badeau had triangulation experts come to Cairo in order to pinpoint the exact location of Sawt al-Umma al-Arabiyya . The location of the site is still unknown .
 In a meeting the next day, Nasser apologized to Badeau for Sharaf, citing his inexperience, and for his lie about the radio broadcasts . Nasser said he had told Sharaf not to lie if the other side knew you were lying . Sharaf was the first
 Badeau expressed his concerns in a thinly-veiled ‘hypothetical telegram’ to Moscow from the Soviet Ambassador . The telegram was sent to the Soviet Embassy in Moscow .
 It was a creative way for Badeau to make his point, and events would prove it to be remarkably accuarate . It was the creative way to make a point, but it would prove otherwise .
 Ambassador Macomber laid out both the economic and political situation in Jordan . In a letter, he laid out the political and economic conditions in Jordan.
 The U.S. had a choice between becoming the benefactor for the Hashemite regime in Jordan or allowing political and economic forces to take their course and undermine the Jordanian government .
 As a result of this discussion, President Kennedy asked for a meeting with Macomber . President Kennedy later asked for the meeting to be held .
 Macomber identified the principle threat to Hussein as internal and nonCommunist . Hussein was Saddam Hussein's main rival .
 In arguments reminiscent of the Dulles years, Macomber made the case that the pro-Western orientation of the Jordanian army was the critical element for the stability of the regime . In arguments .
 Macomber had close ties to Allen Dulles through the Office of Strategic Services and CIA, and to John Foster Dulles, as his erstwhile special assistant . He became the single most influential voice on the situation in Jordan .
 Dann’s work provides excellent insight into the petiod, but his view that the Kennedy administration was willing to see the Hashemite regime in Jordan collapse is somewhat misleading .
 The author uses Talbot’s statements on the maintenance of the ‘separate state’ in Jordan as an indication that this did not necessarily mean the Hashemite state . The author says Talbot's statements on maintaining the 'separate states' in Jordan are an
 Since the crisis of 1958 the U.S. government had seen no real alternative to the Hashemites . Theoretically this may have been true, but the hard reality was that . The hard reality is that the United States government had no real alternatives, writes CNN.com's
 The Kennedy administration had little choice but to follow the course laid out by Eisenhower . Sir Charles Johnston, the British Ambassador, was key to the Kennedy administration's success .
 King Hussein's visit was cleared through Myer Feldman, Kennedy’s advisor on Israeli affairs . King Hussein visited the U.S. during his visit to Israel .
 He agrees that of all the Arabs, Hussein is probably the most acceptable in 1964 . Hussein was probably the least acceptable in the Arab world in 1964, he says .
 Nasser’s view of the internal political situation in the U.S. was not far off the mark, he says . Nasser's view of internal political situations in the United States is not far from the mark .
 Mufti provides an interesting and detailed outline of the events of November 1963 that led to the Aref coup . The coup took place in November 1963 and led to a coup against the government .
 Komer was still convinced that the U.S. had to force reform in Iran, but he lacked any workable specifics .
 Holmes, shortly after his arrival, clued into the fact that Shah was the center of power and that the National Front was no longer a real threat to the throne . Holmes, who was in charge of the Shah, was able to see Shah was in control of the country .
 At the same time, Komer was calling Amini the ‘last hope’ and worrying about building ‘bridges’ to the National Front . Amini was the 'last hope' at the time .
 NACPM, CFPF, 1963, Political 6 Prominent Persons Pak to Political 14 Elections Pakistan, 2/1/63, 2.2/1-63 . Elections Pakistan was Pakistan's first election in 1963 .
 Komer stated that despite the situation with Pakistan, the U.S. intended to go ahead with the military assistance to India . Komer said the United States intended to continue the assistance .
 When Bowles returned later to brief the effort, Johnson turned him down . Johnson turned down Bowles' request .
 Johnson finally set a meeting to discuss the India military-aid plan in late May, but Nehru died three days before the meeting and the effort collapsed . Bowles states that Johnson finally agreed to meet with Nehru, but the meeting collapsed .
 Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, January 1963 .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volume VIII, EightyFourth Congress Second Session, 1956 . The Committee is now in its second session .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Volame XIX, EightySixth Congress First Session, 1959 . Executive Session of the Committee was held in 1959 . The committee is the current Foreign Relations committee .
 John F. Kennedy, John F Freedom of Communications — Final Report of the Committee on Commerce, United States Senate . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 President Gamal Abdel Nasser to the Arab Socialist Union, February 21, 1965 . Nasser's address was a speech to Arab Socialist Party members .
 President Gamal Abdel Nasser on Consolidation of the Cause of World Peace . Gamal Nasser was assassinated in Egypt in the early 1950s .
 President Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s Speeches and Press Interviews, January— December 1958 . President Abdel Nasser was assassinated in the wake of the Arab Spring in 1958 .
 United Arab Republic Information Department — Al-Shaab Printing House, 1959 . United Arab republic Information Department . Al-shaab printing house, 1959.
 Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India Press, 1955 . Publications Division . of the ministry of information and Broadcasting .
 Excerpts from Prime Minister Nehru’s Speeches in Parliament: 1954-1956 . Nehru was prime minister of India from 1954 to 1956 .
 Ahmad, Muhammad Abd-al-Aziz and Wafiq al-Tahmi’s Tajraba al-Wabida bayn Misr wa Suria .
 Jamal. Al-Atasi, Jamal. Jamal. [alah ala al-tajribat al-thawrijat li jamal abd-al-nasir wa ala fikratu istratiji wa altarikhi]
 A/Thawra li Jamal Abd-al-Nasser wa ala Fikrihi al-Istratyi wa al-Tarikh . The king is believed to be the most powerful monarch in the world .
 John S. Badeau, John S East and West of Suex, the Story of the Modern Middle East, is published in the book "Suex" The story of the modern Middle East in Suex is told in a book published by John S .
 The Saudi-Egyptian conflict over North Yemen, 1962-1970, was Saudi Arabia's first conflict in Yemen . The conflict was centered in North Yemen .
 A Study of Iraq’s Old Landed and Commercial Classes and of its Communists, Ba’thists and Free Officers . A Study . of Iraq's old Landed . and Commercial classes and of . its Communists and . Communists . The study was conducted in Iraq in the
 Marxist Politics and the Arab-Israeli Conflict in Egypt and Israel, 1948-1965, is a study of the Arab conflict in Egypt . Marxist politics and the conflict in Israel and Egypt have been at the center of the conflict for decades .
 Robert D. Burrowes, Robert D The Yemen Arab Republic, The Politics of Development, 1962-1986 . The Yemen Republic was the country's first Arab state .
 Feuchtwanger, E.J. and Peter Nailor The Soviet Union and the Third World. The Soviet U.S. and the third World.
 Gerges, Fawaz A The Superpowers and the Middle East, Regional and International Politics, 1955— 1967. Gerges . Fawaz . Gerges: "The Superpowers" and the Mideast are the world's superpowers .
 Rathalik infajar al-srab fi falistin, 1948-1998. al-gahira: dar al al-shuruq, 2003 . al-Gahira is the world's most famous Arabic author of a novel .
 Richard Immerman: John Foster Dulles and the Diplomacy of the Cold War . Dulles was one of the most powerful diplomats in the world . He says Dulles' role was a key diplomat in Washington . In his book, he writes that Dulles tried to counterbalance
 A Biography of Eleanor, Allen, and John Foster Dulles and Their Family Network. The Dulles family network. The network was founded by Dulles, Allen Dulles .
 In Kemal H Karpat Political and Social Thought in the Contemporary Middle East in the contemporary Middle East . Political and social thought in the Mideast is thought to be a key part of the Middle East society .
 Hisham Sharaby Theory and Politics in the Arab World, Critical Responses, is critical of Sharaby’s work . Sharaby: Theory and politics in Arab World is critical to the Arab world .
 The Transformation of John Foster Dulles from Prophet of Realism to Priest of Nationalism . Dulles' transformation of realism to nationalism was a turning point of American nationalism . Dulls was a leader of the Democratic Party in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Emergence of Pan-Arabism and its Impact on Egyptian Foreign Policy, 1945-1981 . Egypt's relationship with the Arab world has been described as one of the world's most important foreign policy decisions .
 An Egyptian View, 1952-1970 — the Impact of the Differences between Arab Socialism and Marxist-Leninist Ideologies. An Egyptian view, 1952/1970 — . The impact of the differences between Arab socialism and Marxist Leninist Ideology. Arab Socialism .
 The United States, the Arab Middle East, and the Eisenhower Doctrine, 1956-1959 . The U.S. and the Arab Mideast were at the center of the Eisenhower doctrine . The Eisenhower Doctrine was a model for the Arab world .