 After the tapes were declassified in the late 1990s, I wrote three books about their historical importance . The tapes are declassified, and the tapes are still relevant today .
 For thirty years, the American perspective on the Cuban missile crisis was dominated by Robert Kennedy's memoir Thirteen Days . Robert Kennedy’s memoir Th13 Days was published in 1987 .
 RFK claimed that war was avoided because the president stood firm against Nikita Khrushchev’s threats . RFK said that war avoided because of the president standing firm against the threat of war .
 Thirteen Days became the accepted template for understanding the Kennedy administration’s handling of the Cuban missile crisis . JFK's advisers later evaded many errors and falsehoods in the book .
 The Week the World Stood Still offers readers a narrative of these historically unique ExComm discussions, enabling them to get beyond the accumulated myths of three decades . The week the world stood still offers a narrative .
 Sherwin deftly reconstructs the thinking, expectations, miscalculations, and blunders of policy makers and politicians from the end of World War II to the Cuban missile crisis . Sherwin won the Pulitzer Prize for an authoritative biography of Robert Oppenheimer .
 Voorhees' assessment of John F Kennedy's leadership during the Cuban missile crisis is strikingly different from most books on the subject . The book is based on his assessment of JFK's leadership in Cuba .
 JFK's decision-making is examined through the lens of the president's domestic political concerns and use of back-channel diplomacy with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev .
 Voorhees insists the Cuban missile crisis did not bring the world to the brink of nuclear Armageddon . The book promises to become an integral part of the conversation about the crisis .
 In 1960, a planned summit meeting in Paris between the US, the USSR, England, and France was suddenly jeopardized when an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Russia . The pilot was captured and the pilot captured .
 President Eisenhower agreed to suspend flights until the end of his term . The Soviet leader angrily denounced the offer and returned to Moscow . Eisenhower agreed .
 President Kennedy’s concern in 1962 about “another U-2 crisis” convinced him to suspend U.2 flights over Cuba . The pause lasted from late August to early October .
 JFK did agree to authorize one flight over western Cuba in response to pressure from CIA director John McCone . The missiles were discovered just before they had become operational .
 At the height of the Cuban missile crisis, President Kennedy met with the Pentagon’s head of civil defense, Steuart Pittman, to assess plans for protecting civilian population .
 The sound quality of the tape recording suddenly went from poor to inaudible . Kennedy became quite irritated, but unfortunately, his harsh reply was largely lost . The recording of Kennedy's harsh reply is largely lost because of the sound quality .
 The books discussed above concentrate on the missile crisis in the US, but there was also a crisis in Moscow and Havana . The books discuss the crisis in Russia and Cuba .
 Americans called this event “the Cuban missile crisis,” the Soviets called it ‘the Caribbean Crisis,’ and the Cubans “The October crisis” because conflict with the U.S. had become a recurring fact of life in Cuba . Americans called it
 Kennedy administration had also been sponsoring sabotage and political assassination in Cuba kept secret from the American people but well known to the Russians and the Cubans . The Kennedy administration also was sponsoring sabotage in Cuba .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next week for a new gallery .
 Topics are things like World War 1, dinosaurs, grief, or jazz . Try again. Try again .