 U.S. aerial reconnaissance pictures showed about forty offensive nuclear missiles being installed and manned in Cuba by Soviet technicians in October 1962 .
 These missiles had an effective range of a little more than two thousand miles . They threatened much of America . These missiles were launched in the 1980s and 'threatened America'
 President John F Kennedy refused to authorize air strikes against missile installations in Cuba . President Kennedy demanded the immediate removal of the missiles from Cuba .
 President Obama has ordered a naval blockade and quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba . The blockade is meant to stop the flow of offensive military gear to the island .
 Organization of American States recommends stopping flow of offensive weapons to Cuba . By a vote of 20 to 0, the OAS voted to take necessary measures to stop the flow of weapons to the island nation .
 Kennedy told Khrushchev that if Cuba launched any missiles at the U.S. it would be considered an act of war by the Soviet Union . The United States would retaliate directly against the Soviet Soviet Union, Kennedy said .
 Soviet ships carrying offensive weapons to Cuba approached the blockade, while cargo ships were allowed to pass . U.S. waited for Soviet ships to pass the blockade of Cuba .
 The Soviet government agreed to dismantle its bases and remove the missiles . The Soviets agreed to remove missiles from the Soviet Union in return for the bases and missiles .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev came to a compromise that if the nuclear missiles were pulled out of Cuba, the American quarantine against Cuba would end and the United States would not invade the island . The U.S. did not invade Cuba in the 1960s .
 The United States also agreed to speed up removal of nuclear missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also agreed that the removal of the nuclear missiles would speed up .
 President Fulgencio Batista fled Cuba in January 1959 . Fidel Castro proclaimed victory in Santiago . Castro declared Castro was the new premier and president in February 1959 .
 Kennedy replied that all work in Cuba must stop before any negotiation . Kennedy replied: "All work must be stopped before any negotiations"
 NSA has sponsored a series of interpretive articles on the crisis as part of the Cold War International History Project . The NSA has also sponsored an interpretive article about the crisis in Cold War .
 Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Soviet Collapse , provides a comprehensive description of the crisis . Castro's book, "Castle," is published by John Avlon, a historian and author of the book, Castro .
 Robert Kennedy, The Thirteen Days, are the memoirs of one of the key participants in the crisis . Robert Kennedy's memoirs are published by Robert Kennedy at the age of 50 .
 Cuba's Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis by James Blight and Philip Brennes. Cuba's struggle with the superpowers . after the missile crisis .