 Batista and his friends were corrupt . Millions of dollars were pumped in to Cuba but little of it met the ordinary people . Batista was corrupt .
 In 1959, after a three year revolution, Batista was overthrown and Castro was in power . Castro wanted to see that the people had rights and in 1959, he wanted the people to have a better life .
 "The first thing was to see that the old leaders of the government were punished for what they did to the ordinary people," says David Cameron . "The old leaders were punished," says Cameron .
 Castro took all the American businesses as he believed that they belonged to Cuba and its people . Castro believed that the U.S. businesses belonged to him and his people .
 He did however let the USA keep its naval base that was on the east of the island .
 Spies told him that there were no nuclear weapons on Cuba, but he was unsure what the USSR intended . It meant that the Soviet Union was expanding into their sphere of influence, he said .
 By this point, Cuba's sugar exports that once went to the USA had now changed direction and was sold to the USSR, who were only too happy to help . The USSR was happy to sell the sugar to Cuba .
 In April 1961, Kennedy decided to take action against Cuba as a U.S. spy plane had recently taken photographs showing clear development of several nuclear missile bases .
 Kennedy could not tolerate this any longer when these missiles where only twenty minuets away from Washington . Kennedy could no longer tolerate this . Kennedy would not tolerate it any longer .
 He flew over 1400 anti-Castro exiles who had fled to the USA into Cuba into Cuba . They landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba .
 Cuban troops killed all 1400 within days . They were greeted with 20,000 Cuban troops who killed them .
 To the USSR, this suggests that the USA didn't want to get directly involved with Cuba, so the USSR kept sending weapons and missiles to Cuba . This suggests that this is why the USA kept sending missiles and weapons to Cuba, says the USSR .
 In May 1962, Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, made a public announcement stating that the USSR was supplying Cuba with arms . But he didn't admit to the nuclear weapons now on the island .
 By July 1962, Cuba had the best well-equipped army in the whole of Latin-America . Cuba's army was one of the best in Latin-American countries .