 Militiamen trained in the Escambray mountains while superpowers tested each other’s resolve . Rafael Lima November 2012 .
 MiG-15s and -19s were the first weapons in a buildup in Cuba that included Soviet fighters, bombers, radar, anti-aircraft batteries, and eventually the nuclear missiles that would ignite the 13-day standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in
 A year after MiGs arrived, Cuba’s armed forces chief, Raul Castro, signed a secret agreement in Moscow allowing the Soviets to introduce offensive nuclear weapons to the island, just 90 miles from the Florida Keys .
 Truckloads of Soviet military equipment began flooding into Cuba . Not long afterward, truckloads of military equipment were flooding into the country .
 Roberto Canas was a 13-year-old schoolboy living at the time near the small town of Moron . Canas is now a Miami resident .
 Canas remembers playing in his front yard and seeing the convoys roll past . Canas recalls playing in front yard, seeing convoys .
 For days, the mysterious trucks rumbled through the Cuban streets, highways, and countryside . The mysterious trucks have been seen in Cuba for days .
 Enormous 18-wheelers moved in convoys that stretched for hundreds of yards . Convoys cut off traffic by cutting off traffic . 18-wheeled convoys stretched for several yards .
 Convoys would sometimes pause while power lines and mailboxes were removed to make room for their passage . Power lines, mailboxes along the route were removed from the route to make way for the convoys .
 As the trucks passed through the various towns, they left a trail of downed telephone poles and crushed huts . The trucks left behind a trail left behind by the storm .
 I had left Cuba, as a seven-year-old, two years before the missiles came, but I have heard many stories about what it was like on the island for the people who stayed . I left Cuba as a child, but has heard many of the stories of the people
 Del Pino was a hero of the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . He had flown a Lockheed T-33 jet, shooting down two Douglas B-26 Invaders and sinking several CIA ships .
 Del Pino's performance in 1961 set him on a course to become Castro’s chief air force adviser . As such, he was a key eyewitness to the missile crisis in 1961 . He became Castro's air force advisor and key eyewitness .
 At 74, retired general is living in Europe under the U.S. Federal Witness Protection Program . He is now living under the protection program .
 One of the top-ranking defectors from the Cuban government, he fled Cuba in May 1987 . He was one of Cuba's top defectors, fleeing Cuba in 1987 .
 Del Pino recalls dozens of MiG-21F.13 fighters arriving at Santa Clara air base in central Cuba in August 1962 . The fighters were assembled by Soviet engineers .
 Weeks before missiles arrived that September, Soviet troops threw up cinder-block walls around parts of Cuba’s main harbor, Mariel, to shield it from view . Weeks before the missiles arrived, Soviet forces threw up walls around Mariel .
 Residents within a mile of the port were suddenly ordered to evacuate their homes . Residents within the area were suddenly told to evacuate . Residents were ordered to leave their homes after the incident .
 All Cubans were barred from Mariel, where the first missiles would come ashore . After that, all Cubans, even members of the Cuban military, were barred . The first missiles came ashore in the 1980s .
 It didn't take long before word of the convoys, and the appearance in Havana of uniformed Soviet soldiers, reached U.S. intelligence analysts . The convoys included young Soviet men in checkered shirts and ill-fitting trousers .
 The CIA stepped up its overflights of Cuba with the Lockheed U-2 spyplane in August . The stories streamed in from returning tourists, diplomats, and newspaper reporters .
 Reports of truck convoys…were critical to discovering the secret cargo . Truck convoys were critical to finding out what the cargo was .
 Major Richard Heyser took photos of the western part of the island in the early hours of Sunday, October 14 . Major Richard Hyser was a U-2 Air Force pilot who took photos .
 The next morning, fuzzy images of rural Cuba were unfolded on United States analysts’ light tables at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Suitland, Maryland . U.S. analysts' light tables unfolded the images of Cuba on the night .
 The weapons were determined to be R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles . The weapons are believed to be medium range ballistic missiles.
 They could reach Washington, D.C., along with 40 percent of the Strategic Air Command’s bomber bases, in less than 20 minutes after being launched .
 On October 22, President John F Kennedy announced to the world that he knew of the nuclear threat in Cuba . President Kennedy announced the threat to Cuba on October 22 .
 Kennedy ordered a ‘quarantine’ of the island to intercept any Soviet ships carrying more missiles . Kennedy ordered the quarantine to intercept Soviet ships with more missiles.
 We were told the Yanquis were invading us and that the Russians were protecting us . We were also told that the Yanqis were invaders and that they were protected by the Russians .
 When we discovered that Fidel had allowed Russian missiles on the island, we thought that was the end of the story . We thought that . When . Fidel had . allowed Russian . missiles on . island, it was thought that that was . end of story, but that was not the end
 This call to action reminded the island's six million people of the showdown’s seriousness . The island nation is in the midst of a major political crisis .
 Castro strengthened the police-state he imposed after the Bay of Pigs . Castro had strengthened his police state after the attack .
 Anyone suspected of being a “counter-revolutionary” faced prison or the firing squad . People were encouraged to report their suspicions about counter-revolutionaries activities .
 The missile crisis “was a period of heightened tension for the government and for the Cuban people,” says Suchlicki . The missile incident was a time of heightened tensions for Cuba and its people .
 By October 25, Cuban men and women of all ages and professions were taking their place in people’s defense units . Civilian “militias” organized by the Cuban military to counter the perceived United States threat .
 These were unarmed civil defense units, and included brigades for health and sanitation, firefighting, and construction brigades .
 Only firefighters and medical emergency responders conducted drills . But they were loosely organized; only firefighters and emergency responders did .
 Fidel is telling everyone the Yanquis are coming back to finish the job. Fidel is up there telling everyone . Fidel is ... coming back, says Fidel . The Yanquios are going to finish it.
 Fidel Castro’s anti-American speeches during the crisis were epic, says Suchlicki . Fidel Castro's anti-U.S. speeches against the U.S., he says .
 The speeches railed against the United States, and warned of a Yanqui attack at any moment . The speeches also warned of an attack on the U.S. at any time .
 The Cubans did not realize the danger they were in; it all happened too quickly . "The Cubans were in danger," says CNN's John Defterios .
 People may have seen trucks covered in tarps, or maybe low-flying planes, but they had no idea what was under those tarps or what those planes were looking at . People may not know what they were seeing .
 The Cuban government ordered all armed forces units to be ready for combat . Cuban government has ordered all military units ready to fight for the country .
 Del Pino was told to report to a secret command post at armed forces headquarters on the outskirts of Havana . Castro urgently needed an air force adviser, he was told . He was told that the air force was urgently needed in Cuba .
 “With the imminent threat of war, the high command felt this was the safest and most reasonable place for the main command post,” del Pino writes . “The high command decided this is the safest place to be located,’ he writes .
 On October 25, with the United Nations attempting to resolve the crisis, Khrushchev sent a coded message to Kennedy through the Soviet Embassy in Washington . The message was in exchange for an end to the naval blockade, and a guarantee that the U.S. would not attack Cuba .
 Castro grew livid when he learned the Soviets were negotiating with the Americans behind his back, del Pino says . That evening, Castro arrived at the riverside bunker, read the command post reports, he says . Castro read the reports and grew angry when he found out .
 He called for his Soviet advisers and shouted at them that he was ordering all Cuban military units to fire on any U.S. aircraft in Cuban airspace . The Cuban president ordered Cuban forces to fire at any United States aircraft .
 Castro paced back and forth, rolling his cigar between thumb and fingers, del Pino writes . Castro's cigar rolled between his fingers and his thumb, the writer says .
 Cuban pilots had no radar and would be able to engage only if they were lucky enough to chance upon a visual sighting of an enemy aircraft . He pointed out that the Cuban pilots have no radar .
 Under the circumstances, he told his president, he was not hopeful of shooting down U.S. aircraft .
 Khrushchev sent another secret letter to the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . The letter was delivered by Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to Robert Kennedy's brother, the president's brother .
 It called for the United States to also withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for removal of the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. should also pull its Jupiter missile launchers from Turkey .
 President Kennedy, Dobrynin was told, was anxious to get rid of the already obsolete Jupiters . President Kennedy had ordered their removal some time ago . The Jupits were already obsolete and had been ordered out of service .
 The missiles were installed under the auspices of NATO, Kennedy says . It would be difficult for the U.S. to unilaterally remove them without damaging the structure of NATO .
 The next morning, October 27, an unarmed U-2F piloted by 35-year-old Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. took off from McCoy Air Force Base in central Florida and headed for Cuba .
 At noon, three SA-2 anti-aircraft missiles were launched toward Anderson’s airplane; two hit it, killing him . Anderson's plane was hit by the missiles, which were nestled in tropical foliage of Banés .
 Anyone who is knowledgeable in the complexities of these missile systems can understand that it takes at least two years of learning and training to be capable of operating them with minimum efficiency .
 Several U.S. Navy RF-8A Crusader aircraft were also fired on over Cuba . The U-2 was hit four hours after it was hit .
 One was hit by a 37-mm shell but managed to return to base in Key West, Florida . One of the U.S. Navy SEALs hit by the shell but returned safely .
 At 4m. the day of the U-2 shootdown, Kennedy summoned his advisers to the White House . Kennedy urgently summoned advisers to White House to discuss the situation . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be surprised if you're going to die"
 A message was sent to the United Nations Secretary General U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out . The Soviets agreed to suspend the work on missiles while talks were held .
 Army General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delivered the news about Anderson and the U-2 . Kennedy’s meeting was interrupted by the news of Anderson .
 President Obama resisted a U.S. retaliatory attack on Cuba . His advisers urged him to return fire if he attacked, but he resisted .
 If that secrecy were breached, the U.S. public and NATO allies would see the deal as a concession to blackmail . If that were breached it would have been seen as an attempt to blackmail the United States .
 The full terms of the agreement would not become publicly known until years later . Though the crisis was over, the full terms were not publicly known .
 Historian and Kennedy adviser Arthur Schlesinger said he believed Castro did not want the missiles, but that Khrushchev pressured him to take them . Kennedy adviser told National Public Radio in October 2002 that he believes Castro didn't want them .
 The missiles in Cuba were always under Soviet control . Crucial to the peaceful resolution of the crisis was that the missiles were always in Soviet control of Cuba .
 Khrushchev writes that Castro had pleaded for Moscow to launch a pre-emptive nuclear strike . Castro was "hotheaded" and "hot-headed" about a nuclear strike, he writes . Khrushchevitch writes .
 Suchlicki: In the Cuban-Soviet relationship, the Soviets clearly had the upper hand . The Soviets had the better control of Cuba, he says . The relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union was very different .
 Though that war did not come, the crisis led to significant actions on both sides . The crisis was a major event in the U.S. history of the Second World War .
 Washington and Moscow set up the Hotline Agreement, establishing a direct means of communication between the White House and the Kremlin . The agreement was set up between the two countries .
 Anderson became the first recipient of the new Air Force Cross medal . Anderson was buried in November 1962 with full honors in Greenville, South Carolina .
 Workers rally in Havana a week after President John F Kennedy announced a U.S. blockade of Cuba . President Kennedy announced the blockade a week before .
 Near the El Nicho nature park on Cuba’s south coast, a MiG-15 and an S-125 surfacetoair missile commemorate the near-war 50 years ago .
 A U-2 photo captures a Soviet truck convoy deploying missiles near San Cristobal on October 14, 1962 . The U.2 photo was taken by U.S. photographer Cristian Viarisio .
 Militiamen reinforce antiaircraft guns on Havana’s shoreline in early October 1962 . Cuban President George W. Bush was assassinated in October 1962 in Havana .
 Major Rudolf Anderson Jr.’s U-2 is in a Havana museum . The battered engine of the plane is now in a museum in Havana .
 The U.S. Army set up anti-aircraft rockets in Key West, Florida, during the Cold War . They pointed them out over the Florida Straits .
 The presence of Soviet nuclear missiles just 90 miles from Florida terrified Americans . Americans were terrified of the threat .
 Cuban slogan: “Fatherland or death; we will prevail” was a popular slogan for Cubans . Cubans were killed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Khrushchev and Castro signed secret pact on July 3, 1962, to allow nuclear missiles into Cuba . The pact was signed by Raul Castro a day after the two leaders signed a secret pact to allow the missiles into the country .
 Arriving in June 1961, the fighter was used for patrols and intercepts . Arrived in May 1961, it was used to intercepts and patrols .
 Also shipped in were MiG-19 and MiG21F.13 fighters, and nuclear-capable Ilyushin Il-28 bombers, flown by Soviet pilots .
 The CIA had been flying the Lockheed U-2 spyplane over Cuba twice a month and supplied data about the arms buildup . The plane was flying over Cuba to provide information about the weapons buildup .
 Air Force U-2 spotted mediumrange ballistic missiles near San Cristobal, Cuba, on October 14, 1962 . The U.S. Air Force saw the missiles in the Cuban Islands in 1962 .
 The Soviets’ shootdown of a U-2F on October 27 almost brought the two sides to war . The shootdown was the first time the U.2F was shot down by the Soviet Union .
 RF-8A Crusader flew dangerous low-level photo-reconnaissance missions for the U.S. Navy .
 The flights, which began on October 23, 1962, confirmed the Soviets were installing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba . The flights were confirmed that the Soviets had installed the missiles in the country .
 The Air Force's RF-101 Voodoo helped confirm at the end of the crisis that the missile sites were being dismantled . Also flying low-altitude reconnaissance missions was the Air Force’s supersonic RF- 101 Voodoo, which helped confirm the site was being dismantled