 The United States and the Soviet Union were on opposing sides during the Cold War . The U.S. and the USSR were the main players in this crisis .
 First, during the crisis, leaders of powerful countries had to make decisions about a nuclear weapon set-up at a time of great uncertainty .
 Information about the real situation in Cuba was lacking on the U.S. side, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The crisis was solved successfully without military conflict or a deep diplomatic rift . Second, the crisis was successfully solved without a deep rift or military conflict .
 The crisis is one of the most thoroughly analysed examples of political leadership, and has inspired such decision-making theory classics as Allison and Zelikow’s Essence of Decision, as well as more recent studies on this topic .
 What happened is still considered to be a benchmark of good leadership and decision-making . What happened was still considered a benchmark for good leadership .
 These tapes have been gradually released during recent decades . They provide a unique opportunity for analysing the ongoing contemplation and negotiation of the top management of a superpower during a serious crisis .
 As far as the author of this book knows, there exists no equivalent real-time, detailed verbal data about any other strategic decision-making incident .
 In this case study, I will be leaning on the reports of the original archive researcher of the tapes, Sheldon Stern . I will focus on the turns and events within the group that are of interest in the light of the more general questions .
 In public, Kennedy answers positively to Khrushchev, promising that the U.S. would abstain from invading Cuba . Kennedy also wants to explain the options for relieving tensions regarding Turkey .
 The purpose is not to provide actual empirical or historical analysis, but to go over the dynamics and shifts in the crisis group’s actions that are essential with regard to wise leadership . The purpose of this article is to provide an analysis of the dynamics of the crisis .
 All excerpts and other background information have been sourced from Stern’s overview of the crisis, summarised from the perspective of issues pertinent to the wisdom framework of the book . The book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Oxford University .
 The participants are not used to reading the symbols of spy plane photographs . They have to ask how this material is definite proof that these are Soviet nuclear missiles . The participants have to read the symbols and ask how they are proof .
 CNN's John Sutter talks about the effects and consequences of an armed strike in Syria . Then, the conversation moves quickly to the effects of the attack, he says .
 The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defence and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff each give their own assessment .
 Everyone views a quick air strike against missile bases to be inevitable . The U.S. military says a quick strike on missile bases is inevitable .
 The question lies mainly in how efficient a mere strike would be to remove the military threat . The question is whether a strike could be effective in removing the threat from Syria .
 Larger operations, such as a fullscale invasion of Cuba, are also on the table . The U.S. government is considering sending troops to Cuba, Cuba and other countries .
 Rusk continues by stating that this could be a countermove to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization new nuclear missiles in Europe, which the people of the Soviet Union could consider to be a genuine threat to their security . Rusk says the move could be counter-movement to the new nuclear
 Secretary of State Rusk continues speculation that Khrushchev might be seeking a psychological reminder of what it is like living in the vicinity of a real missile threat . Rusk speculates that the former Soviet leader might be looking for a psychological counterweight to the real threat .
 Another emerging theory is that the Russians are trying to find a solution to the Berlin crisis by blackmailing the U.S. with nuclear weapons positioned in the nearby areas . The U.K. is believed to be holding nuclear weapons in the area of Berlin .
 Robert Kennedy suggests a full-scale invasion . Even a small strike would in practice expand into a more extensive conflict . Robert Kennedy says even a small attack would expand into an extensive conflict.
 JFK asks the army commander whether it would be possible to mobilise a large number of troops within seven days . JFK also asks if the army could mobilise large numbers of troops in a week . JFK asks whether it is possible to mobilize large numbers in seven days. JFK asks: '
 He is concerned how the Cuban people would react to a possible takeover operation by the Americans . Furthermore, he is concerned about how they would react .
 The leading idea is still a surprise attack on the missile bases . However, the leading idea for the attack is still to surprise attack the bases .
 The President is thinking hopefully that the Russians would only use regular bombs in their aircraft . The President says he hopes that the Russian aircraft will only use bombs .
 In the evening of the same day, the discussion of the interpretation of the situation and various options continues at another meeting .
 The consensus is that a military strike is almost unavoidable, despite the violent reaction of the opposing side . Although a political or diplomatic route is also on the table, a political option is also under consideration .
 Intelligence agents have established that the missiles will be operational soon . The missiles are expected to be operational in the near future .
 At this stage, the President again attempts to open up emotional consensus by contemplating his own role in increasing the confrontation . At this point, he attempts to reopen the debate by contemplating himself .
 He himself had emphasised that the armament of Cuba must not be allowed, and now he must respond to the situation with strength, he says . He says .
 The threat of nuclear weapons in a broad sense has not changed between the superpowers . On the other hand, the threat of nukes has never changed between superpowers, experts say .
 Kennedy reflects on the extent to which he is in danger of ending up in an uncontrollable vicious circle of rhetoric and moves, where the stakes are raised at every round . In other words, Kennedy reflects .
 Perhaps it is not really a matter of an increased direct threat, but rather “a case of a conflict that is as much political as it is military”, he says . The conflict is “as much political and military’s military,” he says.
 The President decides that at this stage, the first option is a larger air strike, and the second is a limited strike against missile bases . However, the President decides to opt out of the larger air strikes .
 The President has to restrain his brother, who repeatedly brings up the topic of a comprehensive occupation, even suggesting the sinking of a U.S. ship as provocation, as provocation . The President's brother is also raising the issue .
 McNamara admits that the President might not currently have to do anything other than ‘deciding to prepare” for the air strikes . McNamara says it would also be a good idea to make an exact plan of a limited strike .
 The conversation is churning with different alternatives, and the President seems to be uncertain which direction to choose . The conversation has been churning for months .
 McNamara expresses concern regarding the unpredictability and danger of a counterreaction, to which the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Taylor states that a military operation has to be strong or nothing at all . McNamara: A military operation must be strong .
 Kennedy responds by announcing that now is not the time for an ‘army committee to shove us out’ and presses the commander to admit that he is not in favour of an invasion . Kennedy responds to the comments by saying that now would not be the time to ‘sh
 Khrushchev had previously demonstrated patience as the confrontation had intensified, so why would he be acting now recklessly? The world's most powerful statesmen had previously shown patience in the past .
 National Security Advisor Bundy says it's exactly what the U.S. has been doing . On the other hand, it is exactly what he says, Bundy says . Bundy: The United States is doing exactly what it is doing .
 The irrational behaviour of the Russians bothers the President, and he asks whether the experts of the State Department have a better explanation for this escalation . The President asks if the State Dept. of the U.S. have better explanation .
 When Kennedy leaves the room, the recording system is still on, and the follow-up conversation in the group is recorded . Kennedy: "When Kennedy leaves, the recordings are still on"
 The talk is led by Secretary of Defence McNamara, who again emphasises the unexpected consequences of a military strike . McNamara: 'The unexpected consequences are unexpected'
 The United States government is having to react in a way which can escalate into a full-scale nuclear war in any case . The U.S. government is a victim of their own rhetoric, writes Peter Bergen .
 Someone also mentions a comparison with Japan’s surprise attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 . Someone also mentioned a comparison .
 The 1941 attack led to the US joining WWII, and thereby also an end to the American policy of restraint . The 1941 U.S. attack led the US to join WWII, leading to the end of the US policy .
 The attack by the Japanese took place before nuclear weapons and the threat of total destruction their use entails . However, the attack took place in Japan before the use of nuclear weapons . The Japanese attack was the first of its kind .
 Secretary of Defence assumed the role of the Chairman when the President left the room . Secretary of defence indicates that there are competing aspirations in the group .
 Minutes show McNamara is still vocal, seemingly having considered the unpredictable consequences of a military strike in more detail . No recording of this meeting exists, but according to the minutes, McNamara remains vocal .
 On 18 October, the President has returned from the campaign trail, and the group has received new intelligence photographs . The group says they have received intelligence photographs of the President's campaign .
 Photographs indicate that the Soviets are installing long-range missiles in Cuba . Now, the photographs indicate that they are also installing long range missiles .
 Secretary of State Rusk announces that his position has changed; he now in favour of a military strike . Rusk says that he is now in the favour of the strike .
 Kennedy is interested whether the public could be convinced about the threat with the help of the photographs . Kennedy is hoping the public will be convinced of the threat by using the photos .
 McNamara also joins the people in favour of a military strike, explaining that there would be losses as a consequence of even a small strike, so it would be easier to declare a full-scale invasion operation . Then McNamara explains that even small losses would be a result of a small
 The risks of a small strike would be hidden inside a large preventative offensive, say experts . The risk of a strike is hidden in a small preventative operation, they say .
 President Obama lectures the others about how their allies do not see Cuba as a direct military threat, and would interpret the attack as an overreaction . Exceptionally, he adopts a position of authority and lectures others .
 Thompson’s reply is an account of the Russian mentality, concluding that the adversary could consent to a legitimate naval blockade and a negotiated compromise . Instead, the former Soviet ambassador Thompson concluded that the Russian could consent .
 The President does not warm to the idea of a naval blockade, because it does not remove the threat of the existence of the missiles in the Cuban soil . However, the President does .
 Others, however, continue to consider air strikes to be the top option .
 McNamara specifies that there would be casualties, “Hundreds of Russians will die,” McNamara says . McNamara: "Hundreds of Russian will die. Hundreds will die"
 The discussion consists of a series of apathetic statements in anticipation of countermeasures by the Soviet Union and the United States . The United States. and the Soviet. Union .
 After the U.S. strike, the Russians will try to take over Berlin, NATO’s troops will fight, they will be overthrown, the conflict will escalate into a general state of war, which in turn means a nuclear war . After the United States strike, Russia
 Kennedy interrupts the series of apathetic statements by emphasising that a solution must be found to avoid ‘the ultimate failure’, referring to the onset of a nuclear war . Kennedy says a solution is needed to avoid a nuclear disaster .
 The President wonders whether it would be possible to establish a naval blockade without a declaration of war . After making another philosophical intervention in the discussion, the President makes a philosophical remark .
 Others think a blockade without a declaration of war is illegal, and otherwise an impossible equation in many ways . Others think that a blockade is illegal .
 Kennedy emphasises that the declaration of war would corner Khrushchev . Kennedy nevertheless emphasises the declaration would corner the Soviet leader .
 When McNamara lists two options, Kennedy “reframes’s” this by stating that the first option is a naval blockade without a declaration of war, then a blockade with a declaration . Kennedy: "The first option" is a blockade without war, followed by
 He is now taking the decision to his preferred direction, regardless of the group’s resistance . The decision was made by President Obama .
 When the President leaves the room, the recording stays on again, revealing conflicts inside the group . The recording reveals a mild mutiny against the President’s tactics .
 Robert Kennedy is also of the opinion that a naval blockade is useless against the missile threat . Robert Kennedy also believes that the blockade would be useless against a missile attack .
 McNamara had to respond strictly to both, repeating the President’s line, according to which direct strikes are too dangerous as a first reaction . McNamara said direct strikes were too dangerous to strike .
 There is no recording system in this location, but according to the notes, the discussion is still tense . The discussion was tense, but it was still tense, notes say .
 The President instructs a committee to prepare the details of a naval blockade . The President is about to start campaigning again .
 Before going to bed at midnight, Kennedy outlines the issues of the day by talking straight into the microphones in his office . Kennedy outlines his issues with each other at midnight .
 He was still confused about the contradictory views, which were offered even by experienced veteran politicians . He said: "I'm not sure why I'm still confused"
 The President has a short meeting with the commanders of different army branches on 19 October . The President is expected to embark on his campaign trail .
 The President responds calmly to the pressure coming from the military men by stating that the Cuban missile situation does not change the overall global picture . The President says the situation is not a threat to the US .
 As the tape keeps rolling after the President leaves, the generals vent their frustration with the commander-in-chief . The tape is rolling as the president leaves .
 If the U.S. only progresses in small steps, it will be at a disadvantage, soldiers conclude . The soldiers conclude that if the United States only progresses small steps will be a disadvantage to them .
 On the following day, Kennedy has to stop his campaign trail and return to herd the discordant ExComm . Kennedy has been on the campaign trail since October 20 .
 JFK wonders out loud about the meaningfulness of ‘destroying Cuba’, but nevertheless gravitates towards a naval blockade as the first measure to take action . JFK wonders about the meaning of a naval blockage, but still gravitates to a blockade .
 The President makes an announcement regarding the implementation of a naval blockade . The blockade will be implemented by the end of the year .
 On 21 October, the group prepares the details of the blockade, and air strikes as a back-up plan . Air strikes are planned as a backup to the blockade .
 The President wonders again how much the Soviet Union knows about the Americans’ awareness of the missiles . The President wondered again how little the Soviets knew about the U.S. President.
 The assumption is that Khrushchev already has a response planned to US actions . The assumption has been made that the U.S. already has plans to respond to the threat .
 Kennedy issues repeated instructions to the army to refrain from sudden counterstrikes, at the missile bases in Turkey among other places . Kennedy issues instructions to avoid sudden counter strikes .
 President's instructions were not taken seriously, instead, soldiers were assumed to follow regular operation patterns in case of a surprise attack . Later, it becomes evident that the President’s instructions were taken seriously . Instead, soldiers would be expected to follow normal operation patterns .
 It is precisely this kind of “automatic escalation that Kennedy wants to avoid by all means,” he says . The next day, he again orders not to use force without approval from him, the commander-in-chief .
 The President is ready to give an evening speech on TV, revealing the existence of missile bases on Cuba . On 22 October, he will give a speech revealing the bases . The Cuban president is expected to make the announcement on 22 October .
 The morning meeting deals with the reactions from the public and the press . It is the first meeting of the morning meeting with the public .
 In the afternoon, the ExComm is alarmed by the information that the Soviet Union’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, who is currently visiting Washington, will be giving a speech . The ExComm was alarmed by this information .
 Kennedy emphasises that the committee must stick together and present a united front with the same message . Kennedy says the committee needs to stick together in order to keep the message .
 Kennedy adopts a more controlled stance and says that although an air strike was an extremely tempting option, he let it go on the previous morning, due to the risks and ethical problems related to the strike . Then, he says that despite the tempting options, he decided not to go ahead
 The President seems surprisingly militaristic, although he has opted for a naval blockade . The President has opted to opt for a navy blockade of the region .
 He also emphasises that the air strike option must not be made public, as it would weaken the image of the U.S. as the peaceful party in the conflict .
 The chosen route is a naval blockade, after which the secret second option is a full-scale invasion . The second option would be a military blockade, followed by a military invasion .
 A former ordinary member of the United States parliament is now the President of the U.S.
 Russell proposes sarcastically that the government is probably just waiting for the OAS to support the blockade, without doing anything themselves . Russell says the government will probably just wait for the support of the blockade to support it .
 Another senator, Fulbright, states that an invasion would be more straightforward in the political legal context . Fulbright: "An invasion of the U.S. would be a more straightforward invasion"
 Kennedy emphasises that any strike would also result in Russian casualties, opening up the path for Soviet counteractions . Kennedy: Any strike would result in casualties from Russian casualties . However, Kennedy says any strike could also lead to Russian casualties from the strike .
 "We don’t know where we’re going to end up with this," he says . Meanwhile, he expresses the great uncertainty that is floating in the air .
 The naval blockade is now the first step, and it will remain to be seen what direction the different parties will take matters . However, it is still unclear what direction will be taken .
 On 23 October, the group anticipates different reactions from the Soviet camp as well as among stakeholders in the United States and among the allies .
 Kennedy is vexed with having to justify the late discovery of the missiles to the Americans, and the limited range of options under the guise of a dramatic nuclear threat . Kennedy is evidently vexed by having to justifying the late .
 Now, we have to “put our cards on the table in a situation with an unknown ending”, he describes the difficult circumstances . “We have to put our cards in the table,” he says .
 He is the commander-in-chief, but also an elected politician whose future depends on the popular vote . He is also a commander in charge of the U.S. military .
 All power lies in practice with Khrushchev, who is making decisions very independently during the crisis . On the Soviet side, in turn, all power is in practice, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The OAS is in favour of a naval blockade as a measure against the missile threat, which partially soothes the atmosphere . At the end of the meeting, information was received that the OAS had agreed to the blockade .
 The meeting continues to contemplate the Russian reaction to the naval blockade and possible encounters at sea .
 Kennedy still seems to be desperate, and does not understand why the Soviet Union is keen on continuing on a hard line . Kennedy seems to still be desperate and doesn't understand why Russia is keen to continue its hardline .
 Khrushchev’s response to the speech and the naval blockade had been sharp . The naval blockade of the Soviet Union was also sharp .
 During the Berlin crisis in the previous year, “we had the nuclear monopoly, but we did not use it.” The Berlin crisis was “the Berlin crisis” in 2008, the government said . During that year, Berlin had a nuclear monopoly .
 ‘It looks like that’s exactly what they are going to do”, the President notes . ‘I’m not surprised’, President Obama says .
 After the meeting, the Kennedy brothers have a discussion at the President’s office . The Kennedy brothers later met with the President at the White House to discuss their plans .
 JFK admits that the situation “looks really bad” but “we didn’t have any other real option” to some type of counter-reaction . JFK: “The situation ‘looks very bad’ but ‘didn’
 Robert Kennedy says he has received information through unofficial channels that the Russians are going to challenge the blockade . Kennedy: They think they think the missiles have a defensive purpose .
 Discussion still revolves around the anticipation of a possible incident at sea . However, the discussion still revolves .
 Depth charges could be used against Russian submarines to get them to surface . Depth charges are suggested to be used to get the submarines to surface.
 He suggests that if the submarine does not react to the requests, it must be attacked . Slightly later, however, he suggests that the submarine should be attacked.
 The President is concerned and states that it is dangerous to engage with a submarine . The President said it was 'danger to engage' with a sub .
 McNamara appeals to the President by saying that he has mapped the situation, and recommends issuing a command for operational readiness to the fleet captains . McNamara: "I have mapped out the situation"
 The submarine crew is not in contact with Moscow, and therefore unable to get an overview of the situation . It is not known if the crew will be able to reach out to Moscow again . The crew of the Russian-bound submarine is not currently in contact .
 Only a refusal from the fleet commander prevents the launch of a nuclear weapon . Two other officers are in favour of an attack on the US Navy .
 Kennedy’s intuition about the risks related to a submarine hunt was right, although he deferred to his Secretary of Defence’�s personal hardline perspective . Kennedy's intuition is right, but he deferred .
 Russian ships at sea at sea have been ordered to avoid a collision with the U.S. Coast Guard . The Russian ships are believed to have been on a collision course with a Russian ship .
 It is clear now that the ships have received instructions not to cross the blockade boundary . The ships have been ordered not to breach the blockade .
 Although the information is incomplete, it seems that the extreme tension eases off for a moment . The information was incomplete, but the information seems to indicate that the tension is easing .
 Instead of a confrontation and rising stakes, there is the first evidence of compliance . Instead of confrontation, there are first signs of compliance from the president .
 Kennedy emphasises that the ships must not be stopped without a pressing reason . Kennedy says that stopping ships is a 'pressing reason'
 In secret, the President has started making preparations for withdrawing the missiles from Turkey . President has been making preparations to withdraw missiles from the country .
 Kennedy has another meeting with his advisors after the meeting with Congress leaders . Kennedy also has a meeting with advisors .
 It seems that he would now prefer to listen to viewpoints that favour a more diplomatic solution . It seems he would rather listen to the views of those that favour diplomacy .
 Former Secretary of Defence Lovett explains that “there are no small military operations.” Lovett explained that ‘there were no small . operations. ‘There are no small military operations’
 The President is wondering how Cuba could ultimately be kept as a “hostage” of the US, turning the generals’ interpretation almost completely upside down . The President wondered how Cuba would be kept by the US .
 Cuba is surrounded by the U.S. and its allies, much like Berlin is in the middle of a Soviet bloc . Cuba is now in the center of the world's most powerful economic and political power .
 Kennedy estimates Khrushchev has had more of his political and military authority at stake in this crisis than himself in the Berlin situation during the previous year . Kennedy estimates that . On the other hand, Kennedy estimates . Kennedy: "On the otherhand, Kennedy has had . more political and
 Kennedy tries to understand the situation through a previous similar confrontation . Kennedy: "I don't know why I'm going to have to defend myself"
 The conclusion is that the U.S. should not put too much pressure on the Soviet Union . It might be difficult for Khrushchev to respond in any other way besides by force, he says .
 The government is doing everything it can so that the army would not needlessly provoke Russian ships at sea . The government would be doing everything to avoid needlessly provoking Russian ships .
 Anti-aircraft missiles are also beginning to be camouflaged, making them more difficult to use in acute situations . On 25 October, there is further confirmation that the Russians have instructed the Cubans not to attack United States aircraft .
 Khrushchev had on the previous day become aware of the gravity of the American stance and loss of trust, which prompted him to retreat from the tight line in the crisis .
 The participants of the meeting are still contemplating what to do if a Russian ship should cross the line of the blockade and it has to be stopped by force . The participants are considering what they would do if the Russian ship crosses the line .
 Messages from Soviet government still contradict the way the ships are changing course . Messages from the Soviet government are still contradicting the messages .
 The preparation of the missile bases has continued at full capacity, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . The preparations have also been carried out in Russia, says Putin .
 He anticipates a situation where the Americans have to stop a Soviet vessel for the sake of plausibility . The U.S. has been in contact with the Soviet Union for several years .
 In the evening of the same day, the committee starts to think about the insufficiency of the naval blockade . The committee began thinking about the lack of a naval blockade in the region .
 Robert Kennedy claims that instead of a showdown at sea, it would be better to go back to contemplating limited air strikes against missile bases . Robert Kennedy: "Instead of a confrontation at sea" Robert Kennedy says air strikes would be more effective .
 He thinks that the United States should demonstrate firmness with Cuba . The U.S. should show firmness in Cuba, he says .
 Secretary of State Rusk tries to defend the effectiveness of the naval blockade . Secretary Rusk says the blockade has been effective for months .
 Some extra step must be taken, and an air strike is becoming a not inconsiderable option in this respect . Air strikes are becoming an increasingly important option in the fight against ISIS .
 The Russians do not seem to have changed their attitude regarding the preparation of missile bases . The general feel is that the Russians are not changing their attitude . The Russian government has not changed its attitude regarding missile bases, say experts .
 The Cuban leader's role in the crisis is to blame for the crisis, CNN's John Sutter says . Castro is a key figure in the Cuban government's response to the Cuban crisis .
 As the events progress, communication only happens between superpowers, and during a critical stage, directly between leaders . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the end of the year .
 The Cuban state was about to dispatch a short telegram directly to the revolutionary leader of the Cuban state . Now, however, they were about to send it directly to Cuba .
 The discussion oscillates to a new level, wondering how Castro feels about the Russian military command, and whether he could be overthrown under the guise of the crisis . Castro is the subject of a new series of questions about his relationship with Russia .
 Kennedy is in favour of this upmost goal and dismisses the speculation about Castro’s fate . Kennedy dismisses speculation about the future of the former Cuban leader .
 Stevenson is a Democrat and a former presidential candidate who has many political opponents on the ExComm . Stevenson is also a former president .
 He proposes bravely that the motive behind positioning the missiles was to defend Cuba against U.S. aggression . Solving the crisis requires the Americans to promise not to attack the island, he says .
 The Soviet Union will demand Western missile bases to be dismantled in Turkey and Italy during the negotiations, he says . Furthermore, he anticipates that he will demand that the Soviet Union also dismantle missile bases in both countries .
 The President seems to concede that the screw has to be tightened, as far as the Russians are concerned . However, it appears that preparing the missile bases for battle has only accelerated despite the U.S. position .
 The naval blockade could be expanded to aircraft, but this might inevitably lead us “to decide to take another path, the path of using power”, the President says . The blockade could also be extended to aircraft .
 The negotiated solution, including the disarmament of the Turkish missiles, is fading into the background . Now, the negotiated solution to the Syrian conflict is fading .
 Military preparations are progressing, and the army is ready for air strikes as well as an extensive invasion . Military preparations have been made for an invasion of Syria .
 There are plans for a new civilian government after overthrowing Castro . There are also plans for new civilian governments after the overthrow .
 A smaller meeting held at the President’s office also seems to drift in favour of air strikes .
 CIA optimistically believes that there is a greater chance of destroying all missiles, although there is no full assurance about this matter . McCone from the CIA hopes that there will be no more missiles destroyed .
 Castro urges the Soviet leader to start the first strike against the U.S. with nuclear weapons . Castro urges Russia to use nuclear weapons against the United States . Castro also urges Russia's leader to use his nuclear weapons to launch a first strike .
 Khrushchev demands the removal of the missiles in Turkey in addition to the suggestion from the previous night . On 27 October, in the middle of the ExComm morning meeting, another public statement arrives from the former Soviet Union leader .
 Out loud, it is suggested that they should only respond to the first letter and ignore the second one . It's suggested that the government should only reply to the second letter .
 The new letter expands the negotiations to the more general arms race of the superpowers, and could be a diversion .
 Rusk announces that “the Cuba issue is about the Western hemisphere” Bundy adds, “It's Cuba that’s the problem’ Bundy adds that Cuba is the problem . Rusk: “The Cuba issue was about the western hemisphere’
 The President briefly leaves the room, other people become increasingly more vocal about their objections to the Turkey-related concessions . The President is seen briefly leaving the room .
 Robert Kennedy states that he cannot “see how we can ask the Turks to give up their defence” without the Soviet Union dismantling the weapons aimed at Turkey . Robert Kennedy: “I can’t see how we’ve asked the Turks for their defence"
 Many think that the United States cannot order Turkey to remove the missiles . Turkey is under NATO’s control, according to some .
 After further clarification, it becomes evident that only the nuclear warheads are under U.S. control .
 The others think that Khrushchev's letter was not composed by hardline communists . Others think that the new letter was written by hardliners . The others say it was composed by a hardline communist .
 Talks with Khrushchev should be continued based on the message from the previous evening . That is why negotiations with Khruschev should continue, says David Frum . Frum says .
 This is the committee’s consensus when the President is away from the meeting room . This is expressed as the . committee's consensus .
 The ExComm is apparently trying to take over the authority of interpreting the unfolding situation from Kennedy . Kennedy is the president of the United States .
 The President emphasises that the new letter is public, and that it should be considered as the most recent offer . However, the President says that the letter is not the latest offer .
 ‘An attack on Cuba would give justification to the Soviet Union to advance in Berlin on the grounds that we are being really unreasonable.’ He also emphasises the perspective of the global community and allies .
 JFK aims to find a response, which would be sufficiently categorical regarding the dismantling of the missile bases, while leaving a door open for other concessions . JFK wants a response that would be enough categorical about dismantling of missile bases while leaving the door open .
 There is also news that another U-2 plane has gotten lost in Soviet airspace . The plane was on a routine flight to Alaska .
 These events may cause the forces leading to an escalation to become stronger all of a sudden, says CNN.com .
 It is still not clear who gave the order to fire anti-aircraft rounds in Cuba .
 The Russians have previously said they have given the command not to fire upon foreign aircraft . The Russian government has said it has given the order not to shoot at foreign planes .
 Two hours later, the spy plane has been shot down over Cuba using an anti-aircraft missile . The pilot is probably dead, the meeting participants receive information that the plane was shot down . The plane is believed to have been a Soviet spy plane .
 General Taylor reminds the others that the committee had decided to respond to the shooting of spy planes with military force . General Taylor says the committee decided to use military force after the shooting .
 The President wonders whether to start the counteractions immediately or on the following day . The President wondered whether to begin the counteraction immediately or the following .
 The anti-aircraft missile batteries are under Russian control, increasing uncertainty about what is happening . Russia is under control of the anti-missile batteries in Syria .
 Before and after the U-2 incident, the discussion revolves tightly around the U.S. response to the Soviet Union . The U.2 incident was a major incident in the Cold War .
 Kennedy suggests that they would be ready to negotiate on concessions, but only if the Russians stop the preparation of missile bases in Cuba . Kennedy says they would only negotiate if they stopped the construction of bases in the country .
 It would be important not to convey an image of the U.S. rejecting Khrushchev’s offer or offers, he says . It would also be important to convey a positive image, he adds .
 National Security Advisor Bundy announces that including the removal of the Turkish missiles in the negotiations would endanger the future of the entire NATO community . Bundy says that including removing Turkish missiles would endanger NATO's future . Bundy: The removal of Turkish missiles from NATO would endanger future of NATO .
 Kennedy responds by stating that “the deal option is attractive” because it can be used to avoid a military conflict, which would in turn weaken NATO’s performance . Kennedy responds to Bundy's challenge by stating in a personal voice that ‘The deal option’ is
 Even his brother Robert thinks that the demand of stopping the construction of the missile bases is only postponing an inevitable attack . Robert says that even his brother thinks that .
 NATO member states in Europe are unwilling to compromise on their own defence in order to resolve the situation in Cuba . NATO members of the U.S. are refusing to compromise with Cuba on its own defence .
 JFK prophesies that after first resisting the diplomatic solution, they would later see how insane it would be if the Soviet Union were to attack European military objects or to take Berlin in revenge . Nevertheless, JFK prophesy that after . first resisting a diplomatic solution they would . later see . later
 The committee continues to see weaknesses and loopholes in Kennedy’s response options . Kennedy continues to be criticized for his handling of the crisis .
 It is easy to be strict today, but the consequences of the response change the situation decisively, for the worse, says the BBC . It's easy to say 'no' when you're strict, but it's not easy to do so today, it's a good thing to say
 He asks participants to consider the consequences of the different options to a wider extent . He asks them to consider consequences of different options .
 General Taylor announces that if information about the dismantling of the missile bases does not come soon, military action must commence immediately . General Taylor: Military action must begin within two days, on Monday, on the deadline .
 JFK admits that if the Soviet Union is not willing to meet them halfway at all, the U.S. is forced to commence air strikes . JFK admits if the . Soviet Union . continues to use firepower, the . United States is forced .
 The group dynamic changes when the President is away on occasion, the group says .
 Vice President Johnson is emboldened during the breaks to present his own views . Among others are Vice President Lyndon Johnson and President Barack Obama .
 He examines McNamara’s interpretation critically, according to which the missiles could not be removed by any other means besides an air strike . He examines the meaning of McNamara's interpretation .
 Johnson: "If you’re ready to let go of the Turkish missiles, let Khrushchev know, tell him that we're ready to make a deal" Johnson replies, “If you're ready for a deal, let us know,” Johnson says .
 According to the mood in the group, there should be a sharp response in the response letter regarding the shooting down of the planes . On the other hand, according to the Mood in the Group, the mood is that the response should be sharp .
 When the President is absent, the remaining people speak critically and ironically about the ideas he has presented just moments before . When he is absent from the White House, the people speak critical and ironically .
 The general view is that due to many reasons, withdrawing missiles from Turkey is impossible in the current situation, says the general view . "The general view of many reasons is that ... withdrawing missiles is impossible"
 Kennedy is able to respond to this critique without becoming flustered . Kennedy responds to the criticism with a logical response . Kennedy is not flustrated by the criticism .
 President suggests a short snack break at the end of the session . The members are tired, and at this stage, he suggests a break .
 JFK does not activate the taping system, so there is no record of this meeting . JFK doesn't activate the system, and there is not a record of the meeting .
 Robert Kennedy would inform the ambassador that the U.S. cannot publicly give in regarding the solution that involves Turkey, but is ready to withdraw the missiles within a few months . He suggests that the United States cannot give in on the solution .
 Secret part of the agreement could not be made public, otherwise the suggestion would become void . However, this secret part of this agreement would not be revealed .
 Only the President and Secretary of State Rusk remained aware of the plan . However, it was not necessary to activate this back-up plan, says President Rusk .
 Kennedy had decided to ram the negotiation solution through, bypassing the key people of the administration . Kennedy's decision to bypass key people in the administration was made by Kennedy .
 Soldiers and intelligence managers were excluded from the actual decision-making . Soldiers were not allowed to participate in the decision making process . Soldiers, intelligence managers, were not included in the process .
 ExComm’s tenacious resistance may have played their part in turning the President towards using informal and confidential channels to achieve the solution he wanted .
 The approach itself was somewhat questionable because some members of ExComm did not have accurate information about the content of the solution and could draw misleading conclusions from the resolving of the conflict .
 Vice President Johnson may have thought that the threat of using military force was a critical element in solving the Cuban crisis . Johnson's vision could have later carried over to his vision regarding the resolution to the Vietnam War using military escalation during Johnson’s own presidential term .
 Details of the U-2 plane that was previously shot down are not yet known . President does not want to attack anti-aircraft bases immediately, as details of the plane are not known .
 McNamara’s preference that “some kind of pressure” be added to the government would not look too soft . McNamara: “Some kind of pressures” is nevertheless added, so that the government wouldn't look soft .
 Kennedy is also concerned that the public will think that the Americans have pressured NATO allies to adopt the position of diplomatic settlement . Kennedy: "I'm not sure if the public thinks that the U.S. has pressured allies into adopting a diplomatic settlement"
 The allies should be pressured, but in the end, they should draw their own conclusions, says CNN's John Defterios .
 JFK cannot talk about the Turkey element in the solution directly, as some of the committee members have not been involved in previous discussions . JFK cannot discuss Turkey's role in the deal with the Turkish government .
 Few think Khrushchev would agree to a relatively vague message, which responds to the first letter from the Soviets, and does not specifically address any measures required to resolve the issue . Few think that Khrushvic would agree with the vague message .
 Air Force was still at the second-highest defence condition . Air strikes were planned to commence on Monday; the air strikes were due to begin on Monday .
 In Moscow, Khrushchev had become aware of the extreme riskiness of his game, and had started to make preparations to approve the offer . In Moscow he had started making preparations for approval of the deal .
 He forbade all military commanders in Cuba to make decisions autonomously . He emphasised that the missile bases had to be protected against external disruptions .
 Castro had suggested first strike with nuclear weapons . Kremlin was afraid escalation would occur without their control .
 At this juncture, Khrushchev formulates a positive response to the suggestions contained in the letter from the U.S. government . At this . time, the Soviet Union was in full control of the world .
 Khrushchev orders his response to be broadcast on Moscow Radio, reaching the U.S. government almost instantaneously . In order to get the information to the opposing side as quickly as possible .
 Soviet and American leadership have reached a compromise that can resolve the confrontation . Soviet and U.S. leaders have agreed to a compromise to resolve the conflict .
 The Soviet Union verifiably completed the dismantling of the weapons and the missile bases from the Cuban soil . Although trust in the Russians was weak in the United States government (JFK, for example, states on 28 October, “We don’t trust them”
 Kennedy showed his excellent ability to read a changed situation . Kennedy showed that he can read a new situation in the game .
 The United States had been heavily involved with Cuba for several years already . After the unsuccessful invasion of the Bay of Pigs, aggressive operations continued, only with increased secrecy .
 Kennedy gave the green light to a project whose purpose was to sabotage the Cuban infrastructure, and weaken its new government in every possible way . The project was intended to sabotage Cuba's infrastructure and weaken the new government .
 This also included a very sensitive project aimed at assassinating Fidel Castro . The project included a project to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Kennedy was not being “soft’ with Cuba in any way, instead largely continuing with plans drafted during the time of his predecessor, Eisenhower, regarding the overthrowing of Castro’s government . In other words, Kennedy was continuing with the plans drafted by Eisenhower .
 Kennedy was ready to use any means necessary to overthrow the new communist government in Cuba . Kennedy understood that a situation involving nuclear missiles and their positioning was on a completely different level to the sabotage campaigns .
 Now, the matter involved the most destructive weapons the superpowers possessed, and would require extreme care and control . Now, it would be the most powerful weapons in the world's most destructive weapon .
 Kennedy participated in WWII on the Pacific Ocean, experiencing first-hand the uncontrollable nature of a global war . Kennedy himself had participated in World War II .
 The events in 1914 slid quickly out of the control of individual countries and quickly led to the onset of the Great War . The events quickly slid quickly into the hands of individuals and led to World War One .
 As the events of October unfolded, he occasionally provides a glimpse of the option of a military strike . CNN's John Sutter says he has been briefed on the situation in Iraq .
 Kennedy understood that once started, a reciprocal series of military strikes would easily move out of the individual leaders’ control, while the army would start operating automatically . Kennedy understood once started that once . started a reciprocal . series of . military strikes, he said .
 Kennedy considered it to be a potentially dangerous situation, where a once-started strategy would be difficult to retract . Kennedy considered the situation to be potentially dangerous .
 In management literature, this trap of wise contemplation is known as “escalated commitment to a chosen course of action” where the implementation of decisions that have been found to be poor is continued because the termination of such a commitment is difficult psychologically and for authoritative reasons .
 Kennedy was sceptical about his generals, as he thought they wanted to be able to use the available weapons and force without considering the wider effect of the use of military force . Kennedy was particularly sceptical regarding his generals' ability to use military force in any way .
 If the path of using military armed force were opened up, it would be difficult to close it using decisions made by the political administration . The path is open to the possibility of using armed forces in Syria .
 If the United States had struck the missile bases in Cuba, the Soviet soldiers had the order to launch a tactical nuclear weapon against the US base at Guantánamo located on the island . Without knowing it, Kennedy was right .
 This would have led to a counterstrike and probably to total nuclear war . The U.S. nuclear war would have been likely to have been averted by a counter strike .
 During the crisis, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down using a Russian anti-aircraft missile . The U.S. was using an anti-Russian missile to shoot down the U.2 .
 Kennedy had to use all the methods of persuasion he knew to prevent ExComm from choosing an immediate counterstrike against the missile batteries . ExComm had to choose between a counterstrike and a possible counterstrike .
 He presented suspicions about how there could be underlying factors related to the strike, which would change the interpretation of the adversary’s motives .
 In addition to trying to stop the use of military force, Kennedy was also careful not to corner the Soviet Union politically . Kennedy was careful to avoid cornering the Soviets politically .
 He wondered during a meeting whether there should be a declaration of war against Cuba along with the blockade, he said . For example, while he was preparing a naval blockade, there was a meeting where he wondered whether a declaration should be made against Cuba .
 An option emerged according to which the blockade would be implemented through the OAS, in which case it would not be necessary to declare war . As a result of the discussions with ExComm, an option emerged to implement the blockade .
 Approval from the OAS gave Kennedy wider international support, which softened the impression that the U.S. was attacking Cuba and its ally, the Soviet Union, on its own . OAS approval softened the impressions that the United States was attacking Russia and its allies .
 Kennedy also made the switch from a blockade to a quarantine when he relayed his decision . Kennedy also changed his decision to quarantine the U.S. President's daughter .
 The purpose of this was to soften the impression of the strictness of the measure, says the minister . The purpose was to ease the impression that the measure was strict, he says .
 Kennedy attempted to detach himself from the attitude towards Cuba that was prevalent in the U.S. atmosphere . Second, Kennedy tried to attach himself to the attitude of the American atmosphere .
 Cuba had been a satellite of the United States since 1898 . The U.S. overthrew the Spanish colonial masters after a short war . In practice, Cuba has been an American satellite of Cuba .
 The Europeans did not understand the emotional Yankee attitude towards losing their ‘own’ island state in the aftermath of Castro’s revolution, the author says .
 Kennedy tried to analyse the prevalent beliefs in an unprejudiced way, and to highlight alternative interpretations of the situation . Kennedy analysed the prevalent belief in the popular belief system and tried to highlight alternatives .
 He had become known as a Cold War “hawk” during the presidential elections of 1960 . He had also been personally involved in deciding to launch secret operations targeting the island state .
 Cuba and the threat it constituted as a geographically close and openly communist country were not the main topic during the crisis . Perhaps Cuba and its threat to the U.S. might not have been the main concern during this crisis .
 He can also see how the actions of the Soviet Union are influenced by their overall view, which also includes the Berlin issue .
 The Soviet Union had recently built a wall around West Berlin, and threatened to attack it if the global tension increases . The Soviets had built the wall around the West Berlin wall . The wall was built in response to the growing tensions in the region .
 Kennedy considered it to be highly likely that the Soviet Union would respond to U.S. strikes by occupying West Berlin . Kennedy considered a strike highly likely .
 In this context, Kennedy’s intuition also played a deciding role in the discharge of the crisis . Kennedy's intuition played a decisive role in discharge of this crisis, he says .
 He emphasised at meetings that the significance of the Cuban missiles is political, not military . Mr Putin emphasised that the importance of the missiles was political .
 Later research has revealed that the missiles were placed in Cuba to protect it from U.S. aggressions . Later research revealed that they were placed there to protect Cuba from American aggression .
 Cuba was afraid of a new U.S. invasion, and that is why they turned to Khrushchev . Cuba was scared of a U.K. invasion .
 The Soviet Union’s persistent explanations about the weapons being defensive were true from their own perspective . Therefore, the Soviet Union's persistent explanations of the weapons were true .
 Khrushchev thought that by moving a small quantity of nuclear weapons near the US, he could convince his own people that the nuclear deterrent of the Soviet Union is real and convincing . On the other hand, he wanted to convince them that the U.S. had a real deterrent .
 During the preceding years, the Soviet Union had fallen behind the United States in the development of a nuclear weapon arsenal, which was worrying for the Soviet government and its generals . The Soviet Union was worried that the U.S. was developing nuclear weapons .
 The motives behind the placement of the missiles were more complicated than what members of the U.S. government and ExComm would have believed . The motive behind the missile placement was more complicated .
 He emphasises constantly that the weighing of different options and the analysis of the situation must be based on avoiding an armed conflict .
 Long-range missiles were in a constant state of readiness on land, at sea and in the air . The U.S. government says it is in a 'state of readiness' on land and at sea .
 The military readiness was like a pile of gunpowder, which even the smallest spark could unwittingly ignite . The smallest spark of light could be ignited by a small spark, he said .
 Kennedy had to explain his underlying ethical motivation to military personnel, government members and leading politicians . Kennedy: "It was as if [Kennedy] had to ... explain his ... ethical motivation"
 Kennedy held on tightly to his position, although he listened patiently to the estimates of the ExComm specialists regarding the consequences and scenarios of different options . Kennedy listened patiently with the experts on the situation .
 He did not push his own clear view on others, but instead attempted to take into consideration all of the offered perspectives, carefully analysing the arguments .
 As Stern emphasises, after having listened to the tapes perhaps more carefully than anyone else, Kennedy never gets agitated or raises his voice . Stern: "Kennedy's voice is always quiet, calm and quiet, but never raises it"
 He lets others present their perspectives, then offers his own emphasis in the discussion . He then offers himself his own perspective .
 The Soviet Union might want the U.S. to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Turkey as a countermove for dismantling the weapons positioned in Cuba . Already from the very beginning, he considered the possibility of the possibility .
 In part, he guides the group to see his own solution that would preserve peace, although at times he has to follow more precipitous positions . In part he guides them to see their own solution, but at times it has to take a more dramatic turn .
 These observations refer to an ethical evaluation of a situation and knowledge—all characteristics of wisdom . These observations are referred to as ethical evaluations and knowledge .
 Kennedy did not want to embrace the information provided by the experts and the members of the government without a more extensive, moral evaluation . Kennedy said, "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with the information"
 Different options had to be weighed in particular regarding the prevention of an escalation, instead of rational national benefits or military calculations . Therefore, different options must be weighed, especially regarding prevention of escalation, rather than military calculations or rational benefits .
 Kennedy wanted to make use of the benefits of a collective dialogue in his own decision-making process . On the other hand, Kennedy said he wanted to use the benefit of the collective dialogue .
 He held on to his moral vision, and made sure that he had the ultimate power and responsibility for decisions as the President and commander-in-chief . Nevertheless, he held .
 ExComm was a tool for a broad review of the situation and a detailed evaluation of different options . For him, ExComm is a tool to review and evaluate different options, he says .
 The underlying existence of a moral vision is also highlighted in the extent to which Kennedy was able to be flexible with political interests . Kennedy's moral vision was also highlighted by the extent of his ability to deal with political issues .
 The Cold War atmosphere was dominant in the US, fearing the increased influence of the communist camp and a nuclear attack on America cities . The 1950s was dominated by the fear of a nuclear strike on America .
 The fear was nearly hysterical in the country that was traditionally used to being safe from direct military strikes . The fear of a strike in the U.S. is nearly hysterical, but the fear is not nearly hysterical .
 Japan’s 1941 attack on the Pearl Harbor base in Hawaii had been a traumatic shock, which prompted the country to become involved in WWII to fight against the Axis powers . The country became involved in the war after Pearl Harbor .
 Any kind of compromise, which would make the U.S. look weak when facing obvious aggression from the Soviet Union, would be interpreted by the people as weakness and cowardice . The United States would be perceived as weak when faced by obvious aggression by the Soviets .
 A reciprocal favour for dismantling Cuba’s arms would undermine NATO allies in a sensitive situation on the Old Continent . On the other hand, withdrawing missiles from Europe as a reciprocal favour would undermine Nato allies in the sensitive situation .
 Kennedy was ready to handle these political losses due to his absolute moral goal . Kennedy was able to handle the political losses because of his moral purpose .
 Rusk would have contacted UN Secretary General U Thant through quiet channels, who would have made the suggestion to withdraw Cuban and Turkish missiles simultaneously .
 In this case, the readiness of the U.S. to be flexible with the withdrawal of their missiles from Turkey would have been made public . It would have decreased Kennedy’s public popularity, he says .
 The Soviet Union responded positively to the first counter-offer on 28 October, meaning that this back-up plan did not have to be implemented . It was made public only at the beginning of the 2000s, and it was only made public in 2000s .
 Before the missile crisis, Cuba had awkwardly entered the picture during the first stage of his presidential term, in the form of the Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 This was an attempt to launch a spontaneous uprising against Castro’s government by sending in 1500 refugees to a remote area of the Bay of Pigs on the Cuban coast . This was a seemingly spontaneous invasion in the remote area .
 Calculations about the resistance met by the troops and the spontaneous uprising were deceptive . The invading troops met with superior resistance on the coast, and the uprising was spontaneous .
 There was no popular uprising, and the US did not provide the necessary air support for the invasion . The invasion was the result of a popular uprising and the U.S. was not involved in it .
 As a result, the invading troops perished or were captured, and the role of the United States in the offensive was revealed . The United States was victorious in the battle .
 Janis used the mistakes made during the decision-making process that led to the fateful operation to develop his theory of groupthink . Janis: The mistakes made in the decision to conduct the operation led to groupthink.
 First, he launched a wide investigation into decision-making and communication problems underlying the fiasco . Second, he has launched an investigation into the problems underlying it .
 Kennedy made changes to the decision-making approach in foreignand security-policy-related issues . Kennedy has been criticized for his handling of foreign policy .
 A special group would be established to solve crises, with representatives from the political, diplomatic, military and intelligence sectors . Tobegin with, if the situation so required, a special group of special groups would be set up .
 Each participant would have to focus on a holistic analysis of the problem instead of their own area of expertise or administrative field . The program would focus on holistic analysis instead of focusing on their own expertise .
 The President did not participate as a chairman, but instead was involved in the discussion like everybody else . The President was not a chairman of the committee, but a member of Congress .
 If necessary, subgroups would be formed to prepare different lines of action for a larger discussion . Subgroups would then be formed for the discussion .
 These new structures and processes were implemented during the missile crisis . The new structures were created during the crisis .
 Kennedy gave up his own authority when he offered the group the opportunity to discuss strategic decisions freely . Kennedy was president of the U.S. State Department of Education in 1973 .
 All the different sectional interests and perspectives were boldly brought to the same table . All of the different sections of the country's political parties have been brought together to make a statement .
 It was possible for both the military “hawks” and the more diplomacyoriented “doves” to express their views . Both the military and diplomacy "hawks" were able to express views .
 On several occasions, Kennedy had to defend his position laboriously as the rest of the group leaned towards solutions that they thought were more advantageous than the President proposed by the President .
 The assembly of ExComm and the format of the meetings meant power was shared with a mixed group of top specialists and leaders, each with strong views on foreign and security policy .
 It would have been easier to continue with the traditional bureaucratic model . Communication and decision-making moved along formal divisions of responsibility and established hierarchy .
 Kennedy had to surrender to the ebbing and, at many times, emotionally charged opinions of ExComm. ExComm . Kennedy . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to give in to the opinions of others."
 "The preferred path was not the easiest one to implement with the group and diverse viewpoints," says the mayor . The preferred path would be "not the easiest" to implement, he says .
 In each form of the manifestation of wise leadership, we can see a connection with the more general elements of wisdom . In this form of leadership, wisdom can be found in the form of wisdom, the author says .
 The ability to read a situation indicates that Kennedy was independent from external lines of action . Kennedy was able to change the perspective radically as the situation changed from low-intensity confrontation and sabotage operations to the possibility of a nuclear conflict .
 A moral imperative superior to everything else during the crisis is also a sign of philosophical wisdom . Avoiding a nuclear war is a moral imperative, as well as avoiding nuclear war . The U.S. should avoid nuclear war, the author says .
 Learning from mistakes denotes that Kennedy was ready to develop his own intuitive wisdom by scrutinising the background of his fateful decision and by changing the operating method of his administration .
 Bad solutions were not hidden or sidelined; instead, the people involved learned from negative experiences, with the future in mind . Bad solutions are not hidden, but instead, they are not sidelined, says CNN.com .
 Why good leaders make bad decisions and how to keep it from happening to you . How do you know how to stop bad leaders making bad decisions? Share your story with CNN iReport .
 Victims of groupthink; a psychological study of foreign-policy decisions and fiascos . The groupthinkers are victims of foreign policy failures .
 Inside the White House during the Cuban missile crisis is a concise edition of CNN's iReporters' coverage of the crisis .