 It is associated in many minds with violence, murder, fanaticism or radical idealism . It has been associated with terrorism, murder and fanaticism .
 Mississippians became aware that the RNA had settled in their midst with the publicity surrounding an attempted purchase of land from a Mr. lason . Mississippans became aware of the controversy surrounding the purchase of the land .
 RNA president, Imari Abubakari Obadele, says whites moved against them when they purchased the land . Whites realized the psychological impact possession of the land would have, he says .
 Mississippians became acltely aware of the RNA presence in August of 1971 . The RNA presence was discovered in August 1971 .
 On August 18, at 6:45 A.M., police opened fire on an RNA residence at 1148 Lewis Street here in Jackson, Jackson .
 Minister of Justice for the RNA described the incident as a ""massacre attempt"" perpetrated by 40 heavily armed police vigilantes on five men and two women .
 Brother La Mumba was speaking at the Masonic Temple on August 16, three weeks ago, during the RNA's Legal Awards Night . He was speaking during the RN's Legal Award Night .
 Eleven RNA members were arrested after the shooting, and charged with a number of crimes, the most serious of which was murder . The most serious was murder, the murder of the man .
 President Obadele was one of those charged with murder even though he was not present at the time of the shooting . He was not at the scene when the shooting took place . President Obdele was among those charged .
 Dean of Men expresses new concern for freshmen problems . Some were arrested on such charges as JACK WOODWARD, dean of Men . Dean expressed concern about freshmen problems.
 New approach for freshman needs carrying concealed weapons, and wearing obscene objects . New approach to freshman needs concealed weapons and wearing offensive objects .
 In the long-run, the attack helped to spur the Black community, beginning a period of strength seemed to make up for their numbers . Out of the Black reaction to the attack grew a movement resulting in the formation of Black Jacksonians .
 The RNA has fulfilled a need in the Black community and in the black movement, says the president of the RNA . The RNA is an important part of the black community and the Black movement .
 The organization represents one of the most organized, most functional elements of the Black community . The organization has been a potent force in the community .
 The RNA hosted ""Solidarity Day"" in 1973, here in Jackson, an attempt to unify the Black community behind the cause of political prisoners . The RNA 11, Angela Davis, and others, hosted the event .
 The audience participated in repeated shouting of ""Break the chains, break the chains,"" and called for the freedom of political prisoners, prisoners who are victims Of a racist judicial system, those mentally enslaved .
 La Mumba feels that it is necessary for Blacks not only to have access to those things that we need, but control over them to insure that they will never be taken away . The move is necessary to ensure that they are never taken away, says LaMumba .
 RNA serves as a visible army for the Black community, a visible force that the community seems to want and need to be able to point to and know that there are people who will risk their lives in military combat for them .
 They are active on many fronts across the United States and the world and on several fronts ht. re <>♦ home .
 They appeal to the people to break the chains, to rally behind political leaders, and to serve as a watchdog on the structure of the structure . They appeal .
 Freshman life, with all its fears and anxieties, often leaves a new college student lonely and emotionally unstable . Without the watchful eyes of the Black community, the police, the government, and the bigilante Reporter offers Jackson an alternative .
 Through a new ""continuing entation"" process, Millsaps is lping its freshmen alleviate these destructive feelings and replace them with confidence and security .
 The tem, with the cooperation of erclassmen and faculty members, will help freshmen adjust with greater ease to college life . The tem will help students adjust to college .
 Russell Levanway, psychology department chairman, met with key faculty members throughout the summer to prepare for the continuing orientation program . The psychology program will run through the summer .
 It has been discussed for several years among Millsaps administrators and faculty members . Millsaps is the largest school in the history of education .
 Jackson has seen the first attempt to provide the city and its environs with alternative, professional journalism in the form of a weekly newspaper called The Reporter . He recommended Carl (continued on page 4T)
 Alternative newspapers, usually weeklies, are becoming popular and successful in practically every city in the nation the size of Jackson and larger . Alternative newspapers are becoming quite popular and popular in many cities .
 Alternative papers result from the public interest in having another source of news and opinion, particularly in cities with daily newspaper monopolies . Not to be confused with the ""underground"" newspapers which emerged as symptomatic of the protests of the 1960's .
 Capital Reporter Publishing Company dropped ""Northside"" from the masthead and launched the conversion of the newspaper into a city wide weekly . The new owners formed a new owner of the new owners .
 Reporter has consistently provided the added dimension of news which it set out to provide . From investigative reporting to political insight, The Reporter has provided an added dimension to the story .
 Hinds County's Chancery and Circuit clerks and Justices of the Peace make through the antiquated ""fee"" system of paying such officials . For the first time, readers learned through The Reporter how much money they make through such a system .
 Hinds County state representative used his legislative position to solicit business for his private engineering firm . The state representative also used his official legislative stationery for his engineering firm, according to a report .
 In The Reporter, the struggling efforts of police officers to organize a union, powerful opposition from city officials, were given understanding treatment .
 Details of how Mafia-tinged outfit from New Orleans moved into Jackson hotel and pulled out what the underworld calls a ""Scam"" were revealed .
 The Manship House is the oldest residence in the city . The newspaper has applied pressure to get the city to repair the streets . A continuing exposure has been given to need for preservation of Manship .
 Consistently, the newspaper has provided in-depth reports pointing out the problems of the poor and the deprived, as well as the aspirations of the racial minority .
 The Reporter goes beyond the smooth exterior of the city's cultural life . The Reporter has probed into the night life of the town, and given frank evaluations of what it found .
 All movies offered to the public in the city are listed weekly in the newspaper . The movies are listed in the weekly newspaper .
 Overall, the style and content of The Reporter has reflected competence, and responsible journalism, taking the position that an alternative newspaper has a constructive role to play in Jackson, Jackson . Overall, The Reporter reflects competence and responsibility .
 Page 2 Thursday, Sept. 22, 1974: On the good life . Page 2: "It was a good time to explore the lifestyle we would enjoy this year at Millsaps"
 After a frantic search for the necessary paper, we found a stall complete with door, and racing the cockroaches for a shower, we felt sufficiently prepared to face the lunch line .
 We arrived at the Millsaps Mecca healthier, but late, and had to be comforted by the scowling faces of the early birds and a cup of coffee .
 'Student union' has gastronomic catastrophes, two students glazed on ""Lucy"" reruns, and a bookstore with two few textbooks and too many 1950's classics .
 Images of city building inspectors lost in hysterical laughter entertained us briefly . All this glory is crowned by an upper floor, divided among student affairs service .
 We sighed as we walked past an impudent squirrel who remained to compete with the beautiful Holiday Inn, knowing we had not been the impetus for the trip .
 It is rumored that our ""beer-a-go-go"" will be funded by the college this semester as a student gathering place, with the red light bulbs being replaced . Red light bulbs are being replaced, and angry accounts of cockroaches having eyestrain abounded .
 All letters will be published as they are written, providing there is no libelous or obscene overtone . All letters should be submitted with the author's name and signature .
 Names will be withheld upon request, providing proper identification is made to the editor . Students are not the hopeless dupes of a corrupt system, but they are the victims of the system .
 This quixotic line has the approximate validity of berating a Chinese son of communism for his inattention to capitalist values . This is not the same as berating the son of communist for his lack of capitalist values, says the author .
 The Millsaps student is carefully conditioned in the art of insensibility to his environment by budget-conscious administration, complacent faculty, doctrinaire public schools, watchful parents, puberty-pandering peers .
 Martha Mitchell, the ebullient, charismatic wife of the former attorney general of the United States of America, visited here last week . The Pine Bluff, Ark., native appeared to be delighted to be in former Attorney General's former residence .
 The occasion was the marriage of her son, Jay Jennings, to a local girl, Miss Greenwood . She was warmly greeted by friends here as well as by friends in the town .
 One thing that bugs her is the image she has gained on the basis of her dealings the Nixon crowd . She also thinks that her husband, John Mitchell, was the number one patsy of John Mitchell .
 She said she does not play millionaire and was mesmerized by Nixon and his crew."" the role that ""they"" claim. She said the other day that . She said that she . does not . play millionaire . The actress said she is not a millionaire .
 Mitchell probably didn't want to be separated from her husband, but "They have a bad image of me,"" she said . Mitchell said she was separated from him .
 Her designer, Philip Robertson, confirmed that some things have been said mother."" about her that were not justified .
 Mrs. Mitchell thinks that Mr Mitchell will go to jail, a spin-off from the indictment . One gets the impression that Mrs Mitchell thinks Mr Mitchell is going to go to prison .
 Mitchell doesn't particularly like the that he's under, national role that she plays . Mitchell says he doesn't like the national role she plays in Australia . Mitchell: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next."
 She has the personality and character that lend her to public notice . But last week she was being attentive to her son and his bride . She has a role that she fulfilled well, she says .
 Visits with Vinaruhu i Mad Dog on the River or Providence Lifts its Leg by Ebenezer Pendergrass . Beware all ye who read these words .
 The story I am about to relate is not for the faint hearted or feeble minded . The story is about to be told by the author of the book .
 It is a tale of one man's encounter with spiritual metamorphosis, divine revelation, and chronic alcoholism . It is the tale of a man's journey to spiritual transformation .
 It is not a story that I lightly reveal, but if not for our own sake, then for the sake of our children and our children's children, so that posterity will be forevermore enriched by the encounter of this writer .
 The heavy action of a Friday night in Jackson had once again taken its toll . It was the second time in a row that the heavy action had taken a toll .
 As I crawled out of bed I could still hear the siren at Friday's punishing some poor tipper for his generous indulgence . The siren still sounded at the end of Friday's punishment .
 Upon arrival I ambled to the bank and eased my battered body into the warm water . Upon arrival there was a feeling of relief at the end of the day .
 A strange voice bellowed in my direction as I sat down to enjoy a peaceful morning . But no sooner had I settled back to enjoy the peaceful morning, the voice of a strange voice rang out .
 The shorts, covered with red hearts superimposed with the caption ""be my valentine", were partially obscured by a sagging stomach that seemed inconsistent with his otherwise scrawny body .
 Albert Einstein's hair showed all the meticulous grooming of Albert Einstein . His eyes displayed the serenity of the Boston strangler .
 "I was not really sure of his intentions, but not being one to turn down an adventure, I grabbed a stick and followed him through several cow pastures to a small cabin in the woods . The cabin is located in the small, remote area of the town .
 Vinaruhu's crusade is based on his background and his crusade . After situating myself, I asked him to explain his background of his crusade.
 What emerged is no doubt the most bizzare story since the death of Catherine the Great . What emerged from the story was no doubt one of the most bizarre stories since Catherine's death .
 Vinaruhu, it seems, is actually Herbert Headlessman, one time heir to that grpat Jackson newspaper misfortune .
 Were it not for a strange turn of events forty years ago, Herbert would no doubt be spending his time harrassing the Jackson public with myths .
 On his way to newspaper stardom, Herbert had assumed the Political beat for the Daily News .
 After some brilliant investigative work, he had determined that Theodore Bilbo was . livth cousins with no less than Aunt Jemima . Uncle Jemima was a great friend of the family . He had discovered that he was a relative of the famous actress .
 The next thing he remembers he remembers is floating down the Mississippi River . He was floating in the river when he was hit by a falling accident .
 Fighting desperately for his life, Vinaruhu struggled to the nearby bank and pulled himself ashore . He pulled himself out of the water .
 There, before his very eyes stood a giant body with two heads standing on top of a three legged elephant . The elephant was standing on a three-legged elephant in front of him .
 One head bore a striking resemblance to Harry Krishna and the other was clearly the face of Senator Vardaman . The head of the two heads bore a resemblance to each other . The two heads were clearly the faces of the late Sen. Krishna .
 The heads were singing ""I get no kicks from campaign"" mixed in with a medley of Frank Sinatra favorites while the elephant danced in step . The elephant was singing along with the heads .
 Vinaruhu swears that the voice he heard was the voice of Clark Reed, but this being forty years ago, he didn't know any better than to listen . He swears it was Reed .
 Vinaruhu explained pointing to what must have been fifty cases of wine . The wine was made from around 50 gallons of water .
 Vinaruhu explains how his position in the spiritual community enables him to see visions of the future by peering into crystal decanter .
 Our alumnus contributor wishes to remain in alcoholic anonymity . He was a member of the graduating class of 1931, captain of the golf team, member of Eta Chi Fraternity . He is an avid New Dealer .
 Moveover, after serving in WWII as a sub commander, our guest writer and his wife settled in Columbia, South America . He amassed a small fortune mining diamonds .
 Since his retirement, he has once again returned to his beloved Mississippi . He is currently writing his memoirs somewhere along the banks of the river .
 We have taken the liberty of adding parentheses, underlining, and summarizing for the sake of clarity to me .
 There's not a whole lot of anything that you can say about ole 'Saps with any kind of certainty . Not that I mean any harm in the saying of it, mind you, but to get right down to it, there's not much to say .
 "Every year you come staggering in, a strange breed of souls out of the woodwork. Every year, every year, you come staggering in," says the author .
 With those words, he fell to the floor in a stupor, snoring loudly as the remaining wine poured over his clean white shoes . The remaining wine was poured over the shoes .
 "I walked away in stunned silence, determined to return next week and discover the riddle of the universe," says author .
 You might want to ask just how in firing blazes did you happen to come by earning this sudden stroke of name-calling, libellabeling . Now being so ill-defined in this tradition as you have now come to find yourselves, you might .
 Not nearly time enough for people to already be picking out your bad habits . Not nearly enough time enough to already pick out your habits .
 "I always put the blame on our founding father, you know, Major Millsaps. Me myself," he said. "Me myself, I always put it all on the shoulders of the founding father"
 Major Millsaps and his ole lady laid out stiff all these years, smack-DEAD center of campus, buzzing and a 'humming through the cement'
 Just try and keep your backside to them and strut on by as quick as you can . Just try to keep them away from them .
 There's also a VOLCANO, a volcano that could be seen in the sky . The volcano is the largest in the world .
 The crater has been a hotbed of unrest and terror for years on end, pouring out commiefagag-long-haired hippies like lava . The crater is known as the 'crater of unrest' and 'lava'
 People drive by and say ""Oh look at the young people playing frisbee, laying out in the grass, sitting on park benches" "All the while they're just storing up boiling seeds of dissention and atheism," he says .
 "Things seem to have settled down as of late. But I'm thankful to say that things seem to be settled down," she said .
 I haven't heard of a demonstration against the football team in a couple of years . I'm not sure if there will be a protest against the team in the future . I've heard of protests against football teams in recent years .
 People are beginning to enjoy their college days like they were made to be . Like I was saying, people are starting to enjoy college days .
 This fall Millsaps is offering Jackson area residents and Millsaps students the opportunity to participate in a specialinterest program of noncredit courses .
 The classes will open beginning September 16 in the Academic Complex . Registration will be held at the first class meetings .
 Other courses scheduled are Crewel Embroidery, Ceramics, Basic Interior Design, Indoor Horticulture, Marriage, Antiques, Needlepoint, and Beginner Knitting .
 The registration fee for the courses is $25.00 each, except for Travel Abroad and Beginning Piano for Adults, and may be paid at the first class meeting .
 Millsaps College will offer its special course in investment procedures again this fall . Millsaps will offer the course again in the fall .
 Richard Baltz is chairman of the Department of Economics, Accounding and Administration . Baltz: "I'm not going to be surprised by the success of this year's class" Baltz says he is proud of his achievements .
 Jackson attorney and business counselor Abe Rotwein is teaching the special course . Rotweins is also teaching a business counselor in Jackson, Mississippi .
 Lillian Cooley has joined the Millsaps Library staff as Reference Librarian . She replaces Mrs. Cooley, who has been in the library for 18 years .
 Cooley will provide research help, library instruction, and interlibrary loan service for students and faculty . He will also provide instruction, research help and library instruction for students .
 The library has restored its pre-energy crisis schedule, though ""subject to change if conditions require,"" staff announced . Students needing assistance with research project are urged to seek her help .
 Library staff has printed a new handbook for students, especially freshmen, to promote maximum use of library facilities . Library staff also printed a handbook to encourage students to use library facilities more efficiently .
 Results of the National Teacher Examinations are used by many large school districts as one of several factors in the selection of new teachers . Results are used in several states to determine certification or licensing of teachers .
 Prospective teachers should contact the school system in which they seek employment, or their colleges, for specific advice on which examinations should be taken . Prospective students should contact their school system or colleges for advice .
 The Bulletin of Information for Candidates contains a list of test centers, and information about the examinations . The Registration Form contains a Registration Form . The Bulletin is also available for candidates .
 Opinions do not necessarily represent the attitudes of the student body, faculty, or administration . Students at the University of Cambridge say they are proud of their experiences .
 David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailaigue, Dean Pittman, Alan Cameron . The winner of this week's show will be announced at 9 p.m. ET .
 Course content includes study of the stock market, security industry and other investment organizations . Course content focuses on the security industry, security and security industry .
 The 12-weeks investments"" course began at noon on Tuesday, September 3, in the Academic Complex .
 The continuity of Liberalism is the first speaker for this fall's series . Reverend Keith Tonkel will speak at the end of the series .
 He is a graduate of Millsaps and a local minister, active in community affairs . He is also a writer for The Reporter, a local Jackson newspaper .
 Tonkel's speech was molded around the challenges of today and the great opportunity people have to influence the events that shape this world . Tonkel: "People have the opportunity to influence their lives"
 He sees activism as the key to healing the brokeness of our world . He sees this activism as a way to heal the world .
 He recognized the need for broad mindedness and unselfishness in the struggle for uniting the world . Concerning himself with three major areas, education, politics, and religion .
 Tonkel viewed man as the essential factor in this solution, through a serious involvement in FrGShfTIGn Guru Roger's book ""On Encounter Groups" which has been studied by all the faculty involved .
 Eighteen faculty members and two administrators are now meeting once a week with groups of eight to 14 freshmen . They are meeting with eight-to-14 freshmen .
 Woodward said the original plan was to experiment with five groups . Woodward said enough people were enthusiastic about the program for 20 groups to be formed . Woodward: "It's a great opportunity for people to get involved"
 Faculty members and upperclassmen are included for continuity and experience, but they will not necessarily determine the direction of the group . Upperclassmen and faculty members are included in the group for continuity .
 The groups will continue their meeting for nine weeks, but if two or three meetings are sufficient, they can stop any time . The groups hope to continue their meetings for 9 weeks .
 The most important thing is for each group to meet the needs of its members by being spontaneous,"" says . ""As the freshmen become more a part of the college, we may find the groups replaced by fraternities, sororities, and other organizations."
 Faculty members find the group meetings beneficial, especially since the groups consist of students in a variety of fields . Faculty members are also finding the meetings beneficial .
 With these things man could do anything he wishes to do, he could have done anything he wished to do . With such things he would be able to do anything and everything his heart desired .
 The series was introduced into a new season with a hopeful and hearty welcome . The series is set to return to a new series on Sunday at 8pm ET .
 Liberalism in the past two centuries and what the future holds for liberalism . His subject will be the future of liberalism in the United States . He'll talk about liberalism's role in liberalism .
 McElvaine plans to review the 19th century lassiez-faire liberalism and its replacement by 20th century New Deal liberalism . The seeds of future liberalism are growing, he says, in the future .
 His view of future liberalism is a product of these experiences and a subtle maturation which will hold new solutions for tomorrow . He says his views of liberalism are a result of his experiences .
 The subjects presented are of a wide range of subjects geared to attract all student interest . Subjects presented will be presented at the University of Cambridge University .
 Ad hoc committee of faculty members prepared for Thursday; September 12, in the recital hall of the Academic Complex . William Rowell, late chairman of the Millsaps Art Department, will be remembered for his work .
 Rowell's family as well as members of the Mississippi Art Association and the Art Entnusiastsiasts uud will be present at the memorial .
 The Chaplain's Committee of Millsaps recently conducted the first organizing session of the Christian Support Groups . Comical groups provide campus interaction .
 A second organizing session will be held next Monday before beginning the unique program . The program is aimed at developing selfawareness and personal friendship .
 Each Christian Support group will consist of five to twenty members, showing common interests, who will work together in solving day to day problems . The Christian Support Group will be formed from five to 20 members of the Christian community .
 Groups will function mainly on the basis of common need and continue as long as they are serving their purpose . Groups will continue to function as long they serve their purpose, says President Obama .
 Don Fortenberry is the Chairman of the Chaplain's Committee and the driving force behind the Christian Support Program . He is the chairman of the chaplain's committee .
 Fortenberry listed several topics different groups may want to explore including basic bible study and prayer sessions . The bible study is a common topic for groups to explore in the Bible .
 Other topics, not so religiously oriented, cover such subjects as sexuality, ethics and morality, politics, medicine, inner personal relations, and self-awareness .
 Fortenberry explained that each group will have an appointed leader but will be able to decide meeting places and times, subjects discussed and, in general, what course the group will take .
 Chaplain Fortenberry predicted that if the group works correctly, individual members will develop a responsibility toward the group . That should strengthen it, he said . Chaplain said .
 Personal Growth groups are sponsored by the Chaplain's Committee . Personal growth groups are also sponsored by Chaplants Committee .
 E Gene Bennett, director of the Counseling and Consultation organization in Jackson, Jackson, says encounter groups are an offspring of the encounter groups or the group dynamics movement . Bennett: "Group dynamics movement" is a result of encounter groups .
 This professionally-led program's objectives will be to bring about open confrontation and communication among the group . The program will focus on the group's members .
 This, theoretically, will teach the members to deal effectively, not only with others, but with themselves . This will also teach them how to deal with other people, and themselves .
 Four different aimed groups are planned, each concluded in a two-day period . Four differently aimed groups will be held in different locations .
 All of the groups are aimed at providing skills in knowing oneself and then confronting oneself . The groups aim to provide skills to know oneself and confront oneself .
 Personal Growth groups in the Personal Growth program will require a fee of twenty-five dollars each, excluding Experimental Theology Group, which will cost either forty or fifty dollars . These professionally supervised groups will require professional supervision .
 Chaplain Don Fortenberry assured that the Office of the Chaplain will work to alleviate any financial burdens . The Chaplain's office of Chaplain is working to alleviate financial burdens for the students .
 Philip Agee is the first agent from the clandestine service of the CIA ever to tell his story . Agee worked for the CIA in the 1980s and '90s .
 Other intelligence officers, most recently Victor Marchetti, have related what they know about CIA operations . They have always been operatives from the CIA bureaucracy in Langley, Virginia .
 The Times report was termed ""nonsense"" by informed sources who felt that the CIA was trying to discredit Agee's potential revelations by portraying him as a traitor . The Times reported Agee was a CIA operative .
 At the time of his resignation from the CIA in 1969, his superiors had no idea of the extent of his dissatisfaction with his mission or the general pattern of covert U.S. activities in the countries where he worked .
 Plans for student use of Millsaps's new Physical Activities Center are now being developed by the Physical Education Department . Swimming pool to open soon at Millsaps .
 Work on the swimming pool is progressing rapidly towards completion . The pool should allow full usage by September 11 . Full usage should be completed by September 10 .
 The activities schedule will depend on when students wish to swim . The pool will remain open as long as weather and endurance permit .
 Life-saving instruction is planned on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday of the first two weeks . Two weeks of a water safety course is also planned for the second two weeks of the course .
 Beginning swimming is tentatively scheduled for C period, or free and convocation periods . Beginning swimming will be tentatively set for the summer .
 Coach Montgomery would like to see created a sports committee composed of interested members of the student body, faculty, and administration that would be receptive to ideas concerning the new facility .
 Coach Montgomery explained that due to energy costs, the night schedule would be rigidly structured to allow maximum activity in a compressed period of time . Coach Montgomery assured ""plenty of time during the week"" for off-the-street activities .
 Further information, including . registration, concerning any of the above may be . obtained from the office of Dr. Dr. John Defterios . Further information may be obtained from his office .
 Agee said recently that he intends to demonstrate in his book that the CIA has served as ""the police force of American capitalism" in imposing United States ""economic exploitation"" on Latin American countries . Agee: CIA has imposed United States .
 Agee resigned in 1969 "because of my comprehension that all the things that we were doing were supporting fascist-type governments" Agee says he resigned because of his "concerns" for fascist-style governments .
 The American secret police was preserving the rule of the wealthy minorities and attacking those who stood for change in Latin America . The secret police, the U.S. secret police were protecting the rich and powerful from the wealthy .
 The agency's job was to keep the lid on ... to keep insurgency down at a lower level than in Vietnam . The agency was tasked with keeping insurgency down in Vietnam, the official says .
 Agee withheld specific details that were in his yet to be published manuscript . Agee withholds specific details in his manuscript .
 He felt that releasing such details before the book would put his life in danger . The book is published next year .
 He did reveal, though, something of his work for the CIA in Latin America . He also revealed that he was a CIA agent in Latin American .
 Agee set up the Mexico City cover operation for the CIA in 1966 . The operation was conducted by Robert Mullen and Company, a public relations firm that fronted for CIA operations in many parts of the world .
 CIA fears that Mullen would publicly disclose the Mullen front in 1972 led to its closing by the CIA . CIA also closed Mullen offices in Singapore and Amsterdam, which also closed .
 The placement of CIA agents in U.S. corporations around the world is common practice . CIA agents are often placed in the United States corporations .
 The agents are assigned to those posts with the full knowledge and permission of the companies . The CIA reimburs the companies for the agents' salaries and expenses . The companies are responsible for the posts .
 Agee's cover in Mexico in 1967 and 1968 was as the Olympics staff assistant to then U.S. Ambassador Holton Freeman . Agee was in Mexico at the time of the time .
 Agee's covert mission was to "meet all kinds of people" in order to extend the Mexican CIA station's network of agents . In his Olympics role, Agee was to meet people in Mexico to expand the CIA's network .
 Mexican students and workers mounted a strike and massive demonstrations against the brutality of the Mexican army and police in 1968 . It was just before the Mexico City Olympics in 1968 that massive demonstrations were held .
 While serving in the CIA's Ecuador station in 1962 Agee participated in launching a pressure campaign against the Ecuadorian government to end diplomatic ties with Cuba . Agee was in Ecuador when he was in charge of the CIA in 1962 .
 The President ""didn't want to break relations but we forced him,"" said Agee . Agee: "We forced him. We forced him" Agee said .
 The CIA's anti-Cuban campaign was carried out through the media, mass organizations, Agee says . The agency's influence with the Ecuadorian military, he says, was also in Ecuadorian influence .
 Frei won, but was eventually defeated by Salvador Allende in the 1970 Chilean presidential election . Allende was elected president of Chile in 1970, but Frei was defeated by Allende .
 Agee handled the cashing of the check and conversion into Chilean currency in Montevideo, Uruguay . Agee was assigned to the CIA station in Uruguay, where he worked .
 The United States poured an estimated $20 million into the 1962 Brazilian election in support of several hundred candidates for gubernatorial, congressional, state and municipal offices . Agee also said that the U.S. poured an estimate of $20million into the election .
 His first assignment to Uruguay in 1962-66 was to direct operations against the Cubans and build up local police forces . He says he started his ideological break with the CIA and United States policy in Latin America .
 It was in Uruguay that he lost faith in the possibility of solving the region's problems through political reform, he says . He says he was disappointed by the lack of political reform in Uruguay .
 "Reform reform is really rhetoric. My own big change was the comprehension that reform was really rhetoric," he says .
 The King is Dead Long Live the King I drink when Ik ave ave occasion . Filmed in North Mississippi, this is the cinematic version of the novel .
 The James Dean classic of frustrated American youth is a classic of frustration . "Rebel Without a Cause" is released on DVD and Blu-Ray .
 Richard Harris stars as Zack Bass in an epic struggle for survival . Harris stars in the new film, "Man in the WILDERNESS"
 From Mel Brooks, the man who gave you Blazing Saddles, you can find out what to do with your favorite movie . Mel Brooks' "Blazing Saddles" opens in theaters Oct. 31 .
 Walt Disney cashes in on the witch-craze . Oct. 31 — BEDKNOBS and BROOMSTICKs — Walt Disney .
 The story is the story of a young woman's ambitions and her fight to realize them . Nov. 30's "Black Girl" is a look at a young girl's ambitions .
 The War Between Women and Men is a James Thurber classic on film . Nov. 30th is the release of The War of the World . The film is based on Thurber's novel, The War Of Women .
 Red Sky at Morning is a moving story of young people growing up during World War Two . Red Sky At Morning is on PBS at 10 p.m. ET on Dec. 31 .
 Bugs Bunny, Foghorn Leghorn, Road Runner, and Yosemite Sam are some of the world's most famous animals . Yosemite Sam was Yosemite Sam, Yosemite Sam .
 The Millsaps Players will open its 51st season with "The Infernal Machine,"" Jean Cocteau's bitingly humorous treatment of the Greek Oedipus myths . The play will be the first of the season .
 Auditions were held Tuesday night in the Christian Center auditorium . Goss says rehearsals will begin Thursday .
 Goss noted that he was quite pleased with the large turnout for auditions, particularly of freshmen . Goss said he was pleased with a large turnout of students .
 Other Players' productions are scheduled for late November, early February, and mid-April .
 1974 Millsaps Majors buoyantly approach new season . Head Coach Harper Davis expecting good things from his 1974 team . Paul Walker and Brian Flint, typlify enthusiasm for new son .
 The brightness of the coming campaign was somewhat eclipsed by rain clouds last week . However, rain clouds cloud cloud clouded up the campaign .
 intramurals, the most popular jic ( urricular activity at ■r.^ps, is beginning its first "unusual week last week,"" remarked Davis .
 The inside of the new Activities Complex saw alot of the Majors last week, bu. Needless to say, the inside of this week's events saw a lot of Major League Baseball .
 Saturday, when the skies finally allowed, they took to Alumni Field and looked ""surprisingly good,"" according to Davis . Saturday's game was the first time the team had played since September .
 Despite last week's weather, Davis is quite pleased with what he has seen so far . Davis says he and Assistant Coach Tommy Ranager are pleased with the results .
 He was referring to his twenty-three returning lettermen, including 16 starters from last year's 54 squad . The coach says he is looking forward to the return of the players .
 The offense, losing only two from last year, looks extremely Intramurals begins new year under new program ex Mil ' under the Intramural ciL a committee of the v ""a r Sitti&rit Senate . The offense loses only two of last year's
 The intramural Coun. Coun. . program has become increasingly popular at Millsaps because it allows participation by all students, yet it has the least cost per student . of any physical education program .
 In the past, intramurals was both directed and financed by the physical education department . The program has also been funded by the Physical Education Department .
 Last year, however, the department was unable to provide sufficient funds due to increased costs . Last year's funds were not enough to cover the costs .
 The intramural program turned to the Student Senate in hopes of obtaining funding . The Student Senate voted for the program to receive funding .
 The Senate set up the Intramural Council to administer and direct intramurals . The council was set up by the Senate in 2007 .
 It is comprised of two advisors from the physical education department — Dr. Dr. Paul and Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister is also a physical education advisor .
 Edge — , two chairpersons appointed by the Senate — Alan Brehm and Sharon Arnold — , and eight nonpartial appointed representatives, four men and four women . Edge — and eight other nonpartial appointments — are also nonpartial representatives .
 There is also an advisory group consisting of elected i representatives, one from each team whose sport is in season .
 Alan Brehm stated that the committee expects to adopt the Men's and Women's Intramural constitutions into its bylaws . Brehm said he expects the committee's bylaws to be adopted by the committee .
 Some of the committee's goals for this year are to develop a comprehensive system for administering the intramural program, to supervise playing conditions, to develop rules .
 This year's budget will exceed last year's $1,200 budget, says minister . He added that there will be sufficient funds to administer it .
 Fall intramural sports include soccer and volleyball for the men and flag football for the women . Flag football, volleyball, and badminton are also offered in fall .
 In preparation for intramurals this fall, the soccer field has been reworked and the PAC is being finished . Montgomery, one of the two advisors to the committee, said that in preparation .
 Montgomery's suggestions for the year include indoor soccer for the women (as a possible replacement for flag football), intramural swimming activities .
 Safety Jeb Dominick busted a knee and is expected to be sidelined for six weeks . Dominick will be sidelined from the start of the season with a knee injury .
 Davis has only one thing to say about the season opener against Southwestern . Davis says the team is looking forward to the opening day of the season .
 After the flood and with an ark full of experienced upperclassmen and hopeful newcomers, Coaches Davis and Ranager are plotting a . course toward another winning season .
 He stated that the PAC can easily be set up to accommodate indoor soccer . The PAC can be easily set up, he said, to accomodate indoor soccer.
 He also hopes that the intramural committee will study the various swimming activities that can be included in the program . The committee will also look at the various activities that could be included .
 Men's soccer and women's flag football will begin within the next two weeks . Men's football, flag football and men's soccer will also begin .
 Intramurals is one of the most enjoyable activities at Millsaps . We hope that everyone will take part in at least one aspect of the intramural program .
 He appeals to the people to remember the prisoners who suffered for them . Angela Davis, the RNA 11, the Wilmington 10, and the Charlotte 3 are among those who suffered .
 People who are imprisoned for no other reason than that they are Black or Chicano, or Native American, or poor . Nor must we forget those persons who are simply victimized by the system, says author .
 The people, sident Obadele says, are onsible for getting him out of prison . If they do not continue to put the pressure on, and to build the type of power that has to be listened to, the chains will never be broken .
 President Obadele feels that Black people are already a nation — a people pressed together by suppression . President Obadlele says Black people already have a nation . He says they are pressed together in suppression .
 He states that the legal basis for the existence of the New African nation is found in Cherokee Nation State of Georgia, 1839 .
 Cherokees developed a written language, patterned a civilization after the White man's, wrote a constitution, and established a legislature . Cherokees also patterned their culture after the white man's . The Cherokees had a constitution and legislature .
 They even adopted Christianity and tried to live peacefully amidst the Whites . The Whites even tried to adopt Christianity and live peacefully in England .
 They saw themselves as a foreign nation with whom the U.S. government had made treaties with . They were not interested in treaties with the United States, they said . But they wanted to be recognized as a treaty-making nation .
 The Cherokee RNA Nation felt pressed to seek action through the Supreme Court to enjoin gold-hungry Whites from taking their land . The RNA Nation was pressed to act against the White .
 Chief Justice Marshall gave the Cherokees a peculiar label, refusing to call them a foreign nation . The RNA has changed somewhat since its earlier days, but has since changed somewhat .
 Its emphasis now seems to be on unifying, solidifying the Black community . The emphasis is now on uniting, unifying and solidifying Black communities .
 Obadele is the president of the Mississippi Black Assembly . He is working for unity within the system within the Mississippi black community .
 Legal Awards Night was an attempt to recognize those who had served or stood by the RNA . Angela Davis was the featured speaker on the program .
 This belief is a guiding factor in their difficult struggle to break away from the club . It is the belief that they will be able to succeed in the future .
 It is ironic, or perhaps prophetic, that those who struggle hardest to break the chains are those who become the most tightly bound . recognizing their unique position 1 as a sort of nation within a nation .
 Obadele sees this case as legal justification for the existence of the Republic of New Africa . He says the case is a legal justification to the country's existence as a nation .
 We have a right to the land, he says, because we have worked it, developed it, and fought to stay on it . We have worked, developed and fought for it, he said, because it's a right .
 We are already a nation, but a subjugated, suppressed nation, a people tired of giving our money to a government to be used for 'white purposes' like them . like them. We are tired of being used to give money to the government to use for 'whites'
 "In so doing, they lessened the gap existing between themselves and persons of this type," says the author of the book .
 The presence of James Meredith, a somewhat moderate Black political figure, was also a unifying factor . Meredith was a moderate Black figure in the 1960s and '60s .
 Dennis Wells senior, Mike Stevens junior, and Paul Stephens freshman, were recently elected class presidents . Betsy Holmes was elected as class president at the age of 16 .
 The 1974 elections at Millsaps brought few surprises to anyone . It almost seemed that everyone who had ever held office was running against everyone who lost .
 There were few changes and it is unlikely that any differences of ideology will be present when it meets . The meeting will be held in New York City, New York, on Sunday .
 One point of interest, however, is the growing role of women in student politics . Women are more likely to be involved in the political process than men .
 All four class vice-presidents, one class president, the secretary of the SEB and two at-large senators are female . It will develop into an eight to eight male-female ratio in the new Senate .
 A subculture of black students has developed within, and apart from, the Millsaps community . Race is an issue we haven't faced that we had better: a subculture has developed in the community .
 It is a complicated situation that has resulted in the absence of black participation in college activities . It is not the first time black students have been allowed to take part in college sports activities .
 In the recent elections no black ran, nor was a black interviewed for appointment to the Judicial Committee which is really a shame . Participation on any level has to be self-motivated, says Dr. Roland Martin .
 Independent participation is imperative as there are only three independents on the student senate . In the future, independent participation will be imperative as only three independent senators are on senate .
 It's a shame that the majority of the student body has such minimal representation on the senate when they have the greatest to gain without the benefits of social organizations . The majority of students have a greater to gain from social organizations than the university senate .
 If the trend of the 60's had continued, the Greek system would have died out because it's president and Diane McMullen vicepresident .
 The four senators-at-large are Mark Jones, Patsy Pharr, May Line Zehnder, and David Bourgeois . Mark Jones was chosen from a field of ten, chosen to be chosen from 10 .
 The trend of the past two years has been towards the 50's idea of banding together to benefit those you want to benefit, and excluding others . However, the trend of two years is towards banding up to benefit yourself and exclude others .
 I think the Greek system will eventually die out, when all groups realize they can't maintain an exclusive type atmosphere . I think it will die out when all of the groups realize it can't be maintained an exclusive atmosphere .
 I think administration-student relations have to improve a lot if Millsaps is to become the king of college that many have visualized . Millsaps has a lot of work to do to become a college college that students can imagine .
 Glade Mclnnis: By assuming the Student Senate is Common Cause Attacks State Corruption by assuming the student senate is Common cause .
 Ethics and open meeting legislation are their weapons for the coming 1975 legislative session . Passage of ethics and open meetings legislation is their weapons .
 The bill to require open meetings of public bodies strikes at the heart of secrecy in government . The bill would allow closed meetings when in the public interest . House bill 139 would also allow public meetings to be held in the open .
 Smkh feels that the present bill is superior in its provisions to a similar bill presented last year, and that the time is now ripe for such legislation . Smkh says the present legislation is superior to the previous version .
 Common Cause is responding to the student's frustration and lack of responsiveness to the administration . "The common man now realizes that he needs to have a say in his government."
 "They've got to establish contact with the student, not just the student leaders," she says . "They have got to start talking to the student," she adds .
 The ethics bill comes closer to the financial heart of politicians and Smith is not as optimistic about its passage . Smith: "The ethics bill is not just a matter of legislation, but it's a bill of concern for the future of politicians .
 Common Cause/ Mississippi has grown steadily since the last session of the Legislature failed to act . Even if both bills were defeated, Smith sees no adverse effects to the organization .
 The basic unit of Common Cause is the Congressional District . Steering committees saw these issues as the movement's top priorities . Common Cause's steering committees saw the issues as their top priorities.
 Common Cause/ Mississippi is part of the national organization with over 300,000 members that has been extremely effective in Congress . The organization is struggling to gain reforms in campaign financing . Common Cause is a national organization that is extremely effective .
 At the risk of appearing terribly 'unliberal', we offer our support to President Ford in his recent pardon of Richard Nixon .
 We agree with the visiting Art Buchwald that the President was probably convinced by persons close to Mr Nixon that his health was in great jeopordy . We agree .
 Extra $200,000 allotted to ousted President and closing of the book on Watergate are two — serious excesses . There do seem to be several excesses, however, however .
 This for a man who struck at the heart of America's existence as a free society, whose crimes are vast in number . This for him, his crimes were vast in his crimes, his crime was vast in a number of ways .
 Gerald Ford will be more welcome than Gerald Ford in 1976 . Gerald Ford would be welcome for whoever Democrats may nominate for President in 1976, says historian .
 Vice President Obama demonstrated his faith in conservatism, the strengths and weaknesses of that ideology in Mississippi . President Obama's recent visit to Mississippi showed that he believes in conservatism .
 His strength is in his belief in the wisdom of the people and their ability to govern themselves without the ever-present hand of central control .
 Mr Ford is a militarist who stated with verity that ""if you're strong you get peace ... if you're weak you get war"" (with all our strength, would that we had a little peace) He believes in running ""government in the black"" — a theory dispro
 We never expect the government to be conducted for the best interests of the people, but perhaps recent events have ironically been so . The government has been conducting its best interests in the public's best interests, says David Cameron .
 President Ford's pardon of Mr Nixon will, we believe, be finally recorded as the compassionate act of a man of integrity, while it will hopefully prevent his election as President . We believe it will be recorded as a compassionate act .
 Mississippi Republican leaders are dismayed by Gerald Ford's erratic behavior . They are making a new assessment of their chances to elect three GOP congressmen in the coming general election .
 Ben Hilbun in the second district, Thad Cochran in the fourth district . Trent Lott in the fifth district and Trent Cochran  in fourth district were lead pipe cinches to retain their seats . Ben Hilubun in second district is a Democrat, but Cochran
 He came out, for amnesty for draft-dodgers and spoke up for legalized abortion . He finally granted former President Richard Nixon a full pardon, long before any legal action was taken against him .
 Possibly the most significant of the congressional races will, take place in the fourth district . The fourth district is located in the U.S.
 The district includes Hinds county, which has something in the order of 72 per cent of the voters in the entire district . Hinds County is the largest county in the district .
 Thad Cochran is the congressman for the district, serving his first term . Cochran was elected to the district in 2008 .
 His Democratic opponent in the general election is television executive Kenneth Dean .
 Dean, in spite of the very low profile he is trying to maintain, has been combing the territory . Dean has been cultivating organized labor as well as blacks and the some 30,000 identified Democrats who voted for Lyndon Johnson . Dean: "I'm trying to keep a low profile
 Some political observers theorize that Dean's low profile as a candidate might stand him in good stead in this race . Dean has a low profile in the polls, but some say it could be a good thing for Dean .
 He is counting on a low voter turnout, and the strategy is to try to get his supporters to the polls .
 Dean says he has tacit support of Mississippi's regular Democrats . With the tide running against Republicans nationally, the economy in a mess, and President Ford's future a quandary, he could pull off a coup .
 What it really depends on is whether Dean can get his people to the polls, a very iffy question . Dean Obeidallah says he's not sure if he can get people to vote in the polls .
 Some say you'll get an education and others that you'll make this a better place to live . Some are even claiming that you're going to make this better place of life .
 "They don't let that provoke them into organizing. Oh you'll hear them complain a bit and see them drink and date out of boredom," she says . "They'll hear a bit of them complain, but see them date out their boredom"
 Tell him that you've already got what the faculty wants you to have and are damn proud of it . Tell him with defiance that you already got the faculty's already got .
 David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailaieue . The winner of this week's show will be announced at 9 p.m. ET on Monday .
 Ebenezer Pendergrass wrote The Fatal Havana . The riddle of the universe was heavy on my mind. It was a mystery to me .
 A demented old peckerwood claimed to have cornered the market on spiritual insight . Simpson County, Simpson County was about to partake in a substantial dose of divine revelation .
 As I knocked on Vinaruhu's door, I noticed a well placed bumper sticker reading ""one way"" with a picture of a bottle of Mad Dog 20 20 20 pointing toward the heavens . As he knocked on his door, he noticed a bumper sticker .
 "I had begun to have second thoughts about this business and my potted pedagogue was bearing them out. I had begun having second thoughts," she says .
 His body began moving to a strange rhythm as he commenced a bizzare chant . The bizarre chant was performed by a man at the centre of the tragedy .
 Vinaruhu collapsed on his bed, his body and mind in a state of shambles . He collapsed on the bed, and his mind and body was left unharmed by the tragedy .
 Lubofuno was created by Vinaruhu, a member of the world's most powerful group . He said he was surprised by the scope of Lubofununo's powers .
 I would catch Vinaruhu off guard with an unexpected test of his powers, I would surprise him with a test he would be surprised by .
 He lay himself on the floor, took a crystal decanter, and balanced it on his nose . He balanced the crystal on the nose, balancing it on the head .
 "The old guard is laughing and making jokes about him, but none of them will look him in the eye," he says . The old guard will continue to laugh and make jokes, but no one will look back at him, he adds .
 White political leadership in Mississippi has been poor over the years, perhaps it comes as no surprise that the publicly political — and potentially political — black leadership in our state is similarly deficient .
 James Meredith conducts a campaign and make a speech whose asininity could rival that of the biggest tobacco-chewer down at the state legislature . Charles Evers gets hit by the IRS for taxes unpaid and thus lose whatever threads of credibility he may have had left as an honest spokesman for
 It all lacks of class; it lacks of eloquence, eloquence and integrity, it lacks integrity . It lacks of the many things which politicians must at least appear to have in order to reach the high places where they can do good things for the people .
 Julian Bond is an articulate, young Civil Rights organizer turned Georgia state legislator . Bond is a former civil rights organizer turned state legislator in Georgia . Bond has been in the forefront of the Civil Rights movement in Georgia for decades .
 This black man's mere charismatic presence leads one to realize, in contrast, just how boorish Meredith, Evers, and white counterparts such as Jim Eastland can really be .
 Bond's life illustrates just what a young and gifted person can do in the public arena, given the right times and the right spirit of mind . Bond exudes a sense of hope, not so much from a speech that sounded like it might have been given on half a dozen different campuses
 Julian Bond found the Civil Rights cause staring him in the face and not about to go away . Bond was a Morehouse College student of 20, likened to poetry and other platonic pursuits . Bond died at the age of 25 in 1964 .
 In 1960 he was arrested for trying to integrate a lunch counter at Atlanta's City Hall lunch counter . He responded accordingly and in early 1960 was arrested .
 Activity grew to marches, voter-registration drives, and most importantly, a position as public information director for the conflictoriented Student Non-Violence Coordinating Committee .
 Bond travelled on back roads and college campuses, organizing young people for massive assaults on the South's barriers of segregation . Bond travelled extensively on college campuses and back roads in the South .
 In 1966 a Supreme Court ordered reapportionment of Georgia created a new 95% black electoral district in Bond's section of Atlanta . The district was created in 1966 .
 He ran for the state assembly and won rather easily . Sensing the opportunity, he ran for a state assembly .
 The 26-year-old was refused a seat by the powers that were decided not to seat him .
 Supreme Court ordered Bond be given his rightful place in the legislature . Bond still holds a position he still holds today . After winning two subsequent elections, Bond won two more elections .
 In 1968 he led a Loyalist challenge delegation at the Democratic Convention to claim half of the Georgia seats controlled by the ""machine"" of then-governor Lester Maddox . Chicago in 1968 catapulted him to the national forum .
 His popularity reached such a crescendo that week that he was nominated for vice-president, only to decline because he wasn't old enough to meet the constitutional requirements for the office . His popularity was such a high that he declined to be nominated for the position .
 Julian Bond is just waiting — sitting back with the confidence that, as in the past, times and issues and events will soon coalesce to present a challenge that will call forth his gifts and talents and charm, propelling his onward in the national political arena toward louder outcries and
 Hinman College should revolve around the education of the student, Hinman says . Hinman should be focused on education of students, he says .
 Making sure the college is financially stable has been the main concern of the administration during President Collin's tenure . The college has a history of financial stability, including financial stability .
 I must say they've done a rather fine job; but certainly, less emphasis should be placed on that . I'm not sure if they're doing a good job, but I'm sure they are doing well .
 I'd like to see a student, or recently graduated alumnus, on the Board of Trustees . I'm not sure if I want to be a member of the board .
 The administration is interested in the student's opinion, the school says . That alone would indicate that the administration is aware of the issue, the student says .
 Faculty and administration seem to place themselves above the student, as if they are on a lower level . I think the faculty and administration — and certainly there are exceptions to this — seem to be placing themselves above students, she says .
 This condescension is going to have to stop — no student vants to feel he is under the humb of anyone, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This condescension has to stop - no student will feel he's under anyone's pressure."
 If educators would show concern for the student's growth as a person, and not develop a parent-child relationship, we could move towards a positive relationship in Sept. 1974 .
 There are going to be an increasing amount of activitieimade available this year in an attempt to transform Millsaps into a college on weekends as well . Millsaps is a high school that has been trying to become a college for weekends .
 Student Senate is a place where students should come to make their views known . Student Senate has an important role that I see as a place to make my views known. And I see the Student Senate fulfilling that role, he says .
 "Any person may speak with the consent of the Senate, which has never been denied," Senate says . "The Senate has never denied" the right to speak, says Sen. John McCain .
 There is a clause in the Constitution that allows the President to veto any college senate action, which is like high school where you can do anything the principal doesn't mind you doing . The President of the University of Columbia University has vetoes of the action .
 Students are not so immature that they can't decide how dormitories are regulated or whether they as freshman should be allowed to live off campus . Also, I think the students are not too immature to decide how their dorms are regulated, or if they should live in dorms .
 Board of Directors of the Millsaps Art and Lecture Series announced that all Millsaps students presenting an ID card will be admitted free to the balcony section during the 1974-75 season .
 The attractions will include the Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre, a total theatre in pantomime . A debate by liberal Max Lerner and conservative Reirf Rnckl^y will also take place .
 Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre will be presented November 9, January 18 and January 18 . Lehman Engel's appearance will be followed by a performance on January 18, 2015 .
 The Troubadours' April 28 performance will be the attration offered from the College . April 28 is the first time the College has offered an attration .
 All Millsaps students are encouraged to attend the seventh year of the series, which Began April 28 . The series is being held at Millsaps High School .
 After less than a week of practice, the Troubadours are already making their own kind of music . Students with ID cards will be admitted free to the balcony on a first-come, firstserve concert .
 Fifteen members and two Fulbright Competition Announced The Institute of International Education announced the official opening of the 1975-76 competition for grants .
 Grants are provided under the terms of the Mutual Education and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 . The grants are intended to increase mutual understanding between the people of the United States and other countries .
 Applicants must be United States citizens at the time of application, who will hold a bachelor's degree or its equivalent before the beginning date of the grant . They must also be proficient in the language of the host country .
 Except for certain specific awards, candidates may not hold the Ph.D. at the time of application . Applicants must also have a Ph.C. degree .
 Creative and performing artists are not required to have a bachelor's degree, but they must have four years of professional study or equivalent experience . They must have a four-year professional experience or equivalent .
 Social work applicants must have at least two years of professional experience after the Master of Social Work degree . Candidates in medicine must have an M.D. at the time of application . Social work candidates must have two years' professional experience .
 Selection is based on the academic and/ or professional record of the applicant, the validity and feasibility of his proposed study plan, his language preparation and personal qualifications . Selection will be made on the basis of the validity of the study plan . Selection is also considered for the validity, feasibility and
 Preference is given to candidates between 20 and 35 years of age who have not had prior opportunity to extended study or residence abroad . Preference given to those between 20 to 35 years old who have had prior opportunities to study abroad .
 The deadline for filing is October 25, 1974, but as there are two to three weeks of work involved, one should apply as soon as possible . alternates were selected by audition last week for this year's group .
 The Troubadours have been selected to appear in the Millsaps Arts and Lecture Series in the spring . Among the shows planned this year is the group's annual spring concert at Millsaps .
 The accompanists are Elizabeth Harwell, a junior organ major, and Adren McCoy, a sophomore and a member of Chi Omega Sorority . Marland Dulaney, bass, a biology major from Slidell, Louisiana, is the only freshman .
 The other Troubadours are Sherry Pearson, a sophomore voice major, a member of the Millsaps Singers and Chi Omega . Maura Mcintosh, also a student of the Singers, and Kappa Delta Sorority, are also involved in the group .
 She is majoring in music education and is the Troubadours' second four year member . Pat Goodman, Vice President of Kappa Delta, a history major, and a member of the Majorette Club . Jan Dickson, a KD pledge and theatre major who received the Best Supporting
 College majoring in chemistry; and Robert Smith, a history major, is a member of Lambda Chi Alpha . College majored in chemistry and history major; college major in history major .
 The general election will be held the first Tuesday in November . The election will take place first Tuesday, November 6 .
 Any Millsaps student who is registered to vote in another district may vote in this election if you change your registration to the 4th district . Millsaps students who are registered in other districts can vote in the election .
 To be eligible for the election, register with the Hinds County Circuit Clerk within 30 days before the election . Register with the county's circuit clerk within the month of the election.
 Some 52 girls at Millsaps accepted bids offered by the college's three social sororities at the end of Rush Week .
 Each of the three sororities were pleased with the number of girls participating in rush this year . Jane Corder, dean of women, says each sorority was pleased with rush rush .
 Carol Albritton, Nancy Barksdale, Ann Bear, Kathryn Carter, Nancy Clarkson, Cindy Crowe, Isabelle Ezelles, Sherry Lipscomb and Sarah Louise Loewenburg . Robin Rice, Cindy Rossin, Cindy Sanders, and Rebecca Brent.
 Sara Buehler, Deborah Burnham, Beverly Clement, Cindy Guild, Jane Harvey, Martha Hutchinson, Sandra Johnson, Margaret Lawrence, Galle Mallette, Nancy Martin, Kathy Meena, Wilma Parry, Theresa Prescott, Sally Sudduth, Susan Tsimortos
 This past Fall Rush was the most successful rush that the fraternities have had in recent years . This year's rush was the biggest rush that Phi Phi Mu has had in years .
 A record number, 96, men went out for rush and another record, 72, men pledged fraternities . A record 72, a record, went out pledging fraternaternities. A record, 96 went for rush .
 Kappa Alpha : Barry Wax, Rusty Ball, David Bourgeois, Cooper Morrison, Ed McManus, Brad Carter and Brad Carter . Bruce McKinley McKinley, Bill Leech, Roger Lawson, Hugh Tedder, John Williamson, Steve Haygood, Rob Rice, and Charley
 Muellen, David Reilly, Donald Reilly, Warren Robinson, Mitch Sing, Keith Thrash, Jim Watts, and Jim Watts are the stars of the show .
 Charlie Waters, Jim Clark, John Stark, Don Hall, Richard Fox, Kent Stone, Mike Gaby, Joel Youngblood, David Raden, Ben Fewel, Mark Scarborough, Mark Stanton, and Lance Syble .
 The United Farm Workers Union is engaged in a boycott in support of the striking in the grape and lettuce fields . Suzie Wiels: Boycott of Wines Called by UFW is called by the UFW . The UFW calls for a boycott of wines .
 For five years until 1970, the UFW fought huge agriculture industry in California for union recognition . The UFW, smallest and poorest of the unions, fought for five years to get recognition .
 As a result of the five year strike and consumer boycott, the grape growers signed union contracts guaranteeing decent wages and working conditions for farmworkers . The union contracts guarantee decent wages, working conditions .
 The UFW then rried the fight to the lettuce Ids where the fight for recognition still goes on . The fight is still going on .
 The union contracts restrict the use of pesticides as well as prevent child labor . Union contracts restrict use of pesticide and prevent child labour .
 The union has replaced the exploitive labor contractor system with the union hiring hall . The hiring hall is now a hiring hall, not a labor contractor .
 The UFW has set up three health clinics and provided workers with a prepaid medical plan that has already paid out two million dollars in benefits . The plan has already been paid out 2 million dollars .
 The farm workers have shown that Filipinos, blacks, whites, and Chicanos can work together in one union . Filipinos and blacks have shown they can unite in a union .
 There is a new spirit of self-respect and independence that takes the place of fear and helplessness . There is also a new sense of self respect and independence in the U.S.
 The farmworkers have new hope that their lives can and will be improved, and this hope is only fair . The farmworker's hope is that the farmworkers will be able to live a better life, and that's fair .
 The contracts that were signed in 1970 expired this year . Instead of resigning the contracts, some growers hired Teamster Union Scab labor . Some growers hired Scab workers instead .
 This not only is hurting the UFW, but is the path to destruction of all unions by the all-powerful, Nixon supported Teamsters . This is the way to destroy all unions, says U.W. Rep. Bob Greene . Greene: "This not only hurts the U
 Many stores have vowed to buy and sell only UFW products . When these are not available because of lack of grower contracts in California, they do not sell grapes or lettuce .
 The Boycott is still on against the Sunflower Stores who once signed, and then backed down on the UFW, as well as Kroger Stores . Kroger and Sunflower are still boycotting each other, as are Kroger .
 State wide boycott on Sunflower and Kroger will gain UFW support . Hopefully, the state wide boycott will gain support from the UFW .
 Only our support of the UFW boycott can bring about the fair treatment of farmworkers . Farmworkers have received little more than survival wages for generations . The UFW should be supported by the U.S.
 David Anderson 38 votes, Lloyd Gray 42 votes, Betsy Holmes 61 votes, and Mike Stevens 56 votes . Lloyd Gray, David Anderson and Betsy Holmes also voted for the president .
 Holmes and Stevens were declared winners by the election committee under James Galloway . Having the two highest numbers of votes, they were declared the winners of the election .
 Later that afternoon Gray contested the election to Dean Harvey Saunders, on the grounds that no candidate had received a majority of the votes . The election was held on the same day as the result of the election .
 Stevens was notified at 10:30 Thursday evening in Hollingsworth's Cafe that the runoff would be held Friday morning . Stevens protested he could not have the runoff postponed .
 Gray and Holmes were to be the new senators and the matter seemed closed . Gray was to be replaced by Holmes and Holmes .
 SEB President Charlie Hinman discovered that the actual reading of the constitution was that the two candidates receiving the majority of the ballots cast shall be the winners . The SEB constitution states that two candidates must win the election .
 Since both Holmes and Stevens exceeded that number in the first ballot, the original decision was reinstated and the controversy resolv ed .
 T W Lewis will preside over the service which is open to all religious faiths . The service is a new concept which seeks to blend the traditional with the contemporary .
 Reiff has been selected to be included in the seventh edition of ""Personalities of the South, 1974"" published by the American Biographical Institute . Reiff was a member of the American Biographical Institute .
 The conference is in preparation for the President's Economic Summit of late September . Governor Waller is one of the nine governors asked to participate in the summit .
 Political science professor Bavender will analyse the turbulent situation in Northern Ireland . He will try to convey some understanding of an extremely complex and widely misunderstood current event .
 Bavender will draw from his recent experiences in Northern Ireland and his personal study of this crisis area . Bavender says he will use his personal experience in the Northern Ireland crisis area as a guide to the future .
 His first-hand account of the violent and chaotic world of Ulster will be recounted and explained . The terrorizing tactics of both Protestants and Catholic factions will be explained .
 Mr Bavender will explore the many facets of the conflict and the effect it has had on human interest in social, political and economic spheres of activity . He will explore how the conflict has affected people's lives and their lives .
 The understanding that he has acquired through his study will greatly enhance the knowledge of Northern Ireland to those who attend his lecture . He will be presenting a lecture in Belfast on Thursday .
 His exciting episode in Northern Ireland will surely shed light on an often misinterpreted subject . It will be the first time he has visited Northern Ireland .
 Large numbers of birds have been known to bob and weave like bezouki dancers inside hula hoops, to bake and smoke the scrapings from banana peels, and to construct mock landing strips to lure gods from the skies .
 Kilibob is pre-eminent among the giftladen gods of cargo cultists of New Guinea and envirals . I may never comprehend the attraction of the hula hoop or the electric banana .
 The book is light on academese and only slightly tainted by the author's high regard for Marvin Harris . Although Harris's credentials as scholar are quite in order, his book is good read .
 Among the seemingly peculiar, behaviors he looks at, and makes seem less peculiar, are the refusal by devout and starving Hindus to slaughter and eat their sacred cows . The waging of war by primitive South Seas peoples popularly supposed to live lives of idylic ease, and the burning in
 Harris finds questions of why people behave as they do most perplexing, and most exasperating . It is in those instances far less remote in time and geography that Harris finds . Harris: "It's in those cases far more remote than remote in geography that people behave differently"
 Whether or not Harris's positions and dispositions are in accord with your own, I think you'll enjoy that chapter on the cargo cults . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 Nearby are thatch-roofed hangars, a radio shack, and a beacon tower made of bamboo . Nearby, there are hangars and radio shacks .
 The airstrip is manned twentyfour hours a day by a group of natives wearing nose ornaments and shell armbands . It is manned by the group wearing the armband of shells .
 A man goes inside the radio shack and gives instructions into the tin-can microphone . A man gives instructions inside the tin can microphone .
 From time to time they watch a jet trail crossing the sky . Sometimes they hear the sound of distant motors . Sometimes, they also hear the sounds of distant sounds .
 Papuans should wait patiently for gods and ancestors to bestow on them the wealth of the Space Age does mankind little discredit . That a small population oi disadvantaged Papuanans, probably not more than a couple of centuries removed from the Stone Age, should wait .
 Scientology became in 1955 a system of psychotherapy, Scientology became The Founding Church of Scientology . Scientology was founded in 1955 . Scientology is now the headquarters of Scientology International Scientology .
 Scientology has an organizational identity crisis . Scientology's adherents are often confused for each other . Scientology is an organization that has a history of growing up in secrecy .
 A Scientologist can outstare anyone who is not a Scientologist, author says . Scientologists can outstand anyone who's not a member of the public, he says . Scientology is a religion, but it's a religion .
 Straight-shooting Amurricans have always admired the fella who can look a guy in the eye . You might at first suppose this is an ability well worth cultivating . After all, the Amurranian has always admired his ability to look at a guy .
 The unflinching gaze of the Scientologist is like that of the humanoids in thriller-chiller movies, and very disconcerting . Scientology is a cult of cults, but it's not a religion .
 The stare is the least of the powers and one practically anyone could cultivate it, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Scientology founder L Ron Hubbard claimed to have grown new teeth at will, overcame gravity and visited Heaven . Scientologists also claim to be able to grow new teeth, overcome gravity and grow new hair .
 On his second visit, he experienced a common traveler's disappointment . On his first visit to the U.S. he experienced the same disappointment .
 He found the place shabby, its pillars scruffy, the saints and angels gone . He found it shabby and found it was shabby .
 If Scientology were merely screwball, it could be dismissed as a harmless diversion for people who like that sort of thing . Scientology is not just screwball: it's a harmless, harmless diversion . Scientology has been accused of being a cult cult of Scientology .
 Scientologists are classified according to changing ""Conditions,"" scaling from a little ""above the angels to a little below the beasts" Scientologists have been classified as 'above angels' and 'below beasts'
 A Scientologist in the Condition of Danger is forbidden to bathe, wear make-up, have a hair-do or shave . Scientologists in the condition of Danger are forbidden to shave, bathe or wear make up .
 There are still lower Conditions like NonExistence where changing clothes is prohibited, Doubt where the miscreant must wear handcuffs and Fair Game where the poor soul may be deprived of property or injured .
 Scientology even has its own uniformed Schutzstauffel, which pinning notices to bulletin boards with throwing knives . Scientology has a penchant for pinning notice to bulletinboards with knives .
 Evans manages in the first half of Cults of Unreason to perform the incredible feat of presenting a witty but serious and balanced study of Scientology and founder .
 He concludes that after highlighting the "absurdities, inconsistencies and smoky background of Scientology, I conclude without giving it a wholehearted thumbsdown .
 The closer I have looked at Scientology the more I feel that it is changing for the better, and the more eager I believe its leader and its adherents are to forget its past . Scientology leader and followers are eager to forget Scientology's past, says author .
 Evans's conclusion was fabricated to forestall his being declared in the Condition of Fair Game . Evans was found guilty of being in the condition of fair game . Evans's conclusions were fabricated to prevent him being declared fair .
 It is the kind of movie in which people go around speaking in simple sentences like those above . The movie is about a young man who goes around speaking like this in the movie .
 Greenwood High's graduating class is the big stud of the graduating class . Buster, (JanMichael Vincent) Vincent is a junior at Greenwood High . JanMichael Vincent: "Buster is a big stud"
 He likes to do things like pretending to be a racecar driver and spewing dust all over the school bus's windshield . He also likes to play hooky from school with his sadsack albino friend Whitey .
 The 'Buster's' in this world are used to getting their own way and this one is no exception . The "Buster" is used to get his own way, and this is not the same .
 For reasons not totally explained by the movie, he begins to fall in love with Billie . For reasons, he also falls in love for Billie in the movie .
 He falls so badly, he buys her an Orange Crush because of her distaste for beer and takes her to church . He falls out so badly that he takes her for church and buys her a beer .
 This is settled simply; he breaks up with her — calling her from bed at one o'clock in the morning, alarming her parents and breaking her heart . This is the settled simply, however, however; he calls her calling from bed from one o’clock of the morning
 This breakup is to the dismay of the townsfolk, for Margy is from an uppercrust family . Margy's break-up is to be met with dismayed by the townfolk .
 This all might sound a bit trite, but one wants to like the movie so much that its triteness is overlooked . The movie is a classic classic, but it's not trite .
 Enjoys it that is, until the end begins to hit you in the face — rather sloppily . The film is set to be released on Friday .
 "This violent ending is a grotesque tragedy that is pseudomeaningful, besides being far easier to write than an actual resolution of the picture's central relationship," the author says . The violent ending of the film is "a grotesque tragedy"
 There are some funny and touching sequences concerning the vagaries of adolescent behavior . Before things get so serious, however, there is some funny, touching sequences .
 One scene about school day pictures is so simple and true that you catch yourself laughing at memories as well as the picture before you . One scene is so basic that it makes you laugh at memories and the picture .
 As I have said before, the movie is pleasing, but much of it is borrowed . The movie is a great example of the world's borrowed culture, but not its own . The film is a good example of American cinema cinema .
 In the violent ending there is a redneck sheriff with the first name of Buford . The violent ending of the film has a violent ending . In the end of the movie, the sheriff is seen as a sheriff with a first name .
 The performances, with the exception of Robert Englund wh gave a moving and touchingly amusing portrayal of Whitey, are like the movie .
 JanMichael Vincent might be the ""world's greatest athlete"" but he is certainly not in that category when it comes to acting . Vincent is the world's "greatest athlete"
 His Buster is too depth-less (not quite shallow) and one doesn't really believe he can fall in love with Billie . The actor's Buster is not quite quite shallow, but he's too shallow .
 Jean Goodfellow may not be an actress, but she was perfect as the sublingual town slut . She was perfect for the town slut role in the classic classic .
 Pamela-Sue Martin is Margy. She gives to the role with her hushed voiced and child-like stares that mystic virginity that Billie i Pamela-sue Martin .
 "Summer of '42" is a classic film about the summer of 1944 . The Deville Cinema is located in Deville, Louisiana, and the Deville Theatre .
 Millsaps defeat Southwestern Lynx 6-0 at Millsaps Millsaps Stadium .
 With two minutes remaining, Southwestern coach Harper Davis sits upon a slim but seemingly safe 60 lead . Southwestern quarterback Mike Hanna and the hometown officials went to work on the Millsaps secondary .
 Southwestern on the strength of two Hanna passes and a questionable pass interference call on Major safety Bob King, found themselves on the Millsaps 40 and driving . The Millsaps punt deep into their own territory .
 Lynx faced a crucial 4th down and 14 with 1:18 left to play . But three plays later the Lynx were forced to go for a crucial fourth-down and 14 . The Lynx went into the game needing a touchdown in the final quarter .
 Hanna dropped back and neatly hit Rik Talley for a first down of the Majors 18 . Hanna hit Talley with no time outs on his side . Hanna was the only player to make a tackle on the field in the game .
 The officials once more stepped in and ruled the next pass incomplete at the 10 on a dual possession call . Another questionable decision, but this time in favor of the Majors . The officials stepped in to rule the next play incomplete .
 Hanna was faced with a crucial 4th down situation . Hanna's fullback bulled his way to the 11 . Hanna was forced to take the field for the first time in the game .
 Ward Emling and the Lynx frantically set up, the horn sounded . But once more the Majors defensive line stiffened, stopping Southwestern at the one . The Majors lazily unpiled uiraHuiiHnnuiHiiiiiiiiiiniimnifiui
 The only thing louder than the KAnnon was the sign of relief from Brindley . And the only thing louder was the the relief from the team .
 0-0 draw for both teams in their opening game of the new season . The game was played without a score in the final minutes .
 Each team's defense methodically forced the other to punt, sending a total of 17 punts into the overcast sky above Newell Field .
 Millsaps drove to the one yard line only to have tailback Don Fredricks straightened up at the one foot line . Millsaps had a somewhat sluggish first quarter of the first quarter .
 Majors put their only points on the board on a 21 yard touchdown pass from quarterback Ricky Haygood to a wide open Dees Hinton . But five minutes later the Majors scored their first and only point of the game .
 Brindley slipped on the turf sending his PAT just wide of the uprights . The scoreline was a huge loss for the Cowboys . Brindly missed a field goal on the field .
 A later Millsaps drive powered basically by passes to Sonny Aldy and Hinton was halted by a fumbled hand off at the Lynx 20 . Millsaps had a late drive powered by passes from Aldy, Hinton and Aldy .
 After intercepting a Haygood pass in the third quarter, Southwestern drove to a first down at the Majors' nine, but an incomplete pass on 4th down killed the drive . The Majors had an interception of Haygood's pass in third quarter .
 On their next possession the Lynx mounted another drive only to see it stopped as a feeble 40yard field goal attempt fell short . The Lynx failed to score a field goal in the second half .
 The game settled into the rut of the first half, with only a roughing the kicker penalty against Southwestern to break the monotony until the waning minutes . The game then settled into a rut until the last minute .
 Although quite boring in appearance, it provided some fine football, fundamentals-wise . The game was played in a very boring fashion, but it provided a good start .
 The offensive line of David Turner, Mike Huoni, Steve Whatley, Bryan Flint and Paul Walker opened enormous holes all day long . Paul Walker and Bryan Flint were among the offensive line players to open holes .
 Aldy, Hinton, and Don Richards were continually finding seams in the Southwestern secondary . And Aldy and Hinton were constantly finding seams, finding seams .
 The entire defense, needless to say, defeated every challenge and emerged with a hard-fought shut-out tucked under their belts .
 NTRAMU RALS got off the ground as the Pikes beat the TEAMS Pikes . The Majors next game is against Georgetown College at 1:30 pm Saturday at Newell Field .
 Lambda Chi's Men'S SOCCER SCHEDULE ALL GAMES at 4:00 P.M. ivon DATE September 18 September 19 September 23 September 24 September . 24 September 25 September . 25 September 26 September 30 October 1 .
 Deville CINEMA ShowTOWN WEST Dl TOWN AND COUNTRY Dl #1 CAPITOL PLAZA runs Week of September 1 .
 They insist that the material wealth of the industrial age is created in some distant place not by human but by supernatural means . The material wealth is created by supernatural forces, they say .
 Harris tells of one such prophet, Yali, who was taken on a junket to Australia . The authorities hoped that his observations of the production process would get the message through to his fellows back home . Yali was taken to Australia, the authorities hoping that his personal observations would get
 Yali visited the Queensland Museum in Queensland, New Guinea, Australia . He was impressed by the keeping of dogs and cats as pets and the rapt attention paid to native New Guinea artifacts .
 Yali was shown a book which contained pictures of apes and monkeys becoming progressively more similar to men . Later, attending a government conference in the capital of Australian New Guinea, he was shown pictures of monkeys becoming more like men .
 The missionaries had said that Adam and Eve were man's ancestors, but the whites believed their own ancestors were monkeys, dogs, cats, and other animals .
 The implication is that natives are too backward, stupid, or superstitious to grasp the principles of civilization . The implication of natives is always that they're too backward or stupid to grasp civilization .
 It was not that Yali couldn't grasp the principles of the principles in question, but rather that he found them unacceptable . Yali found the principles unacceptable .
 His tutors were amazed that someone who had seen modern factories in operation could still believe in cargo . He was amazed that he still believed in cargo when he visited the factories .
 The more Yali learned about how Europeans produced wealth, the less was he prepared to accept their explanation of why he and his people were unable to share in it . But the more he learned, the more was he .
 This doesn't mean that he understood how the Europeans got to be so wealthy, he said . He said that he didn't understand how rich Europeans are getting rich .
 When last heard from he was working on the theory that the Europeans had gotten rich by building brothels . On the contrary, when last heard of him, he had been working on a theory that Europeans got rich by getting rich by having sex with women .
 Yali always had the good se^rise to dismiss the standard European explanation, ""hard work,"" as a calculated deception .
 Anyone could see that European big men — unlike their native prototypes — scarcely worked at all . Anyone could have seen that European . big men . Europeans . scarcely worked as big men. Europeans .
 Cults of Unreason deals with a variety of mostly harmless adventurers into the murky realms of mysticism . The remainder of the Cults Of Unreason deal with a number of harmless adventurers .
 Evans treats Ufologists who worship extraterrestial beings who for eons have coddled planet Earth . Evans treats them all kindly, even when he clearly regards them as kooks . Evans: "I'm not a believer in UFOs"
 I should perhaps mention — and you may consult Erich von Daniken if you doubt me — that it was from those benign extraterrestial beings that we Earthlings received all that that is good on our planet . The author of the book, The New York Times, says it was
 The renovations have been seen as extremely necessary by many students for some time . The renovations are seen as necessary by some students for many years .
 Among the planned renovations is the moving of the grill from its present location to the basement where it would be expanded to include a patio stretching beside the recently completed swimming pool .
 Present grill is to then be made into a lounge with speaker facilities present . The present grill will then be transformed into a lounger .
 Funds for renovations were included in the Capital Funds drive . Funds for the renovations were part of the capital funds drive . The administration successfully completed the drive successfully .
 Hinman stated that it seems to have received a low priority, though some work has apparently begun in the basement level level . Hinman said that some of the work on the project has not yet been completed .
 The exact plans have not been made public, but it now seems evident that no students were involved in the planning .
 Homecoming activities will be combined with the annual Alumni Day . Homecoming events will be held in conjunction with the Alumni day . Students and graduates may participate .
 Millsaps Players will open their 51st season with a production of Jean Cocteau's The Infernal Machine . Millsaps will open the season with the production of the famous play .
 The play will run through Saturday in the Christian Center with curtain time at 8:15 .
 The Producers is a good comedy starring Zero Mostel and directed by Mel Brooks . On Thursday night at 7:30, the Millsaps Film Series will present the movie . The movie is a comedy starring Mostel .
 On Friday, alumni should start trickling in for the homecoming activities . Homecoming activities are scheduled for Friday .
 This informal lecture will involve some of the past history of Millsaps, and no doubt Dr. Millsaps will be a guest .
 The alumni will be taken on guided tours of the Activities Center by representatives of the junior class . Moore's speech will be followed by a tour of the activities center .
 At 6:30, an Early Days Dinner will be held for graduates of 1925 or earlier . The dinner will be for those graduating from 1925 to 1925 .
 This is one of the highlights of the annual Alumni gathering . Mr Livesay, Director of Alumni Relations, states that this "". . . . is a highlight of the gathering .
 During a break, the homecoming court will be announced, and a beer raffle will be held . Homecoming court is set to be announced .
 Those not in the mood for dancing can once again avail themselves of The Infernal Machine . The Infernator Machine will be available again at the end of the year .
 Saturday morning at 8:30, alumni and student representatives will meet for a Continental breakfast . The breakfast will be held at 8 a.m. Saturday .
 This is to be followed by an Alumni Board meeting attended by student and faculty representatives . This is the first meeting to be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Picnic will be held at noon in the bowl . Following more guided tours for newly arrived alumni, alumni will hold a picnic .
 Last year's event was a pleasant success and this year's should be no different . This year's race will be the first time the event has been held in London since 2008 .
 At 1:30, the Millsaps football team defends our honor against Principia College at Newell Field . The Millsaps will face Principaria College at 1,30, on Saturday afternoon .
 At halftime, President Collins and Judge Roten, President of the Alumni Association, will crown the new Homecoming Queen .
 Following the game, the Greeks will hold open house for their alums to come around and visit . The Greeks will be holding an open house following the game in Athens .
 At 5:30, the Golden Anniversary Class of 1925 will get together in the Rogers Room of the Student Union . The class of 1925 is celebrating its Golden Anniversary at the University of North Carolina .
 30 or more graduates are expected to attend this particular reunion from as far away as California . Mr Livesay said that 30-plus graduates from California will attend .
 Judge Roten will be the Master of Ceremonies and the Troubadours will provide the entertainment . The judge Roten is also a member of the band .
 During the ceremonies, the Alumnus of the Year will be named along with the Distinguished Professor . The Distinguished professor will also be named at the ceremony .
 Last year, the Alumnus award was given to Charles N Bradley, the editor of The Chattanooga Times .
 Charles Sallis was the recipient of last year's Distinguished Professor Award . He was awarded the award for his work at the University of Wisconsin .
 At 8:15, the Millsaps Players give their final performance of The Infernal Machine . At 8 p.m. ET, they give their last performance of the Infernal machine .
 Those who do not wish to go to the play can go snipe hunting on the golf course . Snipe hunting is a popular option for snipe hunters in the area .
 The play is a modern adaptation of the Greek Oedipus mythis, the story of the young prince of Thebes who unwittingly murders his father and marries his mother . The play, which is based on the story, is set in modern times .
 Ward Ending, a junior English major from Jackson, has been cast as Oedipus . Ward Ending is the son of a college senior from Jackson .
 He has acted in shows at Murrah High School, the Jackson Little Theatre, and the Mississippi Center for Educational Television . He played John Worthing the year before that in ""The Importance of Being Earnest,""
 In addition to that, he worked on and appeared in the APJAC production of the film ""Huckleberry Finn"" at Natchez in 1973 . He also appeared in a production of "Huckle Berry Finn"
 Jocasta, the wife and mother of Oedipus, will be played by Lynn Pledger, a senior theatre major from Jackson, Mississippi . Her parents now live in Memphis, although her parents live in Tennessee .
 She has appeared with the Players since 1970; when she was in ""Damn Yankees,"" while still a student at Wingfield High School . She has also appeared in "Damn Yankees"
 Millsaps, in a never ending struggle to aid its students, has initiated a careers day program set for October 10, in the Academic Complex . Millsaps has initiated the program .
 The much needed program's basic purpose is to relate the student with job opportunities applicable to his or her field of study . The program is designed to relate students to job opportunities available to them .
 The careers program is outlined in four main purposes . The program is designed to help students prepare for their careers .
 The other two aspects of the program will allow students to explore the tensions between liberal arts and career-oriented styles of education . Students will identify sources of information concerning current and projected possibilities in various fields .
 Counselors chosen on the basis of a school survey taken at the beginning of the fall semester . Counselors invited to the program were chosen via student survey . Students are encouraged to take part in the program .
 A wide variety of fields will be represented during the program . FIELDS and COUNSELors range from social work to banking and banking .
 A Flaming Shame Nero stood at his office window, deep in thought . Other counselors include Harris Sargent of Mississippi Valley Gas Company, James Whittington, and James Whittittton .
 From his window watching them pass to their studies Nero chose a few likely torches . The bastards who had given him trouble in running the government. Nero chose one of them from his window .
 He dropped the shades only to have money fall from the blinds . But all of this was a bit depressing (what with the smell of flesh and all)
 He began delighting in his travels to parts of the empire to collect revenues — it was relaxing and paid for his burning binges . Feeling better about the green and the outlying nations he had taxed with wondrous slogans, he began .
 This flash of anger brought images of flames again and Nero began to smile as his master plan surfaced with the imagery . Nero smiled as he saw the images of the flames again .
 There in his mind's eye was the most vivid picture of the whole city in flames and he revelled in this ecstacy by playing his violin .
 Some Mississippi legislators oppose what some say is an effort by Gov. Rick Perry . Some say it's an attempt by the governor to get more money out of the state .
 At issue is Waller's Executive Order Number 183, issued in July, which he directed several state agencies to merge their merit systems under one central agency . Waller says the order is a violation of the Constitution .
 The issue is a touchy one, dating in modern times back to the administration of former Gov. George W. Bush's administration .
 Coleman ran afoul of the legislature on the issue of a constitutional convention to upgrade the 1890 relic under which the state now operates . Coleman was widely regarded as a strong administrator . Coleman is widely considered to be a strong leader .
 The bitter opposition from the legislature was generally regarded as the handiwork of the late Walter Sillers and his chief lieutenants . It was generally seen as a result of the bitter opposition to the state legislature .
 At the time, Mr Sillers was Speaker of the House of Representatives . He had led that body into becoming a very cohesive and effective group .
 Waller's order established a five-member panel to coordinate the state's six merit programs under one unified system . Waller: The panel will coordinate state's 6 merit programs .
 His press aide, Charles McKellar, told this reporter that this type of organization is required under guidelines of various federal programs .
 Federal funding will not be effected, regardless, so long as some type of viable merit systems are maintained by the various agencies . Federal funding may not be affected .
 Waller has other motives for the move, namely to gain a tighter control over state employment practices . Waller says he wants to gain tighter control of employment practices in the state .
 A 1966 ruling by the Mississippi Attorney General's Office found that such a merger would be in violation of state law . Thirdly, they point to a 1966 ruling .
 The governor's opponents to this particular action feel that it is a matter of legislative action to create such a body and not properly a matter that should be handled by executive order . Governor's opponents say it's a matter for legislative action .
 Whether the governor will win what is shaping up as a battle on this particular issue remains to be seen .
 In everyone's life there's a bummer of '74. Oct. 1974 'Visits with Vinaruhu The Bummer Of '74' Oct. Oct., 1974 .
 A time when everything right becomes wrong becomes wrong, when the unspeakable becomes spoken . A time in the dark is when everything is wrong, says the author of the novel .
 A time when you ache for a chance to belt the sonofabitch that caused it. A time . The son of a sonofaitch who caused it . A . time .
 The ""one way"" sticker had been removed and in its place hung a new sign . The 'one way' sticker was removed and replaced with a new "one way" sign .
 Vinaruhu's cabin was assembled by the Millsaps College administration at the end of the year .
 It was bad enough selling out, but selling out to fast Eddie and his double talking delegation was a bit much . It's bad enough for fast Eddie to sell out, and it was too much for him to sell .
 Collins pumped his hand and made small talk with Collins . Collins was the first person to reach out and shake his hand in the air .
 Vinaruhu then proceeded to explain Cte four rules of sound college administration . Cte then explained the rules of a sound college .
 Attacking a student movement at Millsaps is like killing a dog with terminal cancer . Attacking Millsaps students is like attacking a dog who is dying of terminal cancer. Attacking the student movement is like a killing a child's death, he says .
 Curriculum reform has bounced from committee to committee for twelve years . No one has ever complained about too much progress on that issue . Curricular reform has been a thorny thorny issue for years .
 The Board of Trustees approved a plan to renovate the Union and they want the administration to move on it . The board of trustees wants to see the administration move on the project .
 It was clear that in the life of Ivan Millsapovich there would be a bummer of '74, with more to come . Ivan's '74 was one of the worst years of his career .
 It seems that the flowering college ""generation"" of today is looking for an identity . Rob McDuff: "What the Hell"" is that college students are looking for identity. What the Hell?"
 There are those who lament the passing of the activist momentum generated during the 1960's glory days . There are some who lament that the activist movement has passed .
 Some argue that the apathy of today's university youth labels the present university youth as a bunch of "lackeys" These people argue, perhaps justifiably, that the non-activism, the apathetic of today labels them as a lot of ""lackey"
 Neither are we cloud-dwelling philosophers, or student dupes intent on maintaining the status quo, or even goldfish swallowers . Neither are students dupes, or students duped, or those who want to maintain status quo . We're not goldfish swallowers, but
 Maybe we are spiritual descendants of those glorious literary intellectuals of the 1920's who travelled the world drinking and writing and experiencing life until they wondered what was left . Maybe we're spiritual descendants, maybe we are .
 Millsaps pop-top intellectual who is guzzling beer in CS's with a Hemingway who spent hours writing and drinking wine in Parisian cafes .
 As the days and weeks of the conference dragged on, hopes became dimmer . But as the days . dragged on the conference, hopes began to fade .
 President Wilson compromised point after point at the meetings, diplomat says . Wilson was angry that he had to compromise point-after-point at meetings .
 Quitting the President's Versailles staff in an outrage, the young man was asked what he was going to do . The young man said he had no idea what he would do after quitting the staff .
 This seemed to keynote the spirit of disgusted resignation which existed thereafter for more than a decade . A spirit of disillusion with the realities of the world permeated the Jazz Age and probably caused the Lost Generation to be so lost .
 Except for a bit of lip service, it seems that this generation is not worrying too much about such problems . "Taking it with a grain of salt,"" as the phrase goes, as it goes .
 Like those spiritual forefathers of the Roaring Twenties, our group is turning to good-timing and pleasure-seeking . The group is concerned with one's own local sphere .
 This good-timing is manifested in the freewheeling spirit that has overtaken college campuses in the last couple of years . This year's college campuses have seen a change in the spirit of college .
 It's a spirit that shows itself quite often when a person asks a friend to go drinking or smoking or partying or swimming or whatever . The spirit of friendship shows itself when a friend invites her to a party .
 It's not that today's students have lost all sense of social awareness . And the reply, "Well, I've got a thousand things to do, and a thousand more that I ought to do," he said .
 Last year's Nixon impeachment rally is but one local example to the contrary . The rally was held in New York City .
 Students are just not as concerned as they used to be. However, it is true that students are just as concerned with the safety of the environment .
 They rarely organize, they rarely protest, and they rarely do any large-scale bitching . "They rarely organize," they rarely demonstrate or protest," they say . They rarely do anything big, they say, and rarely protest .
 The public, it seems, would rather not have to contemplate the horrible circumstances that exists in the California fields or the plight of the migrant workers who live on incomes of one-half the national poverty level .
 The remarks we hear of — ""I don't want to hear about it"" bear out the fact that ignorance is bliss . The remarks are often made by people who say they want to know about it .
 Big-time farmers who worked on the farm for their fathers resent being told that farmworkers are underpaid . And there are the ""Have you ever worked on a farm?"", said mostly by farmers who were paid very well by their fathers . Farmworkers are often told they are under
 Some consumers who stop to talk to the picketers are concerned with the poverty and exploitation involved in their lives . Some consumers are concerned about farmworkers and their poverty . The picketers say they want to protect the farmworkers .
 Maternal mortality is 125% higher than the national average . Infant mortality was 125% more than average rate of infant mortality . Migrant mortality was also higher than national average for TB and TB .
 We, as consumers, can help by not buying lettuce or grapes that are not labeled with the UFW Label, and by not shopping at stores that refuse to buy UFW produce .
 Some low cost student air fares to Europe are still, in effect . Europe Still Available to Students . Europe still available to students .
 As always, students living in the eastern and southern states have less to pay than students at western schools . Students living in those states pay less than those living in western states .
 The people of Mississippi responded quickly to aiding victims of Hurricane Fifi in the Honduras . Lower winter rates offer skiers, and other, winter resort . visitors inexpensive trips to Good Neighbor to Honduras Victims .
 Governor Waller appointed Jim Reese of Gulfport as State Coordinator for Disaster Relief Efforts . Reese was appointed as Gulfport's State Coordinator . Reese will be in charge of disaster relief efforts for Hurricane Katrina .
 Robert L Robinson, director of State Agriculture and Industry Board, was appointed to assist in relief solicitation efforts . Robert Robinson is the director of the State Agriculture .
 The two coincided to persuade Mississippi bankers and the State Jaycees into cooperation with their program . The program is a joint effort to persuade banks and the Jaycenees to cooperate .
 The banks agreed to act as collection points for badly needed contributions . The banks will be used to collect badly needed funds from the public .
 The necessary money went to medical supplies, such as penicillin, and for basic food items . The money was used to pay for medical supplies and basic food .
 The state wide Jaycees were responsible for the collection and transportation of supplies from local communities to Gulfport . The state-wide Jaycee was responsible for collecting and transporting supplies .
 State and federal departments approved use of national guard aircraft . They began mobilizing goods immediately after approval by state departments to use national guard planes .
 Waller issued an assessment team to the disaster area, where they conducted a survey of medical and food needs, in order to obtain priorities on supplies . Waller, on Sept. 27, issued an assess team to assess the disaster .
 General manager of the Standard Fruit Company, Honduras Division, wrote the State of Mississippi a letter expressing his sincere gratitude to its citizens .
 Mississippi has reportedly sent a total of 4 C-130 planes carrying 40,000 lbs. each to the victims . Several ships are currently waiting at Gulfport to ship an additional half million lbs. Each . Mississippi has sent 4 planes and several ships to Gulfport .
 Other states seem to have been impressed by Mississippi's quick response . Mississippi is one of the fastest-responding states in the country .
 Wayne Edwards, a previous Millsaps student employed as the governor's aide, remarked on this matter . Wayne Edwards is a former student at Millsaps and is now a former governor's assistant .
 The whole project, in effect, was a ""tremendous outpouring of humanity by the people of Mississippi helping to alleviate some of the Honduran suffering.""
 Many European resorts are dropping their rates for the winter ski crowd . As a result, many European resorts have dropped rates for winter skiing .
 The steady climb of the United States dollar against falling European currencies further decreases the cost of a trip to Europe . The U.S. dollar is a key component of a European trip .
 Ken Dean, a candidate for the 4th Congressional District election, will speak in the bowl in front of Millsaps Student Union . Dean will be speaking during Convocation period .
 Alveno Castilla has been awarded the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Scholarship for the fourth consecutive year . Castilla is a senior at Millsaps .
 Hubert Thompson who is a political science major at Millsaps is studying abroad this semester . Thompson is also studying abroad for the first time in the fall .
 London Semester in London, England, is being taught a specially designed curriculum of comparative politics . Students are being taught how to learn about comparative politics in a new way .
 Clinton Library has invited Millsaps students and faculty to attend two exhibits on display throughout the month of October . Millsaps faculty and students are invited to visit the Clinton Library .
 A concise, common sense, layman's language introduction to the intricate world of insurance coverages is now available through a major insurance company . The layman-language introduction to coverages has been available through insurance companies .
 The booklet, entitled ""Guide"", was designed intentionally as a consumer's guide to the best suited policy for the young person . It is obtainable in limited quantities, by contacting the Public Relations Department of the Kemper Insurance Companies, Long Grove, Illinois, 60049 .
 The National Poetry Press has announced its Spring Competition for College Students' Poetry Anthologies .
 The closing date for the submission of manuscripts is November 5, 1974 . Submit your manuscript to be submitted in 1974 .
 There is no limitation as to form or theme but shorter works are preferred by the Board of Judges due to limited space . Short works preferred by judges due to the size of the room .
 Each poem must be printed or typed on a separate sheet and must bear the name and home address of the student as well as the college address .
 These materials should be sent to the Office of the Press, National Poetry Press, Los Angeles, California .
 The Ford Foundation has announced the beginning of fellowship programs aimed at helping minority students gain access to graduate level education . The programs are aimed at increasing opportunities for minority students to pursue higher education .
 Black Americans, Mexican Americans, Native Americans and Puerto Ricans. Black Americans. Native Americans . Native Americans. Latino Americans . Latino Americans. Hispanic Americans . Hispanic Americans. Latinos. Latinos . Latinos. Latino American. Latinos: Latino Americans, Latino Americanas . Latinos: Hispanic Americans,
 Those interested in applying should come by the P&W Office for the necessary information .
 Most openings are in restaurants, hotels, and ski resorts, and no experience is required . No experience required .
 The big saving is the free room and board that goes with each job . Standard wages are paid, which is an opportunity to earn back most of the trip .
 Job processing can be sped up by obtaining and holding 3 passport size photos and a letter of recdifthiendation from a teacher or school official .
 Two people died and hundreds were injured at Ole Miss in September, 1962 . Hundreds were injured .
 Meredith stated that to him personally, the riot at Ole Miss was not important . Meredith: "To me personally, it's not important. I'm not sure what happened to me"
 What happened at Ole Miss didn't really affect my life in any major way, he says . "I'm not really worried about what happened to me," he says of Ole Miss .
 African experience exposed him to his roots, he said . When asked how this African experience was important, he explained, "Africa had an impact on me"
 He felt that the dispersement of the blac>. race was very important to the African blacks . He felt it was important to African blacks to disperse .
 Black people throughout the rest of the world don't miss Africa — they know nothing about it . However, black people in Africa don't know anything about it, says CNN's Roland Martin .
 Meredith ran for office as a Republican in a statewide senatorial primary in 1972 . Meredith returned to Mississippi after a stint in Washington, D.C.
 After winning the primary, he dropped out of the democratic race to run as an Independent . After winning that primary he ran as an independent candidate, he won't run as a Democrat .
 "I was playing politics with the system of political structure in the state," he said . But he said he was 'playing politics' with the political structure .
 Most white students in Mississippi go to private schools, so all the black students are taught by white teachers . But most of the white students are in private schools .
 He doesn't see an improvement in the educational system in Mississippi until the racial question is eliminated as an issue, he says . He says he sees improvement in Mississippi education until the issue is eliminated .
 He alleges that white politicians base their power on white racism, while never mentioning race as an issue . He alleges the white politicians never mention race as a issue .
 He believes the white power structure knows as long as the structure doesn't change, the outward appearance doesn't matter . He believes that the power structure in the U.S. doesn't care about how outward appearance changes .
 The race issue is like the sand in cement — you try to take it out and the whole structure collapses . But the race issue isn't like a race issue, it's like a problem in cement, says the mayor .
 The district lines in Mississippi are drawn so that there is always a white majority in each district . He elaborated this further when he stated that the district lines were drawn to ensure that there was always a black majority .
 Meredith says he had been through a lot of things in Mississippi . Meredith: "It's been a long way to get back to Mississippi" Meredith says his time in Mississippi has been hard .
 ERA Organizes on Campus by Donna Howell . Students formulating an organizational group for the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment in Mississippi .
 The first meeting of September 18 and 25 were concerned with creating procedural methods of information gathering and the basic structure of the organization .
 The ERA is concerned with governmental policy and subsequent actions in regard to sexual distinctions inherent in the legal rights of men and women . The ERA was founded in 1973 .
 The ERA seeks recognition of the fundamental dignity and individuality of all human beings . ERA seeks to recognise the dignity of the human being .
 It would implement a legal perspective that would protect and defend both sexes in the most beneficial manner . Both sexes would be protected in the same way, the law says .
 Present laws that discriminate or violate the rights of people due to sexual distinction would be eradicated . Thus, present laws that violate the right to freedom of expression would be eliminated .
 The ERA would penetrate all levels of government, federal, state, and local, in order to enforce this new perspective . It would require uniformity to its principles .
 This will give the campus organization some vital and relevant material with which to pursue its purposes . The campus organization will be given the material .
 Conuu Milton must have peered into a crystal ball to write these lines . A meeting will be scheduled in the near future in order to involve all other interested persons into the group .
 Until recently no one noticed much disturbance of this seemingly straightforward biblical law of sexuality . God blessed them, and God said unto them, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it"
 The exposure of so-called sexual deviance has been much more widespread than ever before . Now, however, with the presence of television, radio and the news media in general, the exposure of sexual deviant has been more widespread .
 Bisexuals, transsexuals, and homosexuals burst forth in public entertainment spots, in theatres, and on home television screens . Suddenly, bursting forth in theaters, theatres and home TV screens come bisexuals and transsexuals .
 The vast majority of those with, what shall be called in this article, sexual abnormalities, do not appear on television or in the theatre .
 Many of the immigrants want recognition of their rights as American citizens . Still, many of them still want recognition as Americans .
 Many, especially homosexuals, have been badly mistreated by society . Society, whether from ignorance or just plain ill will, refuses them these rights . Often society, including homosexuals, refuses these rights, and many have been mistreated .
 In this series of articles I will try to relay information to help the reader more fully understand the problems of abnormal sexuality and what some people are attempting in order for many of the existing problems to be eliminated altogether .
 For time and space, I will mainly deal with the sexual abnormality that seems to be getting the limelight most these days . Homosexuality is an abnormality, and homosexuality is the subject of this article .
 Countless definitions of what homosexuals really are have been propounded by countless numbers of individuals . Homosexuality is not a matter of sexuality, but it is a matter matter of life .
 There is the Church, the psychologist, the psychologists, the doctors, lawyers, Indian chiefs, mothers in law, and on and on . There is also the psychologist and the psychologist .
 There may be one clergyman who will say the homosexual is sick, needs treatment, and if he or she refuses treatment, should be thrown in jail or at least kept off the streets . "Homosexuality is sick and needs treatment," he says .
 Another minister may join the Gay Liberation Movement himself . He believes the homosexual to be a normal person who has been cast into the role of an abnormal by a misunderstanding society .
 Gene Bennett is the Director of Counseling at the Pastoral Counseling and Consultation Center in Jackson, Mississippi . Bennett is also a director of counseling at the Center .
 Mr Nelson Guthrie is a consultant in program and development and one of the staff members in their Human Sexual Workshop . He is also a staff member in the Human Sexual workshop .
 Neither man looks at the homosexual as being different because of his homosexuality . Neither man is different because he is gay or because he's gay .
 Pittinger holds that a homosexual's expression of love is the same as the heterosexual's, but just in a different manner . Both tend to have about the same view as Pittingers, who views homosexuality as a homosexual .
 Bennett seeks to counsel homosexuals and heterosexuals alike concerning the problems each encounters in his sexual relationships . Bennett's advice is based on his experiences in sexual relationships. Bennett's book, "Homosexual Counseling for Homosexuals"
 The workshop seeks to advise all the participants as to how to alleviate all these problems . The workshop will take place in the next two weeks .
 From participating in this workshop, many heterosexuals realize that the homosexuals have the same problems they encounter in their everyday lives . The workshop was held in New York, New York .
 Bennett, who is also an Episcopalian minister, has his own views on biblical passages supposedly condemning homosexuality . Bennett is also Episcopean minister, who has his views on homosexuality .
 The Leviticus story of Sodom and Gomorrah is a story about a Jewish law of hospitality and what happened to two cities which did not obey this law . Sodom did not make welcome a Jewish sojourner, Abraham in this instance .
 Unsure of whether they want to remain gay or not, many seek Dr. Dr. John Sutter's advice .
 He talks with them about their problems, together they weigh all the evidence pro and con, and a decision is made . He weighs the evidence and weighs the pros and cons of each other .
 They find one, and they usually walk out satisfied with the decision they made themselves . They find a new home for the first time in their lives .
 Eddie Sanderf ord is a middle-aged gay person . He is the author of a book called "Eddie's Gay"
 Mr Sanderford has been an announced gay for a quarter of a century . He has seen the Gay Liberation Movement come a long way since his announcement .
 He is an active member of the Mississippi Gay Alliance and is a very outspoken member of gay community . He is also a member of Mississippi's Gay Alliance .
 Recently I had an interview with him on campus, and the following is most of that interview . The interview was part of a series of interviews with CNN iReport .
 "We seek to carry on in Mississippi an educational program for the improvement of, and understanding about, attitudes toward homosexuals," the group says . We seek to provide counseling and other needed services for gay men and women and their families .
 The organization has talked with quite a few groups, including the U.S. Anti-Muslim groups, to discuss the issue . The group has been in touch with some of the world's largest groups .
 "Our meetings have been attended by people from the Youth Court Center and also by members of the Parole Board," says police chief .
 The Parole Board has recommended gay people under their jurisdiction, the organization says . "We have been contacted by penal institutions and have eagerly talked with them about their situations," the group says .
 The publicity and direct contact with individuals enables us to carry out our goals . Thus, the publicity and . contact with . individuals enables . us to achieve our goals.
 Most calls are not from people who are openly homosexual, but from those who are closet cases . Most calls come from closet cases, not openly homosexual people, says Gayle .
 Many national reports claim there are in the entire nation . That is a conservative estimate and does not even come up to the percentage many national reports say .
 We usually have about 70 people who attend meetings regularly and who have expressed a desire to work for the Gay Alliance . The Gay Alliance has about 70 members of its membership .
 "The people who are closet cases are the ones who have the most problems," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Usually, these people have a sexual desire penned up inside and they sneak and do things or perform acts of homosexuality and love-making when they are out of town, not in a city where they are known .
 They get into black mail situations and have many other troubles if they are closet cases, and will not openly accept their life . They get in trouble if they don't openly accept life, they say .
 "Most are adamant homosexuals as I am, and I am the administrator of a nursing home," she says . "I am an adamant homosexual," she adds. "Most of the people in the nursing home are adamant gays."
 In fact, I have never accepted a job without telling my employer that I was a homosexual before I was hired . "I'm not ashamed to say I'm gay. I'm proud to say that I am gay. It's a very difficult thing to do for a gay person,"
 Most of the members of the Gay Alliance have jobs where their employers know they are openly homosexual . The Alliance members say they are proud to be openly gay and proud of their achievements .
 Other homosexuals in the community are not able to get jobs because of their femininity . They are transvestites and wish to wear female attire, makeup, and so forth .
 When we speak of a problem, however, we don't necessarily mean it is ours as an individual, but rather a problem of the gay community . We speak of the problem of gay people, not individual individuals, as individuals .
 Under the word ""gay"" and in an alliance we usually include homosexuals, both male and female ; bisexuals; transvestites, and transsexuals . We usually include homosexuals and bisexuals .
 Most of them are dance bars where the gay can go in and dance with members of his or her own sex without any harassment . Most of the bars are gay bars where they can dance without harassment .
 Usually on the weekends they have drag shows with female impersonators . The drag shows are often held on weekends at the club .
 Police would sometimes walk through every hour or so with their sticks, but they felt that was just fear brought on by lack of understanding by young rookies on the force . Now, in the past, sometimes the police would walk through . Sometimes they would walk though every hour with sticks .
 Some homosexuals, especially transvestites, have some problems finding jobs . Earlier you mentioned that some homosexuals have some difficulty finding jobs. We asked you to share your thoughts with us on Facebook .
 These cases involve discrimination in hiring in the city and in city services . The cases involve hiring in hiring and city services.
 There is a Starkville chapter and there is a request in Hattiesburg, Meridian and on the Gulf Coast to open other chapters . No, there is Starkville, Mississippi, Mississippi .
 We have had requests from some people in Louisiana and Tennessee seeking our aid in getting chapters started for them . Also, we've had requests for some of the chapters to be started in Louisiana, Tennessee .
 It has been years since that has happened. Sometimes by teenagers or kids, yes, yes . But it has been a long time since that's happened .
 Some people still look at homosexuality as a sickness . Some people here at Millsaps still think it is a sickness.
 "I had rather admit and run the chance of being harassed occasionally than to wear a false face," she said. "I'm not afraid to wear false face. I'm scared to be harassed," she added .
 Many of the homosexuals here at Millsaps are likely to go to the bars, or they may go out of town to a bar on the Gulf Coast or somewhere .
 I chose homosexuality when I was about 16 or 17, and I had been going out with girls . I had never gone out with a boy until the time I made my decision, he says .
 "I felt I never wanted to be tied down with a family. Basically, though, I felt I . never wanted a family," she said .
 'I did fall in love — with a married man, and I am still in love with him,' she says . 'I am still love him. But I did fall into love. He is still married,' she writes .
 There are some homosexual males, for instance, who do not even want to even want a female in their apartment . Some homosexual males do not want to live with a woman in their home .
 I believe every human being has a certain amount of male and female about him, and there must be a balance . "There must be an equal amount of men and women," she says .
 If a male is more feminine, he will have to have a more masculine woman, etc. If a man is more masculine, he must have a feminine woman . If a woman is feminine, she would have to be more masculine .
 I do not find heterosexual affairs offensive or repulsive. But to answer your question directly, I don't find it repulsive, I do find it offensive .
 "Young gays tend more inclined toward having a relationship with other young gays," he says . "I have never done this. Well, the young gays tend to have a relationship," he adds .
 "The guys I have always gone with have been married men, and straights — or supposedly straights," she says . The guys she has always gone to have been straights, she says, are married men and supposedly straight .
 In December, 1973, the government announced that all federal employees could not be hired or fired on basis of sexuality . The government announced the policy in December 1973, 1973 .
 The National Organization of Women has come out in favor of equal rights for homosexuals . The group says it supports equal rights in the United States .
 The Council of Bishops of the Roman Catholic Church has passed a resolution calling for a theological task force to study homosexuality . The task force will study homosexuality in a theological way .
 The American Psychiatric Association has voted to remove homosexuality from the list of mental disorders . Of course, homosexuality is no longer a mental disorder .
 There are gay bills of rights in Columbus, Ohio; Berkeley and San Francisco, California; Boulder, Colorado; Seattle, Washington; Detroit, Michigan; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Washington, D.C. and Toronto, Canada .
 We did talk to a class on deviation here at Millsaps just before school was out . Millsaps students were talking about deviation in class .
 At the time I made my homosexuality open, I was living in McComb, Michigan . Well, at the time of the . time, at . the time . I was . living in . McComb .
 "I just had trouble keeping people from wanting to go with me all the time," she says of her career . "I'm not going to be able to keep going with me," she adds .
 FDA Nears Decision on Dalkon Shield . No one has ever known exactly how the intern terine works to prevent pregnancy . FDA is expected to make a decision soon .
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration called halt to sale and distribution of Dalkon Shield until it could investigate the matter further .
 The facts are now in, according to Mary Carol Kelly of the FDA Press Office . A statement on' FDA findings and conclusions will come late in September .
 Reports of heavy bleeding, painful insertion, uterine perforation, higher than expected pregnancy rates and pregnancy complications began coming in from women using the Dalkon Shield .
 A physician's survey by the U.S. Center for Disease Control revealed that IUD use led to more than 3500 hospitalizations during the first six months of 1973 . The survey was conducted by a physician's doctor .
 Six deaths and 36* septic abortions appeared to have been caused by the Shield . Robins sent out letters to 120,000 physicians advising them .
 By June reports of more deaths and abortions forced the FDA into action . The FDA was forced to act after reports of abortion deaths and deaths .
 On August 21st, the FDA opened a two day public hearing to gather facts and professional opinions about the Shield .
 Physicians testified that 1 out of every 25 IUD pregnancies occur outside of the uterus and must be aborted . Physicians testify that 1 . out of . every 25 pregnancies occur in the uterus . Physicians said that 1. out of 25 pregnancies are aborted .
 FDA Special Advisory Sub-Committee met over Labor Day holiday to assess information gathered at the hearing . FDA members of the sub-committee met to assess new information gathered .
 The FDA regards the IUD as a ""device"" rather than a drug, it hasn't the authority to require premarket testing of the contraceptive . Because the FDA regards it as a 'device' rather than drug, the FDA hasn't been able to require testing .
 The U.S. can't require reporting of adverse reactions associated with the device, the registration of IUD manufacturers and the attachment of warning labels to each IUD package . Neither can it require the reporting of any adverse reactions to the device .
 Once marketed, the agency can assume a regulatory function if it can prove in court that the product is dangerous to health when used as directed or is improperly labeled . Agency can assume regulatory role if it is capable of proving in court if it's proven in court .
 In California the Coalition of Medical Rights for Women for Women is not waiting for the FDA decision . In California they are not waiting to wait for the decision . They say the decision is a violation of the state's medical law .
 They've filed a petition calling for a ban on all' further sales and distribution of IUD's until they can be further tested for safety . The petition also calls for a regulation that would require manufacturers to take steps necessary to inform women of the potential dangers .
 It consisted of a number of unbound pages, a hundred or so, which were to be arranged in sequence . The reader was to arrange in sequence.
 It was claimed — with some justification, as I recall — that the book's statement would be developed equally well no matter what the order of the pages, while the ordering of them would permit the reader active participation in the creative process . The ordering of pages would allow the reader to participate
 Those who subscribe to the cyclical theory of history will already be aware that this sort of thing is coming into vogue again and can take pride in finding the P&W in the vanguard of this renascent movement . Those who persevered to the end of my last
 The P&W's editor has refused praise for what happened, so we must give it to the gremlins instead . The editor has graciously refused praise, but we must .
 The paragraph order as written as written was reordered as published . What happened was that the paragraph order was changed to the published order .
 Keep it in mind, though, that these instructions will be reliable only if this column is not subjected to the gremlins' further attentions .
 "I intend not to say another word about the matter, you may never know. Since I intend to say that, you might never know," says the author .
 That ;t has ""lost something in the translation"" has long been a ready defense for a work of literature he likes by someone privileged to have read it in the original language. That .t has lost something in translation"" is long a well-known defense for the work he likes
 'occasionally happen that a work gains something in the translation,' he said . 'I wonder, though, if it does not happen to a work that has been translated,' he added .
 Some constructions, translated, may be rendered less pontifical or more powerful . I do not mean that the translator has a greater gift in the second language than did the author in the first .
 Hemingway's "For Whom The Bell Tolls" may serve as an illustration of the author's thoughts .
 The guerrillas in that book did ""this and that"" in the milk of each other's mother . The book was written at a time when prevailing standards did not permit the author license to say in plain English what it was .
 This awkward translation has always seemed to be more potent than the ostensible original . Still, vigorous though Spanish insults can be, this awkward translation seems to be a potent .
 Schwarz-Bart is, like her heroine Telumee, a native of Guadeloupe and a Negress . She is the daughter of a Guadoupe Negress and a Guardoupe native .
 To judge from her jacket photograph, she herself is as sensitive and beautiful as she writes .
 Her husband is a French Jew of Polish extraction, a survivor of the Nazi holocaust, an ex-Maquis and a winner of the Prix Goncourt . She is married to a former Maquis ex-French Jew and a Holocaust survivor .
 Updike, of course, is the best of the last of Harvard's literary Establishment . He is best known for his work at Harvard University .
 Her lyrical, stocking-overthe-lens, soft-focus evocations of the paradise Guadeloupe might have been but for the inhuman institutions of the white men who brought her ancestors to the site of that potential paradise are individually brilliant .
 The argument is akin to that of the ungrateful child who tells his parents that he never asked to be born . Cumulatively, it's not to dispute the obscenity of slavery or that of peonage which replaced it .
 Neither as child or woman is Telumee ever ungrateful that the book is unconvincing .
 The woman named Solitude lives also in Guadeloupe where wisdom is cheap, the one in which she is born a slave ""about 1772"" and dies a martyr in 1802 .
 The wisdom here impedes neither the development of the novel nor the cataclysmic events against which the heroine is portrayed . But the wisdom of the book's author does not hinder the development or events against the novel .
 Asked her name long after she has paid with her very soul for the whims of liberals and libertines, she cannot answer . "She cannot answer," she said. "I have paid with my very soul ... for the whims of liberals"
 She didn't know, she said, because no one had called her by name for many years . She said, "No one has called me by name" for years .
 An old woman observed that that wasn't a human name, no, certainly not. Taking her pipe out of her mouth, an old woman said that that was not a human . The old woman's pipe was taken out of the mouth .
 Later, an old Congo woman is startled to find that this pregnant and disheveled creature is the machetewielding Winged Victory who figures so prominently in the legends which sustain the insurrection .
 She seemed astonished and a trifle disappointed at finding her so pitiful, so frail and yellow and naked, so unlike the stories that had been told in the cane fields, she said .
 There are glimpses of a potential paradise here, too, but the peaceful landscapes are quickly cluttered with severed heads . The rivers soon run red .
 Schwarz-Bart handles by turns warmly warmly, tautly, easily, without trace of mawkishness . It is a subject he handles with by turns coolly warmly . It's the last sentence of an epilogue .
 "Some intelligence having been demanded of him, the reader will have grasped the universality of the author's message," the author says .
 Schwarz-Bart seems to be writing about the people of Guadeloupe resisting Napoleon's French . He will suppose that the indomitable spirit of the people . displayed alike by the . people . resisting Napoleon, by the French at Dien Bien Phu resisting Ho's
 S warz-Bart either has not credited his reader with the intelligence he demanded or holds a very different vision . It is embarrassing to come upon that last V .
 An uprising against Nazi Germans resulted in the killing of 40,000 Jews in reprisal and in the systematic reduction of Warsaw's Jewish population throughout the war years from half a million to about 200 .
 If he finds it necessary to explain his meaning with that single example or, for that matter, with any example or examples at all, we are back in the world of good guys and bad guys . We are back to the old world of 'good guys and 'bad guys'
 "Once we are back in the world of good guys and bad guys, we're back in a world preparing for slaughter and destruction, slavery and oppression, severed heads and bloody rivers," says the author .
 Simone SchwarzBart's book has gained something in translation . I suspect that Simone Schwarzbart's work has gained a translation . The book is published by Simone Schwarzart in Paris, France .
 'I hope that her husband' — moving and magnificent as it is — has lost a little,' she said . 'I'm sorry for her husband,' she added .
 There are a few things happening during the next few days that you might find enjoyable . Millsaps students will be able to enjoy some of the things they do in their spare time .
 At New Stage Theatre Thoreau is spending some time in jail . The play is based on a one-night jailing of the Civil War author .
 Carl Davis portrays the farmers prisoner and is supported by Jack Stephens, Ellen Marshall, Frank Hains, Virginia Fox Metz, etc. Jack Stephens and Ellen Marshall also star .
 I saw "The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail" at USM a couple of summers ago and hated it . I saw ""The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail at USM . I also hated it. I saw it in a movie theater
 "I hated it until I was so numb with boredom that any feeling or emotion whatsoever was impossible. That is, I hated it," she said. "That is, that is, until I'm so numb that any emotion whatsoever is impossible."
 If anyone can redeem the show, New Stage can; and I think it would be worth checking out just to see what they can do with it .
 The Jackson Little Theatre is presenting UTBW sometime within the next few days . It will be with somebody or somebodies or some bodies in the cast .
 I have no idea what the play is about, but I would suggest that you proceed at your own risk . The play is the first of the season for the play company, which is currently on hiatus .
 Mike Nichols film starring Jack Nicholson, Art Garfunkel, Candice Bergen, and Ann-Margret has been hailed a modern Classic .
 Nichols is the director of the film, but don't be fooled, the subject is not treated lightly . Nichols directed the film in New York City .
 This is a very hard, realistically depressing story about men and women — their lives and their sex — and their failure to differentiate between two . This is the story of a man and a woman who fail to distinguish between two sexes .
 In the U.S., it is customary for the elderly to retire from the working force at age 65 . Urban Problems The Elderly by Mike Stevens is published on Urban Matters .
 An ever increasing subpopulation of more than 20 million Americans is being created . Therefore, an increase in population is creating a subpopulation that is increasing .
 As a group, they are economically and socially segregated from society . As a result of this, they have been isolated from society, says the author .
 This is a result of being jobless, and being unemployed, they are no longer needed or wanted by the productive economy . This is the result of them being unemployed and unemployed .
 20 million Americans are the one group in our society whose transportation needs have been ignored, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Because of the small collective voice of the group, their transportation needs usually go unheard . Because of their collective voice, the transportation needs often go unheard, they are often ignored .
 Although public transit systems exist and many of the elderly own cars, the problem still pervades . The elderly still rely heavily on public transport .
 Variables affecting the likelihood of elderly transportation are health, income, sex, sex and residential location, and car ownership . Health, income and income are factors affecting elderly transportation .
 Most city planners are concerned with the 2/ 3 of the elderly who can't provide their own transportation . These variables are interdependent but most city planners want the elderly to be able to get on the bus .
 Probably the most fundamental variable affecting the elderly is the issue of health . The health of the elderly can be a huge factor in life expectancy .
 Poor health makes personal locomotion hazardous for some and impossible for others . Poor health forces people to use wheelchairs, wheelchairs and wheelchairs to walk .
 Age limits walking range, access to public transit, and the ability to drive . Age limits walkers' range, public transit access, walking range .
 As age increases, sensory and motor skills required in driving gradually dimish . Motor skills required to drive gradually dimmer as age increases .
 The usual income decrease that accompanies retirement forces many of the elderly to rely on social security payments . Social security payments are the main source of income for the elderly in retirement .
 The elderly females transportation is further inhibited because many never learned to drive a car; driving was a male role . Driving was a 'male role' for many of the elderly .
 The problem is magnified when we realize that 73% of the elderly are women . 73% are women, according to CNN.com's new report .
 The elderly of the inner city have access to public transport systems, but those in the suburbs and rural areas are cut off from their basic transportation needs . Those in rural areas have no access to basic transport needs .
 City planners have discovered the minibus concept or jitney system . Minibus concept can be specially tailored to the needs of the elderly . The minibus system is designed to be tailored to suit the elderly's needs .
 The flexibility and routing of the jitney system offers transportation for such personal needs as shopping and medical services . Jitney service is available in the U.S. and Canada .
 In Jackson, a jitney system is being developed to provide transportation for senior citizens . Project Mini-Bus will provide transportation to senior citizens in Jackson .
 The primary concern is to make life easier for those 60 years or older, by making all areas in Jackson more accessible . Jackson residents are 60 years old and 60-plus .
 Jackson will have in operation I five small buses exclusively for the use by the aged . For the project, Jackson will be in operation with the help of the aged.
 One mini-bus will be equipped with a special side hydraulic wheelchair lift, with clamps and straps inside to accomodate 6 wheelchairs .
 Anyone 60 years or older is eligible for mini-bus services, free of charge . Anyone 60-years-old is eligible to use the free bus service .
 City of Jackson will take the elderly to places medically, technically, or socially related . This service is provided by the city of Jackson, Jackson, to take them to places they need .
 Rides are available from eightm. to fivem., Monday through Friday, and the buses will pick you up at home . Rides will be available from 8.m. until fivem. Monday to 5m.
 Similar programs for elderly transportation have been enacted in New Jersey and Missouri . Similar programs have been implemented in other states .
 Many other communities are offering reduced fares on bus rides as a means to help elderly transportation .
 The ultimate answer to the problem of transportation for the elderly is to remove the need for transportation . However, the ultimate answer is to have the elderly removed from the need to travel .
 It would be more practical to import the needs of the elderly rather than providing access to them, says the government minister .
 A workable, but perhaps idealistic example, is the retirement neighborhood . A retirement neighborhood is a workable example of a retirement neighborhood.
 This community cc ild offer adequate services and a supply of peers having a common background . This community offers adequate services .
 Many of the elderly can not afford to live in a special retirement neighborhood; and, it segregates them from the rest of the population . It segregates the elderly from others .
 The problem of elderly transportation is a real one, but the problem of transportation embraces more than just the elderly sector of the U.S. All cities need an integrated public transit system which will adequately meet the needs of all citizens .
 Recently the school policy concerning visitation in the dorms was changed to allow 12 hours of visitation during the week and 14 hours during the weekend . Eloise Lurid writes to Eloise that the policy has been changed .
 "I am very uncomfortable late at night and cannot sleep just knowing that there are men roaming the halls of the dorm. Please don't feel that I am against visitation because I'm not, but I am not,” she said .
 "I can't sleep late at night, either, knowing there are boys in the dorm when there's not one in my room," she says . She says she doesn't want to see boys in her dorm .
 The other day I was shocked and appalled to hear it floating around the cafeteria that there was a dead roach in the chocolate cake on the dessert table . I was appalled .
 Nauseated Nausie was a victim of the vicious rumor . Yes, unfortunately, unfortunately I myself was a . victim .
 When I heard that there was a roach in the chocolate cake, I rushed over to the dessert table to check it out . The roach was found in a chocolate cake .
 I was pleasantly surprised upon arriving at Millsaps this year to find out about the dorm visitation system, but I have a problem concerning it . I was surprised to learn of the system, and I'm not sure how it works .
 I don't mind at all that boys use our bathrooms during visitation during visitation but I feel uncomfortable whenever I use the bathroom in the boys' dorms . I'm not afraid of using boys' bathroom during visitation, but I'm uncomfortable when I use it .
 Nervous j. "I can fully sympathize with your uneasy feeling in the boys' dorms bathrooms," says Nervie .
 "I, myself, sometimes find it uncomfortable to go to the bathroom in a urinal," says the author of the book . "I'm not comfortable with urinals," she says .
 Try to think of another team that plays more tricks on their crowd and keeps more people guessing about what's going to happen next . The U.S. national champions are known for their tricks and their unpredictability .
 Seventeen points in the first quarter, that's more than a typical Millsaps game . Millsaps had 17 points in first quarter .
 The Eagles scored another touchdown in the second quarter, building a magical 24-7 lead by the end of the first half . They even scored a touchdown in a second quarter .
 The Millsaps quarterback Ricky Haygood levitated passes in the direction of Sonny Aldy and Paul Benton . Haygood led the Millsaps to victory in the game .
 Benton turned a four-yard Haygood pass into a touchdown and Doug Bundly transformed a kick into an extra point . Millsaps 7-0. Benton and Bundly score touchdowns .
 A temporary roadblock appeared, as the Tigers performed a trick of their own, coming back with a 44yard touchdown pass and extra point, knotting the game at 7-7 . The Tigers scored a 44-yard pass and an extra point to tie the game 7-6 .
 The curtain was up again, and this time the Majors wasted little time . The Majors are back in action for the first time in a decade .
 Brindly, up to his old tricks, was true on the point after, and Millsaps was up, 14-7 . Millsaps went on to win the game by 14 points in the first half .
 Linebacker Philip Maples appeared in front of a Tiger aerial returning it to the 30 yard line for his offensive tricksters .
 Brindly kicked a 27-yard field goal to put Millsaps 17-7 up . Millsaps had an amazing catch by Dees Hinton at the 9 .
 Second quarter play was dominated by the Millsaps defensive wizards, led by safety Bob King . King had one interception (the first of three) and a key fourth down play .
 The defense handed the ball to the offensive repeatedly, but time was running out before the Majors could work their magic again . The Majors won't be able to get back to their winning ways again .
 Haygood passes passes to Aldy Hinton and Kirby . The drive was capped by a four-yard touchdown pass to Charlie Goldberg .
 Brindley's foot provided the finale for the first half as his third P.A.T.T . gave the Majors a 24-7 half-time lead . The match ended in a dramatic victory for the Majorers .
 Following the festive intermission, the crowd saw the Majors pull a disappearing act, or perhaps it was the old ""transfer the momentum from one locker to the other"" trick .
 Midway through the quarter, King intercepted again, but a Haygood pass on the next play turned up in the hands of a Tiger defender at the Majors' 25-yard line .
 King materialized in front of his third Tiger aerial, transporting the ball to the offense . With less than 10 minutes to play, King materialised in front .
 Kirby's punt sailed to the now-deft Tigers . But their magic was again elusive and Kirby's puns sailed to victory .
 Following the kickoff, the Majors offense looked into their bag of tricks and came up empty . The Majors scored a touchdown in the first quarter of the game .
 The game ended with a large, talented Georgetown team proclaiming their 3-0 record . A disappointed 1-1 Millsaps squad looking ahead to Sewanee, and a befuddled Millsaps crowd .
 Sports Editor offers apology to Millsaps safety Bob King . Sports Editor of the Purple an an apology .
 This is a promised written retraction of statements made in regard to King's play in the Majors' openin game against Southwestern .
 King was falsely accused of two questionable fourth quarter pass interference penalties when neither one of them was his doing . Neither one of the penalties was King's doing . King was not doing anything wrong .
 The credit rests instead on others in the defensive backfield (who will go unslandered) and perhaps the o* ficials . The credit for the defense is not to blame, but to others .
 Bob was so infuriated that he promptly intercepted three passes in the Majors' next game against Georgetown . The Majors won't play again until the next week .
 Pikes, KA's, lead first week of men's intramural soccer action . Unbeaten Pikes lead the league with 2-0-1 record .
 The Pikes defeated the Lambda Chi's 3-1 in their opening game of the season . Richard Edgerton scored two goals in the victory .
 Kent Van Skiver scored two goals for the KA's to lead them to a 3-0 victory over the Independents . Kent VanSkiver also scored a brace in the victory . The KA’s won their first game of the season 3-1 .
 One goal came on a penalty kick, the other on an assist by Cooper Morrison . Cooper Morrison also scored a goal for the team .
 The Pikes won their second game of the season with a 4-1 win over the Sigs . The Sigs defeated the Pikes in the first game of their new season .
 The Pikes have won four straight games of the season . They have won five of their last seven .
 Rob Nichols and Earl Aycock scored for the KA's, each assisted by Kent Van Skiver . Rob Nichols was the only player to score a goal in the game .
 Bryan Miller, on a penalty kick, and David Hardin combined to lead the Sigs to a 2-1 win over the Independents . Bryan Miller scored the winning goal on the penalty kick in the second half .
 The final game of the week saw the Pikes and KA's battle to a scoreless tie after two overtime periods . KA and Pikes were both scoreless in the final game .
 Millsaps Majors shutout Tigers 7-0 on their home field last Saturday . The Majors used a third quarter touchdown and their typically fine defense to shutout the Tigers .
 It was, in fact, the defense that kept the Majors in the game . The offense was beseiged by bad-luck mistakes, preventing them from scoring .
 One drive was stopped an inch short after a backfield in motion call, another was killed by an interception, and the other was foiled by a ""missed"" field goal .
 The defense held the Tigers to ten first downs, 37 yards passing, 37 passing, and 78 yards on the ground . The defense was' impressive, holding out the Tigers for 10 first downs and 37 yards .
 Sewanee's deepest penetration came early in the game after they recovered a Millsaps fumble at the 30 on the first running play of the day . Sewenee's deep penetration came after recovering a fumble from the Major's first play . The Major won the game by a score of
 Quarterback Frank Shaw intercepted two passes and returned one for a 40 yard gain . Shaw was the bright spot in the defensive back this week, intercepting two passes, returning one for 40 yards .
 With the whole defense shining, there were also some glistenings on the offensive side of the line . With the help of the defensive line, the offensive line also shone brightly .
 Charlie Goldberg emerged as the offensive star of the ball game . Goldberg was senior fullback for the team .
 Goldberg's seven yard touchdown run in the third quarter gave the Majors the edge it needed, with Doug Brindly's point after making the score 7-0 . Goldberg's run made it 7-7 in the second quarter . Goldberg ran for seven yards .
 He soared a few long ones ending up with a 42 yard average for the afternoon . He also averaged 42 yards for the day .
 The first half was close, mostly because of penalties, but the second half was completely dominated by Millsaps . Millsaps dominated in the first half, winning the game 3-1 .
 Millsaps shut out for the second time in three games in a row . The Majors' defense took up the slack when needed and provided the spark . It was once again the Millsaps defense that took up .
 The election for the Homecoming Court will be held Tuesday, October 8, in the Student Union . The election will take place in the student union .
 Students do a lot of belly-aching about (and because of) the cafeteria and the food committee would like to hear it . The food committee wants to hear what students think about the cafeteria .
 Bank UTICA NORTH WEST STREET, JACKSON 1894 The BankThat Cares X OT C3fl. For EVERYONE FOR EVERYONE . Bank UTica North West Street, Jackson, was founded in 1894 .
 Ken Waggoner, Russel Dridu and Ken Lundguest will discuss elementary education . Representing industry will be Ken Wagoner of the Research and Development Center . Ken LundGuest will also talk about elementary education at this event .
 Doug Brindley of Knoxville, Tenn., will play Tiresias, an old soothsayer and companion to Queen Jocasta . The show will be on Broadway in New York City .
 A native of Jackson, Mississippi, graduates from the University of Mississippi . He is surprise of a graduate, after years of college, finding he has no job .
 It will also open the eyes of uncertain students to the necessity of changing his field of study to one more open to job opportunities before it is too late .
 Further information can be obtained through Don Fortenberry, the owner of the business .
 I think some mention should be made of the egg-throwing incident that occurred during the Kappa Sigma serenade of last Thursday night .
 The participants were all independent meats, and this immature behavior has been exhibited by these clowns before . This immature behavior is not the first time clowns have exhibited such immature behavior .
 There were five jocks who got their rocks off by throwing eggs . The jocks threw eggs in a bid to get the jocks off their rocks .
 The Sigs had gathered in the Bacot courtyard to serenade . Two of them gave a sophomore coed an unsolicited egg shampoo, and then three of them heaved eggs at the Sigs .
 This kind of childish behavior should not be tolerated by the college community . appropriate action should be taken, whether by school or student authorities, against these cretins .
 There really is no room for such antics by anyone at Millsaps, jock or non-jock . Millsaps will not tolerate such antics, either, or not-jocks .
 And, hopefully in the future, these particular meats will exercise some self-restraint and grow up . And hopefully, hopefully, they will exercise self restraint .
 I would like to clarify a statement which appeared in an article entitled ""Student Union To Be Remodeled"" September 19 . I would rather have said the student union had been re-modelled .
 Three student members of the committee studied the union and made proposals to the Trustees .
 Questionnaires were distributed to a diverse group of students and faculty to solicit their opinions about renovation .
 The report was not a final one; the Board of Trustees, of course, has the final decision as to implementation of the proposals or further study . The board of trustees will decide whether to implement the proposals, further study or implement further .
 I am quite sure, however, that more solicitation of opinion and discussion of the proposals will be made with faculty and students before final approval is given . I'm quite sure that more of this will be discussed with faculty, students and faculty and staff before approval .
 Frances H Coker is Chairperson of Committee on Spare Utilization of the Student Union . She is a junior theatre major .
 He appeared in Players' workshop productions during both his preceding years at Millsaps . He appeared on stage during both of his previous years in the workshop .
 The Sphinx who plagued the town of Thebes with her famous riddle will be played by Cindy Seng, a junior theatre major from Morris, 111 . The role of the Sphinx in the play will be the role of a junior .
 She also played Ruth in ""The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds"" in a little-theatre production .
 For his performance in the latter role, he was named Best Actor in a Workshop Production for the Players' Fiftieth Season . He was named for his performance as Best Actor for the role .
 The Young Soldier is one of the three characters Cocteau has included in the play to aid in the telling of the myths . Steve Rankin, a sophomore accounting major from Columbia, will be playing the Young Soldier .
 It's his first appearance with the Players, although he worked in theatre extensively during high school, and participated in acting and stage craft workshops throughout childhood .
 Jim Matheny, a sophomore English major from Jackson, will play the Soldier . Matheny will play another of Cocteau's utilitarian characters . The play will be shown Oct. 31, 1974 .
 Robert Gaston of Greenwood, a junior political science major, will appear as the Chief, captain to the two soldiers . Gaston will be the Chief of the soldiers . The two soldiers will appear in the play .
 Bob Morgan, also from Greenwood, will double in ""The Infernal Machine"" as Creon, Jocasta 's brother, and as the Phantom of Laius, Oedipus' father .
 Morgan, also a transfer student, is on the Dean's List; and, like Gaston, has had no prior dramatic experience . Morgan is also a student at the University of Washington .
 Miriam Lambert, a junior sociology major from Biloxi, will play Antigone, the daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta . She will play the character .
 This is her first appearance with the Players . She has acted in ""The Chalk Gardern,"" ""The Mousetrap,"" and as Nellie in ""South Pacific,"" all within two years .
 Jimmy Thrasher, another Murrah graduate, will play the Messenger from Corinth . He is a sophomore theatre major at Murrah . He will be a sophomore .
 In addition, he was stage manager for ""The Sound of Music,"" and received the Players' Freshman Award as the most outstanding freshman member .
 Millsaps Players' production of "The Infernal Machine" opens Wednesday, Oct. 15 . Millsaps' production opens at 8:15m. in the Christian Center Auditorium .
 Performances will be at that time Thursday and Friday next week . On Saturday, Oct. Oct., however, however, the play will start at 8:30m. The play will be played at 8 p.m.
 It will be directed by Goss, who is also Chairman of the Department of Theatre and Professor of Theatre .
 The sets have been designed by Jackson Daily News Arts Editor Frank Hains and lighting by Stanley Graham .
 Robert E Bergmark, chairman of the Philosophy Department, was chosen Outstanding Professor of the Year during Homecoming activities . Bergmark was chosen outstanding professor of the year .
 A keg party given earlier in the semester in Ezelle by Rob McDuff was met with frowns and disapproval from Dean Woodward . The party was held earlier this year .
 Page 22 of Major Facts does not specifically prohibit beer . However, no action was taken and page 22 of the book does not mention the ban .
 Since everyone living on the party end of the hall was either at the party or not present, no one was annoyed enough to complain to the party . The noise was so loud that no one would be annoyed by the noise .
 The following day it was brought to the attention of the group that they had been reported to the Dormitory Board for disturbing the peace and property damage .
 The independents and Rob McDuff were tried by the Dormitory Board without being confronted by the accusors, Ward Emly and Stacy Jenkins, dormitory assistants, without any chance to crossexamine . Several days later the independents were tried without the chance to confront the accusers
 The basis for the conviction came from a letter from Dean Woodward (who was never at the party) to the Board, describing the events . The conviction was based entirely on hearsay evidence .
 The freshmen plead guilty to a charge of conducting an illegal beer party . Even though Jackson Harper, the head of the Dormitory Board, had told him not to, Scott wrote in his report to Dean Woodward .
 The Judicial Council saw fit to include this new charge and to try the independents for it on an original jurisdictional basis . The independent members of the Judicial Council will be tried for the charge .
 However, the manner of the conviction was sloppy and not according to the Constitution of the Millsaps Student Association . Millsaps students say the conviction is 'slutty' and 'unfair'
 The disturbance charge was very flimsy and still based mostly on a letter from Ms. Ms. O'Neill . Ms. O'Neill was charged with a disturbance charge .
 The person living closest to the party, David Reece, came in that night at 12:00 and slept peacefully through the night . Reece was the person who came in at the party and slept in the next room .
 Dean Woodward has recently stated that Major Facts is not the real set of rules . Dean Woodward says Major Facts does not represent the real rules .
 Millsaps students have aborteaiy nesigns Homecoming Court Under Pressure by Gla^hKMcInnis ■v. v. Millsaps . Millsaps School of the Arts students have had their names changed .
 This was not the first such contest in Millsaps history as some five years ago, a male ran and lost for, reportedly, similar reasons .
 It seems that both he and the recent contestants, Alan Brehm and James Galloway, according to a friend of both ran to prove the ""bogus"" nature of the elections and the court . The friend says both candidates ran to raise awareness of the court's "bog
 Two male students were chosen over a crowded field with eight female students for a runoff election the following day . The two male students won the election over a field of eight females .
 Jenny Bates, Nancy Lang, Maura Mcintosh, Brenda Twyner, and Emile Wofford are featured in this week's edition of CNN iReport .
 Sources within the election committee have revealed that James Galloway was elected to the court in the runoff, but resigned before the announcement of the maids . Sources say Galloway resigned before announcement of maids.
 The unannounced election totals have lead to speculation on campus that pressure was exerted to force Galloway's removal and acquiescence . Galloway was elected to a four-year tenure tenure .
 Sources say administration officials secured the supposed resignation . According to the same source it is possible that officials secured it .
 Other speculation suggests that Galloway as a third semester pledge of Kappa Alpha fraternity was pressured, through his status, to resign .
 There were no deals made with the administration and no backroom politicing.""' remarked James Galloway in reply to the forthcoming article .
 It was obvious from the election that Millsaps is not ready for a male Homecoming attendant . Millsaps has a history of not having a male student attendant .
 Galloway is SEB vice president and chairman of the election committee . Galloway: SEB is a member of the SEB and vice president of the organization .
 The elections were also marked by widespread dissension among female students over the unexpected occurrence of the two male candidates for the traditionally all-female court . The election was marked by the unexpected appearance of two men .
 Alan Brehm remarked that there were quite a few people ""upset "" and that he was verbally accosted more than once by irate co-eds .
 There exists a Mississippi statute prohibiting alcohol from any institution of higher learning . Even as state citizens the students are inferior, for .
 David Fleming, Jackson attorney and Millsaps alumnus, feels that all logic and reason are against the existence of this law . Fleming, a Millsaps alumnaudan, says the law is against logic, reason and logic .
 There is possibly such a law that exists governing state institutions but it would not apply to private institutions . It would not be possible to apply to state institutions, but private institutions would not .
 If Millsaps Administration decides to inform Millsaps students of the real rules, this drinking matter can't be settled .
 The fraternities and sororities enjoy the favored half of a double standard on this campus . The frats and sorority sisters are the favored part of the double standard .
 For their ennumerable violations of tranquility and rules, fraternities receive reprimands and warnings . Independent freshmen, forced to live in Ezelle, are fined heavily . For their violations, they receive reprimand and warnings, while independent freshmen are fined .
 President Collins is expected to make a decision on whether to appeal the decision . Dean Woodward is filing the appeal .
 Millsaps students realize that they have no rights but by Administrative indulgence, there remains one unalienable right, the right to confront and challenge . In Chile the administration burned books that misrepresented the ""truth"
 It is the mentality of men afraid of criticism, who feel that the 'rightness' of their cause is justification for their actions . 'Rightness' is justified for the actions of men who are afraid to be criticised, says author .
 It hardly seems a matter for one to drop his books and take the banner of freedom, but one is reminded of the account given in All the President's Men of those who became the recent administration's .
 These men and the mentality they embodied would obviously approve of such clandestine operations as playing hide-and-seek with the P&W . The Bill of Rights notwithstanding notwithstanding.
 That they attempted to destroy supposedly inherent freedoms in this country is no small matter, neither is the fact that they were part of the supposed guarantee of those freedoms . The parallel is by no means veiled .
 We shall never claim that the opinions contained herein are ordained by the creator, but we consider them valid and insist on the right to express them . The opinions contained in this article are that of the author .
 The purpose of this paper is not to report insignificant happenings in the manner of a city daily, but, hopefully, to be an actor in the creation of a Millsaps community . In these crazy serious, wasted productive years we can ejoy what a college can and ought to be
 There are ways to dissent other than mindless petty larceny . Those on this campus who would abuse the students' rights to secure their own imagined rights have neither the intelligence nor the humanity .
 Gov. David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Janette DeBoever, Sharon Edwards, Flinda Feurgeson, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Pat Gleason, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailague . Dean Pittman, Bill Ray, Derrick Shields, Mike
 Bill Waller's aborted bid to get control of the state's Alcohol Beverage Commission has not gone unnoticed by some legislators . Some legislators say it is another effort on the part of the executive department to increase his power and patronage .
 A report by the Legislative' Audit Committee barely skimmed the surface of the story, edited down as it was by members of the committee, is only the tip of the iceberg .
 Waller's effort to get control of state government could have far-reaching effects in state government . Waller wants to take control of the state legislature . He wants to keep control of it .
 The original intent of the ABC was to blunt the governor's influence over how the operation was handled . The ABC was established eight years ago in order to blunt governors' influence .
 Mississippi's ABC has been considered an efficient model, possibly one of the best operations of its type in the nation . The state's ABC is considered to be among the nation's best .
 State Tax Commission Chairman Charles Brady tried to fire three key men from the ABC's law enforcement division . State tax commission chairman Charles Brady fired three key officials from the law enforcement department .
 Brady charged the three with taking liquor seized in raids for personal use . Brady charged them with taking the liquor seized from raids for their, personal use. Brady also charged the men with taking it for their own use .
 Those close to the situation say that there is no evidence to substantiate this charge . But, those close to this claim, say there are no evidence that this is untrue .
 State Tax Commission chairman is in a powerful position, able to influence appointments and the hiring and firing of state employees . Obviously, the position is a powerful role .
 Gov. William Lee Parker of Washington, D.C., is under a long-term lease to Gov. Lee Parker . The governor's office is located in Washington, DC, but is under lease to Parker .
 A side issue is the connection between Brady and Jackson insurance man, Harold Busching . Busching is a former insurance agent for Jackson, Mississippi .
 Waller wrote a tetter to Occidental Life Insurance Company of California . Waller directed them to send commissions on insurance policies to Busching . Busching was an insurance agent for Busching.
 Walter called the State Commission to a meeting iq which he insisted that Garner, Mashburn and Cote be dismissed . Walter called a meeting to discuss the dismissal of Garner and Mashburn .
 Robert Biggs and Bobby Vaughan, the two other commissioners, have foiled the Governor and his friend Brady in their efforts to make the changes they want . So far, Biggs has foiled Brady in his efforts to change the rules .
 Whether Governor will persist in his quest is a matter for conjecture . Gov. John Kasich has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 Letters to the editor are strongly encouraged by the P&W .
 Such letters should be neatly typed, double spaced and should not be over three pages in length . Such letters would not need to be more than three pages long and should be typed .
 All letters will be published as they are written, providing there is no libelous of obscene overtone . All letters should be submitted with the author's name and signature .
 Names will be withheld upon request, providing proper identification of those individuals . Names will also be withheld if requested .
 We trust you will bear with our inexperience, these too often occurences. We trust that we will bear it with us. We hope you'll bear with your inexperience .
 "I was only trying to get on the Millsaps faculty, but they turned me down," he says . "I'm not going to be able to do anything," he adds .
 Vinaruhu mounted a nearby chair, peered upward at the heavens, and began a strange chant . The chant was a form of prayer to the gods .
 The story explains in detail, why Mississippi is like it is . What proceeded was a bizzare story that explains more about Mississippi .
 Wilbur was kidnapped by a couple of disturbed sailors from Panama . While on a fact finding tour at the Port of Gulfport, he was kidnapped . Wilbur's kidnappers kidnapped him from his hotel room .
 Rumors have it that these sailors had a fondness for young men . No one knows what became of him, but rumors say he was a sailor .
 Lubofuno searched the state population for the most outlandish fool available and charted his course to the Governor's office . Lubofununo searched for the best fool in the state to chart his way to the office .
 It seems that the Ole Miss incident was only the beginning of Mississippi's humiliation . Mississippi has been humiliated by the NCAA .
 Lubofuno decided that to break the racial barrier, he needed a black man who was a bigger fool than Ross Barnett . Lubofun decided to choose Ross Barnett as the man he wanted to meet . Barnett was a big fool .
 James Merideth and Ross Barnett were the co-conspirators of the CBC's "Mississippians" in the 1960s and '90s .
 Any U.S. drugstore, pharmacy or retail medical supplies distributor in the United States sells a wide variety of the latest pharmaceutical products . GRAMMA, Cuban by Nidia Diaz, will be featured on GRAPHIC IMAGES .
 Pills of all colors and shapes in fashionable plastic containers wait on shelves for purchasers who will religiously swallow them whole as good believers of Yankee propaganda .
 Baxter, Johnson and Johnson, Parke Davis and others are also a part of the enormous U.S. monopolistic octopuses which suck the life out of the underdeveloped countries and price medicines out of reach of most of the people in the United States .
 In 1950, the total cost of medical care in America amounted to 12,000 million dollars . The cost of health care in the United States was estimated at $12,500 million .
 By 1976, by 1976, it will go up to 132000 million dollars dollars .
 This sudden rise in the cost of medical expenses is a considerable factor, one which reflects the tremendous inflation running rampant in the U.S. The rise in medical costs is a significant factor, according to experts .
 His last request will be to keep putting him on the ballot after he's dead and gone, he says . "His last request is that he be put back in the polls after he dies"
 In individual terms, the burden of medical costs is even greater . Page 3 expressed in terms of individual medical costs .
 According to the U.S. Department of Labor, 15,800,000 people in the United States will be on welfare by 1975 . The picture gets even darker when we add that according to the government, 15 million people will be in need of welfare assistance .
 The high cost of medical care hasn't produced any program of preventive medicine, experts say . Instead, the high cost has produced no program of preventive medicine, they say .
 Every year the health services that are available to the people of the United States get even worse . On the contrary, every year, health services get worse . The health services in the U.S. get worse.
 The immunization index of the people in the United States is dropping steadily . The Disease Control Center of the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare has often said that immunizations index is dropping . The CDC says immunizations are dropping steadily.
 Only 60 percent of children between the ages of 1 and 4 were vaccinated against polio in 1973 . In the United States, where the Pentagon has presented a program calling for the appropriation of 21,000 million dollars for new weapons, only 60. percent of the children aged 1 to 4 were
 In 1964, some 78 percent of the children in the same age bracket received polio shots . Some 78 percent in 1964 received polio injections .
 The diphtheria, whopping cough and tetanus vaccine was given to 75. percent of the children in 1972, but to only 72. percent in 1973 . The vaccine was also given to 72.9 percent of children in 1973, according to the CDC .
 Low immunization indexes exclude all the families living in the United States ghettos, which lack all kinds of facilities for getting disease prevention measures . And these low immunization index excludes all of the U.S. families .
 There is one doctor for every 6300 inhabitants in Guatemala, or Ghana, with one for every 25,000 . This is a high ratio when contrasted to that of Guatemala, where there are one doctor per person in 6300 .
 Doctors in the U.S. are unequally distributed throughout its population . Doctors are not widely distributed in the United States . Doctors in America are not equal to each other .
 Beverly Hills has one doctor for every 50 residents . Watts, the Black ghetto of Los Angeles, has one for every 1000 residents . Beverly Hills boasts one doctor per resident . Watts has a doctor per person for every 100 residents .
 The development of public health services in the U.S. has gone down the drain, especially when contrasted to that of other industrialized countries . As a result of this inequality, the development of health services has gone to the bottom of the line .
 In 1950 the U.S. had the fifth lowest infant-mortality rate in the world, but by 1971 it had slipped down to 23rd place . The United States had the lowest infant mortality rate in 1950 .
 The high cost of medical care, lack of preventive medicine, uneven distribution of doctors and overall deterioration of the people's health are self-evident, says Dr. Ravi Agrawalala .
 The United States has made man's most basic right, the right to preserve his life, a profitable business for the large pharmaceutical concerns and others who have made medical care the privilege of the few . Millsaps students and faculty and administration have shown concern for the plight of the farmworkers .
 A petition that was circulated a few weeks ago received more than four hundred signatures, twenty of which were interested faculty and administrative officials . These feelings were determined by a petition circulated by faculty and administrators, 20 of whom were interested .
 The petition circulators were impressed with the large amount of signatures . This was a great percentage of students on the cafeteria meal plan, almost fifty percent .
 The petition was presented to the cafeteria administration who readily agreed to begin looking into available sources for the desired lettuce .
 The concerned attitude of the cafeteria management was promising, the concerned attitude was promising . It has pondered whether the threat of a cafeteria boycott (only rumor, of course) or of picketing the alumni picnic the weekend following the petition perhaps had just a small bearing upon approval for the change
 The school administration was willing to absorb the small extra cost, because of the large amount of concerned persons who showed an interest in the farmworkers, that would accompany the special ordering of the lettuce from California .
 Millsaps hopes other school cafeteria's around Jackson, and the state, will follow suit from Millsaps .
 With the help of the Millsaps Student Organization for the Farmworkers, which will soon be set up, maybe we can get petitions circulating in the other area schools . The Millsaps student organization will soon set up .
 He will discuss with a panel of students and faculty his new work, A Nation of Strangers . The panel will also discuss his work on the subject .
 Mr Packard has authored several widely-read books on trends and problems of American society, including The Naked Society .
 At 1:30 he will be on the Millsaps campus to discuss with the panel the substance of the lecture . A Nation of Strangers, a study of the lack of roots in America, will be held at Millsaps .
 The feelings of people vary so drastically from one area of the United States to another as I seem to have found. I am a new student to Millsaps .
 Just yesterday I actually heard a girl proclaim overjoyed that a guy had dropped her, or that she was dropped . Just yesterday, a girl was heard overjoying that she had been dropped .
 People in general in the South do not find pleasure in dumping or 'dropping' you described, but there is a strange group of 'Greeks' who seem to be masochistic in this aspect .
 These people are seen roaming in packs with brands acrossed their chests . They even sit at meals in segregated groups .
 I was disgusted and angered to see a petition circulating on campus asking for universal amnesty for the cowards who desserted duty in Vietnam or ran away to hide with their tails between their legs .
 It is more frightening to me that anyone would go who did not agree with the U.S. of A's policy in Vietnam .
 'New Canadians' of the 60's seemed to know more about the war than any of us did who supported it . The 'new Canadians' knew more than anyone who supported the war . 'The new Canadians' seemed to be more knowledgeable about the conflict than anyone supported it.
 Maybe universal amnesty would be one way of making right the wrongs we committed in a country that did not want us or our 'free' way of government, by being ""patriotic"" to our own people who want to come home .
 David Anderson, Claire Chastain, Janet Dykes, Ward Emling, Lloyd Gray, Ann Hendrick, Mark Herbert, Charlie Hinman, Maty Lowe, Mona Perry, and Dee Dee Woroner were inducted .
 Marsha Brock, Lorean King, Jan Lansing, Janet Love, Suzanne McWilliams, Dale Guild, Edna Holbrook, Harriet Tucker, and Harriet Tucker are featured .
 $230 includes all expenses except meals for the professionally-taught program . USM will offer the week of Feb.-Mar. in Park City, City, this winter .
 At Princeton, he was a Danforth Fellow, a Princeton Fellow, and a Ford Fellow . At Princeton he was Danforth and Ford Fellow at the University .
 Thompson's major field of interest is BlackAmerican history from the 19th century to the early 20th century . Thompson has numerous publications, including numerous publications .
 The correct answer is Arizona and New Mexico; they were explored by the biology group this summer . Special interest paid to the Sonoia Desert in New Mexico .
 Yensen and his wife, were Charlie Hinman, Alan Brinson, Susie Roberson, Chris Wilberson, Phyllis McVaden, Jeff Tolbert and Bill Hardin .
 During the course of the trip, they not only observed nature, but also visited several places of interest . The team also observed nature and visited several areas of interest.
 Among these were the American Museum of Natural History, Carlsbad Caverns, Tumacacori National Monument, Tuscon Mountain Park, Grand Canyon National Park, and Petrified Forest National Park .
 Yensen has spent a year in the desert studying the habits of the surrounding wildlife . He has spent the year studying the desert's wildlife habits .
 The Copper-Tail Trogan is a tropical bird noted for its brilliant plumage . Among the rarities that were found was the copper-Tailed Trogan, which is known for its plumage.
 Two other rare birds that we sighted were the goshawk and the red-faced warbler . The birds are rare birds .
 Field trips such as this offered two to three times a year . For those who are interested, there are field trips such a year offered by the school .
 A large collection of guns were taken in a house burglary on Old Canton Road Saturday night Sept. 9 . The loot includes a large collection both antique and modern guns .
 Also a considerable amount of silver flatware and serving pieces, coin collection, jewelry and 2 furs . Also a coin collection and jewelry collection, including two furs.
 In order to combine all the feelings of the black population this article is told by a fictional student . This article is written in a fictional version of the story .
 Many of the statements are based on feelings and emotions and not entirely on fact . Many of these statements are not based on fact, not on facts .
 If anyone would like to offer any corrections or explanations the black students would gladly pt them. If anyone has any corrections they would gladly pare them.
 "Being a student here makes me kind of unique, but there is something else about me that makes me even more different," she says . She says she is proud to be a student at U.S. University of Columbia .
 There is a distinct difference between being a student at Millsaps and being a black student . Millsaps students are not students at all of the same schools .
 "One of the things that I have to encounter since I'm black is that people constantly study me and watch my actions," she says . She says she has to deal with the challenges of being black .
 "From their studies of me they try to tell other people how I feel about this school," says Drexler . "They try to [tell other people] how they feel about the school," he says .
 "Few of these people ask me how I feel about Millsaps. Now that's all right except for the fact that few of these . people ask us how we feel about it," she says .
 This can be very frustrating — especially if someone misquotes me or misinforms the people. This can't be the first time I've heard from someone who misquoted me, I said .
 This week I am going to explain how I feel about the administration, athletic program, student government, and the Greek system here on campus . So this week I'm going to talk about my opinion of the administration and student government .
 The administration has one fault that is so glaring that I must say something about it. The administration's one fault is that it's so glaringly glaringly, it's a fault that I feel like I need to say something .
 In order to understand the culture and culture of our community, the community should be pictured on campus just as it is off campus . The community should also be pictured as well as off campus, says Loyoyoy .
 "I feel that this is not done because blacks are pictured as cooks and maintenance workers. However, I feel that . this is . not done," says the author .
 It must be noted that there are blacks serving in other positions here on campus such as library and business office .
 "I feel that the administration would be made complete if black professors were added to the faculty," says LZ Granderson . Granderson: "I think that I would like to have black professors on the faculty at the university"
 Millsaps' athletic policy is based on the premise that athletics exist for the benefit of the students, not primarily to enhance the prestige and publicity of the college . Millsaps has a policy that it does not enhance its prestige or publicity .
 The athletic program of Millsaps College has not benefited me as much as I think it is possible. Millsaps has not been able to do so much for me, I said . Millsaps is a small college school in Mississippi .
 Derrick Shields, to relate to black players on the team and performing together with the white players on an equal basis . Derrick Shields is a former NFL player who played in the NFL . Shields says he is proud of his team's success .
 If the reason is something that cannot be changed (such as the academic requirements) I will accept the lack of blacks on the team, he says . If that can't be changed, he will accept it .
 Until a reason is given, I cannot be fully satisfied with the present athletic program . But until a reason has been given I can't be satisfied, he says .
 "I feel that the lack of participation in a variety of intramural sports is 100% the fault of the black students," student says . Student says he feels that the problem is that black students do not participate in intramurals .
 Nothing seems simple now, . on a regular basis in sports such as soccer, tennis, golf, etc. Other than basketball, blacks have not been successful in sports like basketball .
 The trend is gradually changing, however, and I think the trend is slowly changing . KAREN GLADNEY is one of the exceptions, however .
 As members of the Millsaps Student Association, I don't think the black population gets enough representation . We're not sure if there is enough representation in Millsaps students . The Millsaps student association hopes to have more representation .
 There are no blacks in the Student Senate . This statement is supported by the fact that there are no black members of the student senate .
 There was only one black running for a position in the last election, but the reason there were no others was becuase it is felt that it is really no use in trying to get elected . I realize that there was only . one black candidate running for . a position .
 All the candidates who won have some group — usually a Greek organization — behind them . The candidates are usually backed by some Greek organizations .
 The members of the BSA cannot begin to compare with the Page 5 membership of even the smallest fraternities and sororities . The membership of Page 5 can be compared to the membership of the smallest fraternity and sorority groups .
 In order to illustrate this fact, look at what happened to our only black candidate in the last election . "Look at this fact: Look at the fact that the only black person in the country ran for the first black person to be elected to represent us in the U.S.
 It is evident that a black cannot be a part of the senate by power of the vote. Therefore, it is evident . Therefore, a black can't be a member of the Senate by the power of vote.
 A few years ago, blacks were automatically given a position in the senate . But now, blacks are allowed to hold a seat in the state legislature .
 I think that it should be renewed in order to get black representation, at least until the black population on campus will be great enough to run a candidate successfully . The black population is great enough for a candidate to run successfully .
 The last issue that I want to tell you about concerns the Greek system . The Greek system is the system of the Greek government .
 We really don't care for the Greek system and don't consider it as an issue. We don't think it's an issue, and we don't want it to be a problem. We really do not want to see the Greek government as a problem .
 There have been some who have asked why there are no blacks in fraternities and sororities . However, there have been no black members of the fraternity and sorority .
 The main reason is that as a whole, no blacks were interested in getting into the Greek system . "As a whole of the Greeks were not interested in joining the system," he says . "No blacks wanted to join the system, and no blacks would be interested in it," he
 To use the Greek system up with the Greeks just as long as they don't begin to disturb us. We're not going to disturb them. We'll use it up with them up with us just as well as we're not disturbing them .
 "We, as a group, hope that many more young, intelligent blacks come to Millsaps and get from this school what they can," says the group of Millsaps students .
 Millsaps is not perfect, it has many imperfections, says Millsaps . Millsaps was "not perfect" Millsaps, "just as in anything, Millsaps not perfect," says author .
 That McDuff and his buddies high on Boone's Farm may be bewildered, I will readily admit . McDuff's buddies may be baffled, I'll readily admit. But that's not the case .
 Don't try to muscle into the Do-Nothing Generation, either. And don't, appropriating apathy as your watchword, too . Don't take apathy to be apathetic. Don't, take apathetic approach to politics .
 We may not anytime soon see a return to those glorious days of the last decade when New Left student activists monopolized the FBI's ""Ten Most Wanted" list .
 McDuff: "You and your generation are going to leave this world — and this campus — a better place than you found it" But, McDuff says, "I don't think you're leaving this world, but it's going to be a great place to come home"
 Your doing so will signify to the Dean that you do not apathetically accept a long-existing problem which poses a serious obstacle to your obtaining a quality education at Millsaps . Do not accept that you have a problem that poses a significant obstacle to getting a good education .
 The practice is of ordering textbooks in quantities smaller than the numbers of students enrolled in courses for those assigned reading . The policy is meant to ensure that the books are available for students in certain courses .
 'It is a practice which has intruded on my happiness and wellbeing during each of my four years here. It is a matter of my happiness,' she said .
 To comprehend how poignantly this practice can intrude, consider this situation . To comprehend this, consider the situation in the U.S.
 As I write, I am looking forward within the week to a mid-semester examination in a demanding course . I'm looking forward to looking forward in the next few weeks to exams .
 Twenty-some students had not enrolled while suffering delirium, the books were re-ordered . Once it was clear that the students hadn't enrolled, they had to re-order the books .
 Supplies of four of them were replenished before the semester was more than a month old . Supplies were kept in place by the end of the semester .
 The two more significant titles, however, were still unavailable a week before the exam .
 The copy of the most important title which was to have been placed on reserve in the Millsaps Library somehow never found its way there . It was put on reserve at the library but never made its way to it .
 This affliction is an affliction for the faculty, of course, as well as for the students, says the author . "This affliction" is an "affliction" for faculty and students, he says .
 The instructor could not in fairness prepare an examination that would penalize the losers in this variation on Musical Chairs . This would be to penalize those students who had labored through the often laborious required reading .
 The practice is intended to prevent the overstocking of books which might become obsolete . Well, you might suppose that the practice is . intended to . prevent overstocks of books .
 The Norton Anthology of English Literature has not gone uns pared . The Norton anthology has been published for more than 50 years .
 It would seem more consistent with Millsaps College's strivings toward excellence if the possible loss of money on book sales were construed a lesser evil than the obstruction of its constituents' pursuit of knowledge . Millsaps has been criticized for its lack of funding for the book sales .
 In short, there is no good reason why this sort of thing happens, and only your apathy, McDuff, will permit its perpetuation . McDuff: "Only your apathetic attitude will permit it perpetuation. It's not a good thing to do."
 Gertrude Stein's. Apathy is mine, vengeance the Lord's, and rose is a rose . Apathy was mine. vengeance the lord's, vengeance is the lord .
 It will do you a world of good to get off your duff and do something, McDuff . It will be a good thing for you to get out of the house and get back to work .
 On January 2, 1959, in a little rundown saloon on San Francisco's lower Market Street, a young man and one-day-to-be student activist raised his glass of redeye in a toast to Fidel Castro .
 Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista was sent packing for the Dominican Republic . A day earlier, forces coalescing around the 26th of July Movement, of which Castro was the leader, had sent him packing .
 At that time, it was still possible for rich Americans to gamble and participate in bizarre sexual games in Havana . It was still permissible for impressionable young Americans to idolize the dashing rebel, not then known to be an instrument of the Communist Menace .
 In the months following Castro's takeover, one could read of his eating hot dogs and ice cream cones at the Bronx Zoo . Jack Paar often showed home movies of his daughter Randy splashing about in a swimming pool with Castro's son .
 Rich Americans who wanted to go kinky had to go elsewhere than to Havana . Randy didn't swim with Fidelito anymore .
 Castro had become another dupe for Soviet Russia and was busy sowing the seeds of dissension throughout Latin America . Castro had been a dupe to Soviet Russia .
 The CIA supports the most undemocratic revolutions in Latin America . It is obligatory today for the CIA to interfere with orderly democratic processes, he says .
 Castro was exporting revolution, but doing so to the embarrassment and consternation of the Soviet Union and of all organized Communist parties except the Chinese . Castro exported revolution, all right — with what success may be reckoned by the fact that Che is not alive and well in La Paz .
 The Communists in Latin America were faring far better in working through the system than was Castro in promoting violent revolution . Castro was far better than Castro was in promoting a violent revolution in the 1960s .
 Castro came to see the error of his ways after abortive Cuban-directed revolutionary adventures in Venezuela and Venezuela . Castro was forced to leave Cuba in 1959 .
 By 1968, he had shucked on his earlier flirtation with China and had returned, wagging his tail behind him, to the Soviet fold .
 Castro seems to make sense to me, but I wouldn't trust a Russki any farther than I could throw Chuck Connors . Castro's move to Cuba makes sense to some of the world's world's most famous politicians .
 From its very beginnings as a geopolitical entity, Cuba had lpnged for some measure of that independence of which other nations boast . Cuba's independence has been a hallmark of the Cuban nation .
 Raped and ravaged by several empirebuilders, pre-Castro Cuba came closer to enjoying the spirit of independence when a Spanish colony . After a grueling Cuban-fought war of liberation, it became — with the ""help"" of an expansionist United States — a republic .
 Jose Marti, the Washington/ Lincoln/ William Tell of Cuba, warned his followers against domination by the United States . Marti was a staunch admirer of the U.S. that he was, but warned against domination .
 Cuba's nationalization of the sugar refineries was of paramount importance . Cuba needed to put Cuba on a sound and selfsufficient economic footing . Cuba was nationalized in order to make it self-sufficient .
 The refineries being Americanowned, to nationalize industry was to antagonize the United States. But, the refineries were Americanowned . To nationalize refineries was to . antagonize . The United States, the U.S.
 To antagonize the United States — without first making sure that its bullying postures would be matched by those of a powerful ally — would certainly have been once more to surrender Cuban independence . The U.S. should not antagonize Cuba, it would have been a surrender to Cuban independence
 The remarkable thing is that Castro has consistently manipulated the Soviet Union more ably than it has him . Castro has managed to manipulate the Soviets far more successfully than the U.S. has ever had him .
 Even today, with Castro chastened and Cuba ruled by a Communist party, the party is at least 80% dominated by Castroites . Old guard pro-Soviet Communists are pointedly excluded from leadership roles .
 As an example of spunk, Castro's maintenance of Cuban integrity in the face of increasing economic dependence on the Soviet Union rivals . Franco's remaining aloof from the turmoil of World War II by refusing to let his erstwhile ally Hitler use Spain as a corridor to the Mediterranean .
 True believers would doubtless dismiss these as the blib, forked-tongue sentiments to be expected from a warmongering Commie . The true believers would undoubtedly dismiss these comments as the . true believers .
 Khrushchev was thought to be quite sincere by the war-mongering Commies themselves . But, to judge by his fall from power not so very long afterward, he was thought quite sincere . The war-muserer was thought by the Commies to be sincere .
 "It does not, however, read like a novel," says someone else in another blurb . It does not read as well as a novel, but it does .
 The first phase consisted in assassinating a prominent government official, and the second in blowing up, with buried explosives, the Havana cemetery during the official's funeral . All the top government leaders, including Machado, were killed in the first phase .
 Suchlicki has permitted himself a single exclamation point in the entire book, and that one comes so unexpectedly, and inappropriately, that it is a thunderclap shattering the calm of pages and pages of cane production figures . Only Earl Butz could find this exciting, but only
 Suchlicki has succeeded admirably at what he set out to do which was to write, not a novel, but a short history of Cuba . The book is published in Spain, Italy, Spain, Germany and France .
 I should point out that his account of Castro's Cuba's Cuba is a good deal more balanced and less approving than my own .
 The book comes at a timely time and makes excellent reading for anyone who wants to know more about our tempestuous neighbor .
 The Pikes lead the Men's Intramural Soccer League with a 6-0-1 record . The undefeated Pikes have just one week left in the soccer season .
 The Lambda Chi's bombed the Independents 7-1 behind a 3-goal effort by George Krebs . The team also scored 3 goals in the win over the Indindents .
 Lambda Chi goals came from Don Hall, assisted by Krebs, Ricky Price, by David Anderson . Eyrich, Dean Foley and Dean Foley also on the scoresheet .
 Earl Aycock scored two of the KA goals, assisted by Rob Nichols and Steve Haygood . The KA win was a 2-1 victory for the club in the league .
 Doug Minor, Steve Laney, and Richard Edgerton contributed goals for the Pike victory . The Pike won the game 3-2 at home .
 George Krebs scored two one assisted by George , to help pace the Lambda Chi's . The team scored two goals in the first half of the game .
 Don Hall, assisted by Krebs, and Ricky Price scored the other LXA goals . Ricky Price and David Anderson also scored for the LXA .
 Rob Blount, assisted by Bryan Miller, and Jim Watts provided the scoring for the Sigs . Jim Watts also assisted by Blount .
 Richard Edgerton scored two goals in the Pike victory, one assisted by Doug Minor . Doug Minor also assisted two goals .
 Mickey Wallace, assisted by Edgerton, and Bill Mann scored the other goals . Bill Mann also scored for the club .
 Lambda Chi goals came from Ricky Price, John McVey, assisted by David Anderson, and George Krebs . Ricky Price scored in the first half .
 David Hardin provided two of the Sig goals, the other being scored by Rob Blount with an assist from Bryan Miller .
 Earl Aycock, Bruce McKihley, and Bill Stii, assisted by Rob Nichols, provided the scoring for the KA's . Earl and Bill Aycock scored the goals in the 2-1 victory .
 Earl Aycock and Rob Nichols account for the KA's scores . Each scored a goal and assisted the other . The KA won the game 2-1 .
 George Krebs, assisted by David Anderson provided the scoring for the Lambda Chi's . David Anderson assisted the scoring in the victory over the team .
 The Pikes dropped the Sigs 4-0 behind two goals from Richard Edgerton, one assisted by Bill Mann . Bill Mann also scored a goal for the Pikes .
 Have Your Doctor Phone or Bring Your Prescription In BankAmericard and Master Charge Accepted . Have Your doctor phone or Bring your Prescription in Bank Americard and bring it in .
 The Majors moved handily up and down Newell Field . The win was a comfortable victory for the Majors .
 George Eyrich scored two of the goals for the Lambda Chi's . George Krebs scored one of the other goals . Krebs also scored a goal for the team .
 Pikes 6 KA's 4 Lambda Chi's 3 Sigs 3 0 . Pikes' punter John Kirby sent four punts towering into the October skies for 42 yard average .
 Fullback Charlie Goldberg and tailback John Kirby handled the running chores . Receiving receivers Sonny Aldy and Dees Hinton took care of catching chores .
 As the game opened Millsaps' offense looked a little rusty, producing little more than a fumble, and interception, and a fine 57 yard rush by Kirby in the whole first quarter . Millsaps scored a touchdown in the first quarter, while Kirby rushed for 57 yards .
 The defense kept the Majors in the game, repelling the Indians on countless occasions . The Majors won the game 7-2 on Tuesday night .
 The defense opened with yet another brilliant goal line stand, holding Principia on the one yard line . The defense also stood strong in the first half of the second half .
 Hinton broke three tackles on route to 71 yard touchdown pass-run play . Haygood found Hinton after hitting Aldy for a 20 yard gain, Haygood hit Hinton for 71 yards .
 A second Millsaps drive was killed by a fumble at the seven, but the Majors quickly followed with a score . The Majors scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Haygood hit Kirby with an 11-yard touchdown toss . Goldberg and Wieniewitz scored a touchdown for Haygood . Haygood's toss was the only touchdown touchdown for Kirby .
 With two minutes to go in the half, the Majors led 14-0 . Bridley added the PAT, and with two minutes of the half the Major led .
 Callaway High School Band and Chargettes led to the crowning of the 1974 Homecoming Queen . Jenny Bates was crowned the homecoming queen at halftime .
 Early in the third quarter Brindley hit on a field goal from 22 yards out to push the score to 17-0 . The game was the first time the two teams had scored a score of 17 points .
 From this point, the game took a somewhat lethargic turn, as the defense was continually called upon to rectify offensive miscues . The game took an offensive turn, with the defense constantly called upon .
 Principia had earned a first down at the 10 yard line . Millsaps held on to hold on to the scoreline .
 Greg Freeman picked off a Principia ariel and returned it 60 yards for the Majors' final touchdown . Freeman awakened the crowd with 40 seconds left to play as he picked off the ball .
 Mr Smith was one of the South's few progressives in the Civil Rights torn years that he served .
 He was considered too liberal and chummy with the Kennedys . His district was gerrymandered and he lost to James Whitten in 1962 .
 Mr Smith was in his early years an avid reader and amateur journalist . Born in a village south of reenwood, Sidon, in 1918, he was born in 1918 in Sidon .
 Mr Smith returned to politics through jourand after working in Senator Stennis's first campaign . Mr Smith was the senator's legislative assistant for the years 1947-49 .
 In this capacity he was director of the KennedyJohnson Natural Resources Advisory Committee in 1960 . Director of Tennessee Valley Authority after his Congressional career until 1972 .
 Smith portrayed untypically as a Southern congressman in the 60's . For the last seven of his Congressional years he was a member of the United States Delegation in the NATO Parliament .
 Frank Smith's subject for this Friday's program is one which has occupied much of his public career and permeates his writings, that of his state's place in the world . Smith: The subject of Friday's show will be discussed at 8 p.m. ET Friday .
 Kappa Alpha president says fraternity in no way influenced alleged resignation of James Galloway from Homecoming Court . Lloyd Gray, president of Kappa Alpha fraternity, says fraternity did not influence Galloway .
 The Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre is the second attraction of the 1974-75 Millsaps Arts and Lecture Series . The local series and S Hurok present the Claude Kimnis Theatre .
 Claude Kipnis has been savored by audiences in many countries through many media . The genius of Claude Kopnis is savored in many ways, including through the media .
 Hailed by Newhouse Newspapers critic Byron Belt as ""one of the giants, of contemporary theatre,"" he has created works for solo mime, mime troupe alone and mime with orchestra . Has performed on television, lectured on mime and published a book on
 Claude Kipnis was born in Paris and after studying with Marcel Marceau founded a school of mime in Tel-Aviv . He studied at the school and founded a mime school .
 He has appeared at many colleges and universities as well as the Ravinia Festival and Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival .
 His numerous television appearances include NCB's Today and programs on the BBC in Londonders .
 College Senate Holds November Session by Glade Mclnnis . Third session of the College Senate was more tense and more active than previous two .
 With all seven student representatives present, the senate handled six items in an hour long meeting . The senate handled only six items during the meeting .
 Frank Laney called, "". . . . the only body on campus that represents everybody on campus"" proceeded to approve an amendment . providing that the registrar be on the Admissions Committee .
 The second item called for a report from the Student Committee on Parking which had not been prepared . The student committee on parking had not prepared a report .
 Student senators unsure as to what proposal, if any, had been accepted by the Student Senate concerning parking violation rules . Student senators were unsure what proposal had been approved .
 Laney, joined by several other faculty members, were anxious to see the situation corrected . Laney and several others expressed concern for the Library and Ezelle Hall .
 Mr Howard Bavender sought statements from the administration concerning Administrative Functions Committee and plans for renovating the Student Union . Mr Bavender then sought statements about the administration's plans for renovations .
 Collins had issued no statement in reply to the request . Dean Saunders stated that both items were under consideration . Collins has not issued a statement .
 The dull buzz pervading the senate room left as Mr Bavender addressed the matters that concerned the Purple & White . The dullest buzz pervaded the room as he addressed the matter .
 Publications Committee rejected proposals that 'outside' writers not be allowed to participate in the paper and that no unsigned articles be allowed . Committee did not respond to requests for an investigation the confiscation of the P&W .
 As a part of the Millsaps community, if such a thing exists, I am making a serious and hopefully productive attempt at presenting an alternative view of what a college newspaper can and ought to be . Now, as a member of Millsaps, I'm making an attempt to present an
 I completely agree that the P&W should not report in the manner of a city daily . "I completely agree," he says. "We should not be reporting daily."
 All good newspapers follow the conventional format of including, usually on one or two inner pages, an editorial page . The editorial page is usually published on one of the inner pages .
 We all agree that editorials are of vital importance to a newspaper . P&W follows the extreme reverse with a surplus of editorialized articles to the extent of making them front page .
 You included the imors and speculations from unannounced sources ""within the elections imittee"", but then you quoted the chairman of the committee and the person >n as denouncing the rumors completely . You included . speculations within the committee .
 To include varied accounts obviously opinionwiated article is one thing, but then to slap a head on the story that is exactly NOT what the ""Male Reportedly"" did is misleading and deceiving . It sacrifices all ethics that any worthwhile journalism ever attempts to have .
 The poor use of cartoons at Millsaps has led to a sense of community at the school . Millsaps students say cartoons have been used to destroy community spirit .
 President Collins has been criticized for his support of students' rights . Collins: "Let me first light a torch of loyalty and appreciation for President Collins"
 The fund raising campaign happens to be in the interest of the entire Millsaps community . By the way, the fund-raising campaign is being organized by the Millsaps Community .
 You have the right to editorialize in light of our freedom of the press . You're ambiguous, or maybe your goal is ""to bitch is to bitch is  to bitch"", but whatever the case, you do have a right .
 This letter is in response to the Purple and White of October 29, 1974 . This letter was written by the president of the United States in 1974 .
 Professor Bergmark wins Distinguished Professor Award . Bergmark also wins award for reporting of tap day .
 Some people might wish to be so corny as to send a clipping from the campus newspaper to their parents about being tapped into an honorary society . Possibly some people might want to send them a clipping .
 Male homecoming maids are an example of campus conflict, but not the most significant examples of campus violence . The maids were not the maids, but they were the homecoming girls .
 If we do this often enough maybe we too will be able to tell the difference between significance and insignificance; and maybe, just maybe, if we're good, we'll decide for ourselves . If we're not good enough, maybe we'll be able, and maybe if we
 The paper staff, in particular the editor, castigated the administration for lack of concern for the students . The editor of the paper said the administration was not concerned about students .
 From my observations, the paper staff could use some brushing up in this area also . From his observations, I think they could use a bit of brushing up .
 Even with the unsatisfactory features that I have enumerated, the rece paper had some bright spots . The paper had a bright spot, especially in the light of some of the bright spots.
 Of especially high quality were the articles black students at Millsaps, and the article on student rights by Dennis Mcintosh . The articles were especially high-quality, and of course, were written by black students .
 I should feel quite inadequate were I asked to express the attitude of all members of any race, such as all Millsaps students of Jewish or Irish origin who feel oppressed by an atheist majority .
 To suggest that people should be chosen arbitrarily for an office or position merely because they happen to be members of a certain race or group is beyond belief . And to suggest that . people should . chosen arbitrarily, it's beyond belief, he says .
 Anyone can get elected if he or she uses the right propaganda techniques and can smile all the time . Granted, the majority is usually full of it, but anyone can use propaganda techniques to win .
 Convincing the majority of just about anything is easy as Amerikan pie, if you know how . The best way to get around the world is to make a pie pie .
 Your salary and position is as editor, not king, and this paper is a Millsaps' paper, says P&W editor . "This paper seems to be trying to tear apart instead of create," he says .
 The only sense of community the P&W inspires is by creating a common enemy for the students once every two weeks, or whenever . The only way to create a sense of unity is to create common enemies, the school says .
 Inexperience has been your excuse for lousy layout and tardiness, but you need an original excuse for proofreading errors . You need to be honest about your mistakes .
 Correct spelling and grammar would make even a pitiful publication a little more appealing . Correct spelling would make it more appealing to the public .
 As business manager, it's really none of my business what you choose to include in the P&W, so let me submit this letter not as a staff member but as a member of the Millsaps community .
 It won't be necessary to publish our names because it will exceed your three page limit . We are happy to clarify that this is not the case of any of us .
 Its utter lack of knowledge as to the guiding rules by which Millsapians should abide is only superseded by its extreme lack of . Page :s of -procedural due as I atte any Fi 1 c bj Pat Gleason process .
 Scott Spillman, was acting as an independent entity, that is, without actual approval of The Dormitory Board, as he utilized the Board's trust in him, as Board recorder, to insert into the decision in the ""Leroy Case"" which was not decided by
 Such a usurption of power itself abominable, base and disrespectful; but to complicate this calamity with outright insanity, the Judicial Council proceeded to rule n the Leroy Case, in part of this report .
 It is apparent that the Judicial Council is both a lackey to injustice and to those in the administration seeking a definitive ruling on the status of alcohol on campus . The Judicial Council should not be seen as a lacke to injustice, it's apparent .
 Ebenezer Pendergrass had just begun to appreciate Vinaruhu as a source of profound wisdom and divine revelation . If it is justice that is sought, justice is sought .
 He had been on his mind for several days now and on this cold, dark Saturday night I was making my trek to his cabin to make apologies for the cala Judi upor mer . Judi will work within their distorted visions to pursue equal and exact justice .
 I believe in actuality that this entire subject calling for informing on your neighbor is ludicrous . But if it is ludicrousness that is called for, it will be attained, he says .
 The experiences of the material world often clutter the path to spiritual truth . As I dodged the cow dung in my path, I reflected on how not unlike this cow dung, the experiences of the material world often clutter the path .
 "I could see a light on inside and could faintly hear some strange noises," says witness . "I'm not sure what's going on but I'm sure it's a strange house," she says .
 Vinaruhu's cabin was cluttered with empty wine bottles and positioned in the midst of this awful mess was Vinarahu himself, lying in a pool of wine .
 He was barely conscious, rolling around in a stupor muttering the words to a strange song . He rolled around, muttering, "a strange song" He had been in the hospital for four hours .
 In cotton fields, ain't nothin' so evil As Planter man's foe, ole boll weevil . Hell or high water we'll get 'em all . Cain't argue with that greenback call Ninety-seven bottles of wine on the wall .
 Colonel Mim appeared from nowhere, prancing across the room leaving a trail of money in his path . Then all of a sudden Colonel Mim appears from nowhere . Colonel Mim was seen prancing around the room .
 Clark Reed scooped up the money and all concerned disappeared, including Colonel Mim and the boll weevils . Then in a fleeting moment Clark Reed appeared to scoop up the cash .
 That left only myself and Vinaruhu who were struggling to remember the words to the next verse . That left us struggling to find the words for the next .
 I felt Vinaruhu owed me an explanation, so I asked the crucial question . "I asked the question: 'What do you think I'm going to do?"
 First you orchestrate the ongoing manipulation of the Millsaps peons, now you're financing Clark Reed . Clark Reed. First, first, he's financing Reed. Reed.
 Every year I conduct the ancient dance of the boll weevils to guarantee the cotton crop . The dance is an ancient dance to guarantee a cotton crop, says farmer .
 A goood cotton crop means money in the delta economy, new homes, and a prosperous year for Clark Reed . Reed: A good cotton crop is good news for the Delta economy . Reed says it's a good year for the delta .
 Clark Reed is the best thing that ever happened to the Mississippi Democrats . Reed is best thing to ever happen to Mississippi Democrats, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Reed: "Clark Reed is not a Democrat, but a Republican."
 "The War Between Men And Women" is this Friday's movie .
 Thirteen students have been invited to join Alpha Epsilon Delta premedical honorary . It stars Jack Lemmon and Jason Robards .
 Seven Millsaps students tapped for membership in Alpha Psi Omega, a National dramatic fraternity . They are John C Barber, Don Carpenter, Jeff Cook, Thomas Derbes, Richard Edgerton, Rickey Graham, David Johnson, John McVay, Jackson Harper, Randy Carleton
 They are Lynn Pledger, Diane Wiltshire, Kevin Sessums, Jan Dickson, Cassandra Fowlkes, Jean Moore, and Jimmy Thrasher .
 Lloyd Gray was selected as one of 50 outstanding young leaders and college students to participate in the Mississippi Economic Council's Human Resources Seminar in Jackson last week .
 The National Teachers' Exam will be given in the AC Recital Hall Nov., from 8 am to 5 pm. The exam will be held from 8am to 5pm .
 The Mississippi Modern Language Ass. Ass. will hold its convention at Millsaps, Mississippi, Saturday .
 Richard Baltz, chairman of Economics, Accounting, and Administration, has been studying tuition data for the last five years . He has come up with some proposals on tuition and increasing the number of students at Millsaps .
 Baltz has found that tuition has risen from $2,160 to $2.496 over the last five years . Total enrollment of full-time students has fallen by less than 5 students . Baltz found that while tuition has gone up, enrollment has stayed steady .
 The increase in tuition has discouraged few people from attending Millsaps . Millsaps students say they are discouraged from attending the school .
 Lower out-of-state tuition (instead of raising it like other schools do) in order to attract more out of-state students . Lower tuition would be a way of attracting more students .
 Develop new programs and degrees to increase interest in the various departments, thus attracting more students . Develop new degrees and new programs to increase student interest .
 The Bachelor of Business Administration degree has already been proposed to the administration . The degree will be part of the university's plans to introduce a new degree to students .
 Fearing unisex toilets, female drafting, and homo sexual marriages, many people mistrust the Equal Rights Amendment support group on campus . ERA Opens Membership Rolls .
 Millsaps supporters of the amendment are not a women's lib pact, but, rather a soon to be chartered organization seeking the ratification of the ERA in Mississippi .
 In its efforts to achieve ERA ratification in this state, the organization has launched a letter-writing campaign .
 These letters to legislators will simply show the senders' support for the amendment . The letters will be sent to legislators to show their support for it .
 This evening, group members will present their objectives to two fraternities on campus . The group will meet with fraternaternities in order to present objectives .
 If you are unsure about the ERA question, take the following quiz provided by the group . The ERA question is an ERA question .
 States now have the right to regulate the separation of sexes in prisons, dormitories, military barracks, ets. States must separate sexes in dorms, dorms and military barracks . States must also decide how to separate prisoners and ets .
 David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Janette DeBoever, Sharon Edwards, Flinda Feurgeson, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Pat Gleason, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailague, Dean Pittman, Bill Ray, Derrick Shields, Mike Stevens,
 Panhellenic members found the afternoon to be tiring, but the experience proved to be very rewarding . The experience was rewarding and rewarding for Panhellenes .
 Panhellenic Counsel, under Mary Lloyd, is planning another social service project with Willowwood for later this year . Willowwood is also planning a social project with Panhellenenic Counsel .
 Willowwood School is a developmental center for mentally retarded children of all ages . The Mississippi State Fair was the setting for a funfilled afternoon with the children of Willowwood . Willowwood is located in Mississippi .
 The Millsaps Panhellenic Association members took a field trip with sixty children . The children range in age from 6 to 16 and from slightly retarded to mentally and physically handicapped .
 The Shriners of Jackson provided the children with free rides for the afternoon plus Read This The Stylus is alive — it thrives .
 The Stylus is Millsaps' literary magazine and it will come out this year . Funding has come from student activity fees and the magazines will be completed and distributed to all students free of charge next spring .
 When submitting any work, please type it if at all possible but otherwise write it very legibly in ink . Please submit any work to be submitted to the Daily Mail on Sunday .
 No exact deadline has yet been set for submission of works . Submission of works will probably be sometime in late January or February .
 If anyone desires to work with the Stylus in any way, or make any comments of any sort, or ask any questions, please contact one of the people just mentioned . They are trying to help you so write something today and turn it in .
 Henry Patton, a successful businessman well acquainted with many phases of economics on a global scale, will visit classes during the week arid give personal interviews to students by appointment .
 Mr Patton is a 1935 graduate of Princeton . He has since been involved in securities and investment banking enterprises spanning the Western Hemi45Sfe.
 At various times during hWcareer, he has served as president of such firms as Fredrick H Hatch and Co., Deltec, Deltec and American Overseas Finance Co. He has also been president of Fredrick Hatch and Company .
 In 1955, Patton took part in the uranium boom in the famous Four Corners area in the Midwest . Patton was part of a group of college friends in the area .
 A group discovered one of the major uranium ore bodies in the United States . The group discovered the U.S. uranium ore body .
 This business venture is known known as the United Nuclear Company, currently worth about $100 million . The company is currently worth $100million .
 He is devoted to the peaceful development of nuclear energy . He is there involved in various cultural projects and is there .
 The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation is devoted to increased communications between liberal arts colleges and the nonacademic worlds of business, diplomacy, and the professions . The foundation is based in Washington, DC .
 Margaret Chase Smith visited Millsaps as a Woodrow Wilson Senior Fellow for last spring . She is now a Senior Fellow at the University of Millsaps .
 John Hughes, astute political observer and author of THE LIVING PRESIDENCY, will visit Millsaps under the same program in the coming spring .
 Mr Patton will visit numerous classes during the week, particularly in economies, sociology, and political science .
 He will be available for personal appointments with students throughout the week . He will also be available to personal appointments .
 Appointments are to be handled through the office of Dean Saunders . Most weeks in Jackson there is nothing to do except gripe about there being nothing to say .
 She is the model with the gap between her front teeth; the actress with caps . She is also the model and actress with a gap between their front teeth .
 Scott is the first man to direct, star in, produce, and produce his own movie — and the studios don't like him for it . Scott is also the first person to direct and star in a movie to own own movie .
 Also Scott doesn't like the Motion Picture Rating Board because they gave the picture a Restricted Rating . Scott says he's not happy with the rating board because of the picture .
 He contends that the worst word said is ""damn,"" that there is no violence, and that there are very little sex . He contends there is very little violence and there's no sex .
 There are two stage shows coming to town this week . One at the city auditorium, the other at Millsaps . Millsaps is a Millsaps location .
 The stars that stud the cast include Myrna Loy, Ricardo Montalban, Edward Mulhare, and Werner Klemperer .
 The Claude Kipnis Mime Theatre will be at the Christian Center Auditorium on Saturday at 8:15 thanks to Millsaps Arts and Lectures Series .
 Byron Belt of New House Newspapers said that Kipnis is one of the giants of contemporary theatre . Byron Belt said that he was a 'giant' of theatre theatre .
 I know I'm therider, can't run away; invisible hands rise from black ground, tossing me into vapour . Invisible hands rise to black ground and toss me into vapor; thighs grip beating clouds .
 A great sword falls glitters from stars; Someone whispering THERE IS NO LAW . A torch appears at my side; mouths laughing There IS NO Law .
 "I have lost, along with my sense of humor, all conception of what comedy is," says Richard Quest . "The Graduate" is the "most talked-about comedy of our time," says Quest .
 "I remain perplexed that so few people should recognize the character of Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy Kennedy III," she says .
 Robinson to be the only one in the film worthy of sympathy . If her code isn't a very ice one, she at least has one, and he alone moves with purpose .
 An observant man, he succinctly parodies Spanish manners and mannerisms while setting up his scenes . An  observant man, he describes Spanish manners as "a gentleman"
 The film stars Paco Machismo and Alfredo Gazpacho . But it descends to the kind of low burlesque suggested by their names .
 While some of the situations (especially those inolving El Chicote, who suffers — in the bullring — an unbecoming fear of bulls) are nevertheless almost very funny .
 His novel is at once a nonnovel (in which incidents relate to each other) and an exquisitely exasperating exhibition of the author's impressive erudition .
 Nothing is ever what it seems to be what it looks like, says the author . "It's peopled with detectives, dwarfs and ecdysiasts," she says .
 Not by Barth, Barthelme, Borges, Kafka, Pynchon or Bonnegut, all of whom Dillard has read . Raymond Chandler, Dillard, has read Raymond Chandler .
 One wishes that Dillard would deliver a payoff less cutesyarcane than the assertion that that's-all-there-isthere-isn't-anymore . Dillard, if he feels he must spin intricate webs to entice the reader into giving up hours better
 One wishes Dillard would put his appreciable talent into a conventional novel — or, anyway, into a novel of conventional structure . Dillard leaves pyrotechnics to poorer writers who need them to be noticed .
 George Garrett, Wright Morris, Louis D Rubin, Jr. and Colin Wilson among those who already do . Colin Wilson, George Garrett and Wright Morris among those to join the ranks .
 Each generation of humankind grows bigger than the previous one, says Resnest . He proposes a novel solution for the population explosion, energy crisis, food shortage and food shortage .
 We must employ what we know about nutrition and genetic engineering in such a manner as to insure that succeeding generations of humankind will be progressively smaller . Or, anyway, we must employ . Or anyway, anyway . We must use nutrition and . genetic engineering to insure . succeeding generations . will be
 His brain enabled Man to control his environment; now, says Resnest, his bulk threatens to destroy it . But make Man smaller and in effect you enlarge his world and multiply his resources, he says .
 The know-how and technology for this bold approach already exist . Resnest acknowledges that its implementation poses problems, some even thornier than those of universal nuclear disarmament .
 John Q Public wants to be smaller . Ivan Ivanovich Ivanov doesn't want it to be bigger .
 Even though a single Big Mac would make dinner for two, John Q Public wants to be a big man . Even though the attainment of some optimal size would mean that his condominium home was — as advertised — truly spacious .
 There is another kind of problem, too, to which Resnest has not addressed his fertile mind, too . There is also a problem, he says, that he has never addressed .
 Assume that all mankind has recognized the worth of his proposal and has submitted to becoming a race of pygmies . Assume for the nonce that all . mankind has . recognized the . worth of the proposal and . has submitted .
 EL EL GRITO is a book review for the first time . The author is concerned about inflation in general and about the outrageously rising prices of foods in particular .
 President Barack Obama has asked for help and sacrifice to help his country's future . Obama has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 An informal meeting to discuss a program of action intended to encourage local foodstores to reduce their prices on selected food items . Interested persons are asked to assemble at 8:30m., Thursday, November 14th in the Colloquium Room of Elsinore .
 Initial participants will select and specify four food items and determine the prices they are willing to pay for those items . Participants will select four items and decide how much they will pay for each item . Participants can choose what items they want to buy and what prices they would pay .
 Bulletins will be sent to headquarters executives of local foodstores announcing the number of participants pledged to the program . Participants will refrain from purchasing specified items at prices higher than those they have determined .
 Each week, each participant in the program will be expected to recruit one more participant . The program will focus on recruiting one more participants .
 Each week, four additional food items will be selected, prices will be set and updated bulletins will be circulated to foodstore executives . Foodstore executives will also be given updates on how much food is available .
 Food marketing industry's inventorycontrol and buying procedures make food marketers highly sensitive to the slightest changes in consumer buying patterns . Quixotic scheme may seem at first appraisal, but the industry's sophistication of the food marketing industry makes it more sophisticated than quixotic .
 Even a small number of dedicated nonconsumers can, acting in concert, make their demands heard and their non-consumption felt . Consequently, even a few dedicated non-Consumers can .
 To make a go of the program, people with specialized knowledge — of similar consumer actions, of the food business, of possible legal ramifications — can be especially helpful . People with media and/ or foodstore contacts (no double agents, please) can be helpful .
 Lacking any special qualifications, however, you can still be immensely valuable so long as you can offer your support . You lack special qualifications but can still provide valuable support .
 Players Director Lance Goss has said that he has waited to present the play — which is the story of Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning — for a solid decade . Because of legal problems involving Robert Goulet and the rights he claimed to any American musical about the Brownings, the owners
 Goss said the play has just become available, after its highly-acclaimed run in London from 1964 to 1967 . Goss: The play is just available after it ran from 1964-1967 .
 A professional company in Chicago has already opened its production, which is to run until late November . The Millsaps production will not be the first presentation in the U.S.
 Millsaps students and faculty will be admitted free on Wednesday and Thursday nights only, upon presentation of their identification cards . Thursday and Friday, they must pay the regular price for admission — as yet unannounced .
 The play is a large musical, set in Victorian London — and in Florence — in 1845 . It is set in the Victorian London and Florence .
 The play will be directed by Goss. who is professor of theatre and chairman of the department . Goss is a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 The elaborate sets will be designed by Jackson Daily News Arts Editor Frank Hains, with musical direction by Leland Byler, chairman of the department of music and conductor of the Millsaps Singers .
 A special ballet will be choreographed by Albia Kavan Cooper . Lighting will be designed by Stanley Graham; and a special ballet is choreographed .
 Kevin Sessums and Diane Carroll have been cast in the title roles . Keith Michel and June Bronhill appeared in the original London production of the play .
 Sessums is one of seven recent initiates into Alpha Psi Omega, the national honorary dramatic fraternity . The fraternity is based in New York and Washington .
 Sessums were sophomores Diane Wiltshire of McComb, Jan Dickson of Jackson, Jimmy Thrasher of Jackson and Cassandra Fowlkes of Jackson .
 November 7, 1974 Page 7 Sports In Sight m by Ward Em ling P&W Sports Editor . Due to significant sports happenings, limited information and ample space .
 The last time such a feature appeared in the Purple and White escapes memory, and this one is extremely I will probably also escape memory . This one will be the first time I've seen this feature in the last time .
 Millsaps handed the hometown Scots a 21-7 defeat in a game marked by particularly unnecessary physical roughness .
 Frank Shaw scored on a short burst which, when coupled with Doug Brindley's extra point, gave Millsaps a 7-0 lead . After a scoreless first half, Frank Shaw's short burst led Millsaps to a comfortable lead in the first half .
 A 95-yard return of the ensuing kickoff knotted the score at 7-7 . However, a 95-year-old kickoff from the game's first play was returned to the field .
 Shaw, al«ng with the Majors, came rushing back, scoring the go-ahead touchdown on another short run . Shaw scored another short-run touchdown in the second half .
 Don Richards put it away in the fourth quarter with a 30-yard interception return to paydirt . Don Richards scored the touchdown in the first quarter .
 One Millsaps player and three Maryville players were ejected for fighting . Brindley connected on his 12th consecutive extra point of the season .
 Steve McAllily's interception is his first of the year, and his first by an experienced half-back .
 The Majors won their fourth game of the year against two losses . Head Coach Harper Davis of his eighth non-losing season in a row .
 Texas on 9 for la bout with tin College, and returns home their season's finale against Trinity College, a week later .
 The tennis Majors host the Mississippi State netters Friday, November 8 . The Millsaps tennis team is ranked No. 1 in the tennis rankings .
 Coach Jim Montgomery and his racquet persons will attract some merited success, status and perhaps even a few spectators . Coach Montgomery and racquet people will be hoping to attract some success .
 NFL Monday Night Football was in for a treat during half-time . NFL fans were treated to a special treat during the half time break .
 Muhammad Ali is the new heavyweight champion of the world . Muhammad Ali has been crowned the new world heavyweight champion . The interview was a fine interview with Muhammad Ali .
 A girl, the first ever in San Francisco 49's area history, participated in the Punt, Pass and Kick Competition . She is the first girl to participate in the competition .
 Orleand 48, Miami 2 Miss 0, Open 7 Wofford 37, Catawba 26 . L.S. Millsaps 24, Austin 10 Mississippi State 21, Auburn 16 Alabama 16 Alabama 31, Alabama 31 .
 "The Longest Yard" is definitely worth seeing at the Deville Cinema in Deville .
 Millsaps was the first to light up the scoreboard for Millsaps . Millsaps scored the first goal of the game .
 Majors executed a five play, 56-yard scoring drive in the second quarter . The Majors execute a five-play-long scoring drive to win the game .
 Rick Haygood's 15-yard touchdown sprint was the big gainers in the drive . Haygood threw 18-yard pass to ace receiver Sonny Aldy and a 19-yard run by fullback Charlie Goldberg .
 McMurray replied to the Millsaps tally with a touchdown of their own . The Indians eaptured the lead on a 37-yard field goal which had been set by a pass interception deep in Millsaps territory .
 The scoring drive was capped by a 35-yard touchdown toss to wingback Dees Hinton in his only reception of the day . It was the only touchdown touchdown of the game for the Lions .
 McMurray mounted their go-ahead touchdown drive with little over five minutes to go . Millsaps remained in control of the game, however, until late in the fourth quarter when they scored .
 Millsaps' drive was ended by two possible interference calls from the Millsaps backfield . Millsaps had two plays inside the 10-yard line and the other in the end zone .
 A few minutes later, the Indians ambushed John Kirby in Millsaps territory on a mixed-up punt . The Indians were ambushed in the end of the first half .
 The Majors were outgained in every department . The Millsaps were outmatched by the Millsaps .
 The size and strength of the McMurray defensive line is evident by the lack of rushing yardage and the fact that Haygood was dumped behind the line for a minus 61 yards .
 Skip Wieniewitog and Goldberg led what rushing attack there was with 48 and 44 yards, respectively .
 The receiving department was led by Aldy who hauled in four passes for 50 yards . Aldy hauled in 50 yards for the team .
 Kirby also had four receptions for 11 yards, added 26 on the ground and sent nine punts into the air for a 37. yard average . Kirby also added 26 yards for the team in total .
 Haygood hit on 11 of his 21 passing attempts, suffering one interception . Haygood was the only player to throw an interception on his 21 attempts .
 Linebacker Phillip Maples led the Majors' defensive charge with 12 tackles, seven assists and one interception . Maples also had seven assists, one interception and seven tackles .
 Howard Smith sacked the Indian quarterback twice . Greg Freeman and Jeb Dominek each added eight tackles for the team . Howard Smith sacks the Indian QB twice .
 The Major's lost the game for the first time this season . The loss was the second of the season for the Major's against three shutout wins .
 After an open week the Majors were to travel to Maryville College for a November 2 bout .
 The Pikes won the championship with a 7-0-1 record . The men's intramural soccer season ended this week with the Pikes winning the championship .
 Bill Mann, Doug Minor, and Richard Edgerton provided the scoring for the Victors . Bill Mann and Doug Minor scored the scoring in the victory .
 George Krcbs scored two unassisted goals and assisted on the other to lead the Lambda Chi's to a 3-1 victory over the Sigs . The Lambda Champs won the game 3-2 .
 Life 15 NOT LIFE AT ALL WITHOUT DELICHT Victory in Defeat . ' Victory in Victory' is a victory in defeat . Punctuate your life with pleasures. Life 15 is not life without delicHT .
 A short pause for a Coke means a full stop to tiring work and a fresh start refreshed . A short stop for a Coca-Cola means a stop for work and the rest of the day refreshed .
 Allen Bishop stated that he was upset with this approach and called for facts — a debate between faculty members ensued . Allen Bishop said that this approach was wrong and that facts were facts .
 The Publications Committee was at the end of tense debate directed to conduct an investigation, to consider guidelines for publication, and to present its report before the committee .
 November 7, 1974 possibility of developing Placement Office at Millsaps to aid students in finding jobs and entering graduate schools . Fidelity Rank UTICA NORTH WEST STREET JACKSON 1894 .
 Dean Saunders stated that the proposal would be handled through established procedure . Dennis Wells of the senior class was concerned about the future of the school . Dean Saunders said the proposal will be handled by established procedure, but Dennis Wells was concerned .
 Robert Shive ended by calling for a study of the efficiency of the scheduling process . Shive also called for the study into the scheduling system .
 We've got Pancakes, over 20 different kinds, from Georgia Pecan to French to BananaNut Pancakes . We're looking at over 20 kinds of pancakes .
 Strawberry Waffles heaped with fruit and ringed with whipped cream . Plus fabulous Waffles, such as our Strawberry Waffle heaped fruit .
 According to the plan, wheellocks will be placed on all cars in no-parking zones, making them immobile . The plan will be implemented in the near future .
 The owner must pay a $5 fine to the business office in order to have the lock removed . Owner must also pay $5 to remove the lock from a business office .
 If after 24 hours the owner has not paid, or arranged to pay, the car will be towed away and kept in lock with an additional $5 fine . The car will also be kept locked in lock and fined $5 for 24 hours .
 Faculty members of the College Senate praised the plan which originated in the Student Senate for its ingenuity and simplicity . The plan was created by students and faculty members at the university .
 Student senators had been concerned that registration of cars was an unworkable method and that the tow-away method (entailing a $25 fee) was unreasonable . Student senators were concerned that the registration of vehicles was an unfair method .
 A committee was established to study the feasibility and rationality of having football at Millsaps . Other action was also established to examine the feasibility of having a football team .
 A proposal to eliminate the program failed in a student referendum two years ago . Two years ago a proposal to cut it failed in the student referendum .
 Student Senate considered several proposals by Senator Dennis Wells as the main order of the day . Wells proposed several proposals in a meeting last week, Nov. 11 .
 The first, a letter of congratulations to the football team and coaches, was adopted by the school .
 The second proposal called for the monetary regulation of the P&W with regard to the article ""Visits with Vinaruhu"" and any other such writings that might appear in the student press . The proposal also called for monetary regulation .
 Senator Diane McMullen and Senator Mike Stevens voted against the motion . The motion failed unanimously . The vote was held at Millsaps College Volume 90 Number 90 .
 Four other proposals introduced by Senator Wells in absentia through substitute Senator Mark Eppes failed unanimously also failed unanimously . Wells was absent from the Senate .
 The final proposal to appoint a committee to study the tuition plan of Dr. Dr. John Defterios is being considered .
 A motion to direct the Publications Committee to conduct a survey of student opinion of the P&W was introduced by Senator May Lipe Zehnder . In final action, a motion was introduced to direct a poll on student opinion .
 Motion passed as a survey to study what students -i. want in a school paper . Motion passed to study students' views on what they want in school papers .
 Bill to aid private college students supported ai w St by Robert Gaston . Millsaps College, along with all of the other private higher educational institutions in s state have been lobbying for what is commonly called a tuition equalization bill .
 Nine accredited institutions (Millsaps, Belhaven, Blue Mountain, Clarke, Rust, and William Carey, William Carey) are accredited institutions .
 The Mississippi Association of Private Colleges have organized a private college association in Mississippi .
 The tuition equalization bill would provide cash renumeration to Mississippi students of private colleges in the state . In brief, the bill would give cash to private colleges students of Mississippi .
 The rationale underlying this grant of money from the state is that parents of students from Mississippi pay state taxes higher education without eiving direct benefit from these taxes . Parents of Mississippi students pay state tax higher education .
 Bill proponents argue the grants will make the more exve private schools more cessible . Also, since the private institutions take part of the burden away from public schools, bill proponents argue . Bill proponents say bill will make more money from private institutions .
 Currently, state supported colleges are receiving more than three times the amount per student which the bill would provide for private college students . The bill would also provide more money per student for state supported college students.
 The association stresses that it is the individual student who must apply for and receive these grants . The grants are available to students from across the globe .
 The private schools of ssissippi are experiencing the economic crunch like all of the colleges across the nation . Private schools in the state of Mississippi are experiencing an economic crunch .
 The bill was defeated in our state legislature in past years for several reasons . The bill has been defeated in previous years for reasons .
 Amendments were tacked on, one of which expanded the bill's coverage to private elementary dary schools . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives last week .
 The Supreme Court has ruled that state aid to segregated schools was unconstitutional . Most of these schools in Mississippi fit into this category .
 The original bill would not have been unconstitutional, as several states already have such a program . The original law would have not been unconstitutional .
 Another argument against the bill was the separation of church and state controversy, since most of the schools are church related .
 It should be recalled that the aid is to go to the student, not to the school directly . The aid is not to be given directly by the school, but by the student .
 There have been numerous rumors flying about as a result of the October 19th Concert held in the Athletic Complex . Tuition assistance will permit middleincome students to choose an alternative to the concert .
 Apparently there has been a great deal of misunderstanding both on the parts of students and faculty . Students and faculty have been involved in the controversy over the incident .
 Millsaps students would be admitted free upon presentation of a current Millsaps I D . All non-students would be charged $5.00 in advance or $6.00 at the door . The Senate would be responsible for rental of the gymnasium, procurement of security guards
 The Senate rented the gymnasium and two additional rooms in the building for approximately $530 . Millsaps College has a policy that in the event of off-campus organizations participating in events where admission is charged, sponsoring organizations must pay a standard rental fee to Millsaps .
 Use of the gymnasium for the purpose of a musical concert was approved by the Administrative Council . The use of the Gymnasium was approved for the concert .
 Major officials (including Dean Saunders, Dean Woodward, Mr Wood, Coach Montgomery, and Coach Montgomery) had been informed of the event .
 Verification of the supposed indestructability of the floor came from the Director of Services . Verification was confirmed by the director of services .
 It was asked by one or more members of the faculty why the concert was not stopped when certain acts were discovered or when so many ""outsiders"" attended .
 To have ended the concert early would have been a violation of a legal contract, and a suit could have been filed . The concert was held in New York City .
 The crowd of over 2,000 would have not responded favorably to a premature abortion of the show which they had paid, and I need not discuss the sociological implications of an angry crowd in a small area . The crowd was angry at the premature abortion .
 Now that this problem has been discovered the danger of more serious accidents will be prevented . More serious accidents are likely to be prevented by this discovery .
 Further damage that could result from future events (basketball games, rodeos, etc. etc. can now be prevented . Further damage could be prevented.
 There were several complaints about this concert, and many were deserved . The concert was held in New York City .
 This was a trial run for that building — the acid test . One must remember, though, that this . event was a . trial run .
 Everyone watched to see just how much it could take, and saw what it couldn't handle . Everyone watched the film to see how much they could take and how much could take .
 "To use the promoters and sponsors as whipping boys for the event is entirely out of place. To use the promoter and sponsors . as whipping boy for the . event is out of the place," says John Defterios .
 "To those persons who were legitimately inconvenienced by any part of the concert and/ or its effects, I offer my most sincere apologies," he says .
 To those who have maliciously instigated and perpetrated rumors which cast aspersions on the Student Senate and the sponsors of this concert, I offer no apologies but rather my right middle phalanx . To those persons who have . maliciously . instigated, perpetrated rumors, cast as
 Millsaps secured $6 million in just one deft sweep . Millsaps has been at Millsaps for some time .
 The conqueror is, of course, President Collins who merits the applause of the Millsaps community for bringing home the bread .
 We're forced to wonder how much time one has for the actual administration of a school while engaged in such an effort . But we are forced to ask if one has time to think about the school administration .
 The administration has devoted almost no time to the problems of the student or faculty member, the authors say . It has been our contention that the administration under President Collins has devoted little time to students' problems .
 "The utter lack of social or intellectual stimulation outside the classroom with a few exceptions is astounding," the author says . "The complete lack of stimulation outside of the classroom is astounding"
 Most seem to have a vague sense of being cramped at Millsaps and the problem is physical (e.g., the Student Center) as well as social . Millsaps has a reputation for being cramped as a college campus .
 The administration runs the school so that nothing is done without moving mountainous institutions . "Nothing is done with moving mountains," says the school president .
 Student government is part of the problem because it becomes bogged down with small matters, ignores innovation, and rarely challenges faculty or administration . Student government should be able to challenge faculty, administration, student says .
 Millsaps functions as a collection of communities, not a college community, says Millsaps . Millsaps is a community college, but it's not a university community, it's a community .
 This obvious segmentation is a product and promoter of the other problems. This is not the only one of the problems we face, it's the other one .
 Only the administration with its monopoly of power can approach these problems effectively, says President Obama . Obama's administration has a monopoly on power to solve these problems .
 Students and faculty are the life of a college, not contributors and administration . Unfortunately, they fail to see that students, faculty and staff are the college's life of the college .
 Emily Wof ford's attack calls to mind Scarlett O'Hara's confrontation with that Yankee soldier on the stairwell of Tara: she shot him . Emily W of ford: "Emily shot him. She shot him"
 I think our Miss Emily brought it off with more panache than Miss Scarlett . She brought off the occasion with a flourish of panache, rather than a dash of style .
 She then pistol whip his corpse and heave it over the banister . Not content with emptying her derringer into him, she then pistol whipped his corpse .
 One has a hunch that Miss Wofford, in this best of all possible worlds, would resent whatever disturbed the status quo . She would resent what disturbed the current status quo.
 Until then, you drift languidly with the stream, fondle the water lilies, keep your crinoline umbrella twirling . Until then' you will be able to enjoy the rest of your life in the sunshine .
 In a world bounded by the banalities of the Greeks and the breathless insipidity of elections to the court of a Homecoming Queen . The editorial policy of the P & W is no doubt equivalent to crocodiles in rut in the lily pond .
 Miss Woff ord's shrieks of frustration is there any talk about what the P & W should be . Nowhere, though, has been discussed about what it should be.
 Student Senate seems as bereft of Jdgas as everybody else . Student publications committees at both the College Senate and Student Senate levels seem to be bereft .
 The editorial objectives of the Editor, as I understand them, are to educate, inform and in the process create some excitement . The Editor's objective is to educate and inform and create excitement .
 Laudable objectives regardless of what is thought of his means he means to achieve them . The President of the United States should be proud of his achievements, he says .
 What is needed here is a P & W Advisory Committee to whom the Editor may turn for intelligent advice and counsel . What is really needed is an Advisory Committee for the Editor to whom he may turn .
 With such a device, students and faculty, including Miss W. W. and her smoking derringer, might produce a newspaper worthy of the name .
 For now, Millsaps alcohol fans can breathe a sigh of relief . Sincerely Howard Bavender To Alcohol Fans .
 Mississippi State Law prohibiting beer at educational institutions does not apply to private colleges . The administration is aware that the law does not extend to private universities .
 Defending the right of Millsaps tudents to drink grain made beer in the middle of a'&strophic famine might allude to misplaced priorities . But something else here is involved .
 The underlying issues are certain reasoning processes, and the prevalent attitude, reflected through administrative policy and Judicial Council rulings, concerning the mentality and maturity of Millsaps students . Millsaps has a history of not allowing students to leave the school .
 They reasoned that since beer was forbidden to Mississippi citizens under 18, they as policy makers shared this responsibility of prohibition . Policy makers say they shared responsibility for prohibition .
 The Council implied to the defendants that the administration and the Board of Trustees shared this feeling . The Council also implied that the defendants' lawyers and the board of trustees share this feeling.
 Under-eighteens are not forbidden by state law from drinking alcohol in private homes . Under eights are not allowed to drink alcohol in their homes .
 State law does not seek to shield under-eighteens from exposure to alcohol, but only to restrict its sale . State law doesn't seek to protect under-8s from exposure, but to restrict alcohol sales .
 The Council did not rule on the legality of beer on campus, but President Collins will . President Collins is expected to make a decision on the matter .
 Dean Woodward said President Collins is sure to rule against having it anywhere on campus . Woodward: President Collins will rule against allowing it to be used at campus .
 Collins and no doubt the Board of Trustees must feel that the under-eighteens on this campus are of such fragile moral fiber and so incapable of reasoning as to need shelter from the lures of alcohol .
 At the age of 15 and 16, first tutored at Miami-Dade Community College . Now a 17-year-old Millsaps student, he is living on this campus .
 Even if some students under the age barrier do need ""protection"" is it correct to compromise the rights of the vast majority of over-eighteens for the ""benefit"" of these few?
 If certain students were found to have disturbed the peace of other students by holding loud beer parties, it is incorrect to use this as a reason for banning beer is incorrect . Students should not be allowed to hold loud parties, according to the university .
 A party that disturbed the peace and damaged property should be tried for disturbing the peace, not for being a ""beer"" party . A ""beer" party should not be a beer party, it should be a 'beer' party, not a beer' party .
 A reexamination of the archaic attitudes that seem predominately influential in administrative actions is definately in the near future . A re-examination of these attitudes is definitely in the future .
 I rushed to the door as fast as I could, hoping that the fire had not devoured my beloved tutor . The fire broke out in the early hours of the morning .
 "I knew I had to hurry, when the flames hit the Mad Dog it would be all over," says the author of the book . "When I saw this, I knew I needed to hurry," says author .
 There was Vinaruhu, standing in the middle of the floor carefully tending a small pile of burning papers . He was standing next to the burning pile .
 Collins or Saunders had nothing to do with it, says Saunders . But I don't know why you think Collins and Saunders had a little bit of a thing to do it .
 Vinaruhu was getting nervous, but I could see he wasn't going to break . "I could see him not breaking," he said. "I'm not scared, but he's not scared," he added .
 There are those who must dissent They have feelings they must vent They should say what they please Long as it never disagrees Vinaruhu does the Rose Mary Stretch lob .
 Vinaruhu once again showed his profound grasp of the workings of Millsaps College . And for the next 15 minutes he showed that .
 Vinaruhu began by explaining why there was nothing to fear from the students . He also explained why there were no problems with the students' safety .
 Dennis Wells had studied Constitutional Law, but Vinaruhu said that doesn't mean that he believes the First Amendment has any business being practiced at Millsaps . Wells studied constitutional law, but said he doesn't think it should be allowed to practice .
 The attitude of the many faculty members was well expressed several years ago by Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge . He said the attitude of faculty members is well expressed .
 Vinaruhu explained that Saunders had over reacted and applied early pressure on the P & W editor . He and Collins would not presume to oppose freedom of the press .
 Even if evidence led to the top no one would have the balls to point the finger . They would give their encouragement knowing that even if evidence . led to a top, they would give encouragement knowing they would not have to point out the top .
 Mothre Millsaps was once again showing her penchant for rectangles . I left with the realization that in that great educational effort to shape well rounded individuals .
 A Setback at Millsaps be concept of academic and intellectual freedom, uninhibited by censorship or external pressures, is one of the most vital components of a je education . The idea of academic freedom is a vital component of a university education .
 "It cannot be abandoned in any degree, even when such abandonment would be expedient at the time," says President Obama . "It is not an easy decision to abandon it, but it is a matter of principle," says Obama .
 This concept has usually been maintained most admirably at Millsaps, even in the face of very hostile external pressure from local envirirons . Millsaps is one of the world's most successful universities .
 RNA President Imari Obadele was denied privilege of speaking on the Millsaps campus this semester . The RNA president was also denied privilege to speak at Millsaps .
 Gay advocate Eddie Sandifer spoke on campus several weeks ago . President Collins began receiving complaints from citizens, alumni, and various other people .
 "All of these folks were a bit freaked out because we had a homosexual here, with the potential of filling us full of perversion and immorality," the author says . The author's book is published in New York, New York and London .
 Imari Obadele was asked to speak at Millsaps to explain the concept of Black nationalism and the RNA to a predominantly White audience . Not long after Collins caught this heavy flak, it was requested from outside that he be allowed to speak .
 The Public Events Committee approved the visit, but decided to check with the President to make sure he had no objection to it .
 Collins did not order the Committee to reconsider their action . However, he requested that they do so and temporarily deny Obadele the opportunity to speak .
 Collins opposes such control and wants to deal with the Board before the situation becomes even more inflamed by something like Obadele's speech . Collins says he wants to avoid further escalation of the situation .
 Public Events Committee decided not to invite RNA spokesman, temporarily . RNA spokesman was invited to speak at RNA convention in New York .
 Collins' discouragement caused the denial since the Committee had earlier approved the speech . Although other factors influenced the Committee members, it was obviously other factors that caused the decision .
 Collins did not order the denial of the Obadele request . It is to Collins' credit that he didn't order the request, Collins said .
 There exists a certain apprehension that he would even try to influence the selection and prevention of a speaker on campus . Trustee-dealing expediencies such as fund-raising and Trustees are key to campus fund raising .
 Who does and does not speak at Millsaps is really not any business of alumni or financial donors . Even if they are paranoid about their money being used to support homosexuality and the takeover of Mississippi by bomb-hurling Black nationalists .
 Collins' business isn't going to be a success in the U.S. even when other factors such as money are involved . Collins says he's not worried about his business .
 Obadele might come to campus in the spring, but it still sets a precedent for what could become a practice that inhibits the freedom of the education here at Millsaps . The incident is not of dramatic import .
 When raising money and pacifying alumni begins to influence the scope of information and speakers allowed on this campus, the value of that education is endangered . The value of the education at U.S. colleges is endangered, the author says .
 Jl' s a Page 4 The City Jackson Urban League by Mike Stevens .
 The ultimate goal of the League is to achieve parity for black Americans in all areas of human life, the League says . The League says it wants parity for blacks in all aspects of life .
 The League recognizes divisiveness as their greatest obstacle and it tries to function as a bridge across the gaps which divide people . The League is dedicated to bridging the gaps between people .
 The League is a bridge between black and white, the powerful and powerless, the informed and uninformed . The League was founded in 1964 and is now based in New York .
 "The Urban League moves with the times, and is always in a state of reassessment and redesign," says the Urban League . The Urban League says it is "in a state-of-reassessment" and redesigns .
 The Jackson Urban League is Jackson's only full time voluntary social service organization . It is working to further the allimportant cause of equitable and just relations between people of all races and classes .
 The purpose of the League is to eliminate the existing differentials in life chances between black Americans and others . The League's purpose is to "eliminate the existing differences in life chance"
 Recently, there has been a lot of talk around campus about making soccer Millsap's sixth varsity sport . The Jackson Urban League is organized under a board of Montgomery Centers on Soccer Proposal .
 As it stands now, intercollegiate soccer is played by a team of Millsaps students on an extracurricular basis . The team is currently playing on the campus of the Millsaps .
 There are no credit for those participating and no requirements concerning discipline and attendance . That is, there is no credit . There is no requirement for discipline or attendance .
 This inevitably results in a weekly make-shift team of the intermittently interested which, needless to say, has a difficult time in holding its own against most rivals . This week's team is made up of just a handful of players .
 There is a will, there should also be a way and that is what the varsity proposal would produce . But where there is there is a way, there is also a way to get around the world .
 The Millsaps campus is full of persons who are very interested in participating in intercollegiate soccer but because of the lack of organization do not participate . Millsaps students are full of people who want to participate in soccer but not .
 Athletic Director Jim Montgomery's proposal would give it that organization . The proposal would be the first time the organization has been given an organization . Montgomery: "It's a great organization. It's a good organization. We need it"
 Albert Lyle of Jackson would probably be a permanent coach . Lyle, through his voluntary unpaid coaching, has been responsible for what little organization has had .
 This would end the tedious process of waking persons up on Saturday mornings in an effort to field a team . This would be the first time a team has fielded a team in the United States .
 Varsity soccer would provide the incentive that is needed to make the program function properly . It would provide an incentive that would be needed for the program to succeed .
 There would probably be a ten game fall schedule, five games being played here, that would be worked around the football schedule . Five games would be played in the fall .
 The proposal would allow members of the varsity team to also compete in intramural soccer . The proposal, at least until it reaches maturity, would allow the players to play intramurial soccer .
 Coach Montgomery, who is the former president of the Mississippi Soccer Association, is highly optimistic about the idea .
 Montgomery claimed that it would induce some parties to play for reasons other than pure love of the game . Montgomery further claimed that some parties would play for other reasons . Montgomery said it would be more difficult for the game to be played on a level level .
 Coach Monty also said that other colleges in the Jackson area are planning to take this step . He said other colleges are also planning to do it .
 Belhaven and Tougaloo are almost assuredly going to adopt it . Mississippi College and Southern Mississippi will probably follow . Belhaven is almost assured that it will be adopted by Belhaven .
 Montgomery says, "We want to get in on the ground floor" Montgomery says he wants to get a quick approval for the project .
 The proposal would surely enhance Millsaps' ability to recruit students . Millsaps has a history of recruiting students .
 Atlanta, which is one of Millsaps' prime recruiting areas, inhabits an estimated 8000 soccer players . Coach Montgomery pointed out that Atlanta is a prime recruiting area .
 A good soccer program would surely be a plus for the Millsaps Admissions Department . Millsaps has a history of recruiting success .
 Millsaps has played about five or six soccer games at a total cost of about $30 dollars . So far this year, Millsaps is playing soccer at a cost of $30 a year .
 The sport would, of course, incur its required costs but little over and above that . Upon receiving varsity status, the sport would pay little over the required costs .
 The proposal would have the Student Government fund the program for the remainder of this year through its control over the intramural budget . Student Government would control the budget through control over intramorial budget .
 Coach Montgomery says Student Senate funding would only be for this year and that in subsequent years, he hopes to have it allotted for in the varsity budget .
 To be recognized as such, the proposal must be brought before the College's Intramural Committee which is composed of three faculty, two students, and Coach Montgomery as an ex office member .
 The hearings would be held early next month and the conclusive recommendations would be made to the Administration and President Collins .
 With the benefits that could probably be obtained and with the absence of any major problems, there should be no reason why this proposal should not be actualized . With the beneficient results that could be obtained, there are no major problems .
 It would benefit many and would inconvenience, at most, very few directors which are strong, active, and interracially mixed . It would be a boon to the community which is strong and active, but would inconvenience many .
 It represents varied segments of the Jackson community . It supports the concept of sound professional leadership in the execution of its program .
 The full responsibility for selection and direction of its staff is in the hands of the executive director, Irwin C Walker . The full responsibilities for the organisation's staff are currently in charge of selecting and directing staff .
 Overall, the membership of the Urban League has a ratio of 2:1, black to white . The Urban League membership is black-to-white . The membership is based on the ratio of black and white .
 The League implements programs designed to assure and protect the equal rights, privileges, and opportunities of blacks and other minority groups in the community .
 The League operates in such areas as economic development and employment, housing, education, and health and welfare, and community organization .
 The major challenge facing the black population is to broaden employment opportunities, says the minister . The minister says the challenge is to broad employment opportunities .
 The Jackson Urban League maintains close contact with industries and city, state and federal agencies for employment opportunities for its clientele . The Urban League hopes to solve this problem .
 Up-to-date files are kept on job seekers and matching places individuals in the proper jobs . The files are used to keep people in the correct jobs .
 The League is currently sponsoring the Labor Education Advancement Program which places young minority men in the construction field as apprentices . The League sponsors the program .
 In the area of housing, the League works with public and private agencies to bring needed relief on individual collective basis .
 The League works for neighborhood improvements in rehabilitation and construction to blighted areas . The League also works for rehabilitation of blighted neighborhoods .
 Additional help is received from various HUD-FHA assisted programs and rent suppliment programs under the National Housing Act . Additional assistance is provided by HUD assisted programs .
 The League continues to support integrated public education . Recognizing that education is vital for the survival of the black community, the League .
 It also offers special G.E.D training programs and evening adult education programs .
 The League operates with various health and welfare agencies for more effective communication . In the area of health and . welfare the League works with . various health . agencies . The League has been in contact with the world's leading health agencies .
 Counseling service aimed at improving the life chances is offered as well as planned parenthood counseling . Counseling services are also offered to improve life chances .
 The League also operates a Big Brother program in which adult men offer to be the ""big brother"" of fatherless boys . The League operates Big Brother programs .
 For more community organization, the League has initiated a New Thrust Program . The League has also initiated an "New Thrust Program"
 In this way you aid community residents in recognizing their problems and then helping to develop programs to meet the particular needs .
 The Jackson Urban League strives to be a community organizing tool . Throughout these and other efforts, the Urban League aims to be an organizing tool for the community .
 Grilled Frank 1.29 Grilled Hot Dog 65 Chih Dog 65 Chili Bun 80 Chili Bun 75 New Orleans hot dog 65 Chili bun 65 Grilled Dog 65 . Grilled hamburger 65.5 Grilled Chicken 65.3 Grilled Beef 65 .
 The completion of the much talked about Millsaps swimming pool is re-scheduled to be completed, hopefully, with the first snowfall . Millsaps is hoping to finish the project in the spring .
 Since its ground breaking, this Millsaps building project has been literally beseiged with common and not so common construction problems . The Millsaps Building has been plagued by construction problems since it was ground breaking .
 The foreboding of possible doom to the project came earlier in the school year with the rain, delaying construction on numerous occasions . The rain delayed construction of the project .
 Although late, the swimming pool project seemed back on some sort of schedule, until recently . The pool project seems back on track until recently, but is still in doubt .
 In actuality, surmounting problems, not blatantly noticeable, have hindered any further progress in achieving ""perfect" completion of the pool . In fact, surmounted problems have hindered progress .
 President Collins and others involved are striving for completeperfection before opening the pool in order to weed out possible future problems . President Collins said the pool will be used in the future .
 President Collins explains the obstacles facing the construction of the new pools . President Collins also listed efforts in negating these problems . The pools will be built in the fall .
 Perhaps the most crucial problem is that of the fundamental construction of the pool . Perhaps the biggest is that the pool is being built in the wrong way .
 For the past few weeks efforts have been directed at locating the place of ""seepage from the pool" for the first time . Efforts have been made to locate the place where the pool is located .
 This obstacle outweighs the others, although no direct blame has been laid for its cause . No direct blame was laid for the cause of the problem, but it has been blamed for it .
 Two other problems figure in the delay of the Septemberplanned opening of the Sydney Opera House . The September opening will be delayed by more than a year .
 The school claimed that the original contract provided for a drainage ditch by the pool to stop alien water from contaminating the chlorinated water in the pool . The school said that the contract had been provided for the ditch to stop the contamination .
 The constructor refused to fulfill this questioned obligation . However, disputing the clause, the constructor did not fulfill this question .
 The past few weeks were spent on negotiations, of sort, which ended in favor of Millsaps . No action in beginning the ditch has begun, but no action has been made .
 A second problem will delay the pools opening date by at least three months more . The pools' opening date will be delayed by three more months .
 The heater, however, cannot be installed until all ""the bugs are out of the pool"" and the independent agency can move in . The heater will be installed, but it is not installed until the pool is cleaned up .
 Any question concerning dorm rules may be directed to Dee Dee Woroner, Brenda Millstead, Sue Humphrey, Celeste Draffen, or Evalyn Bishop . Any question about dorm rules should be answered by the team of staff .
 The proposal contained certain provisions describing what a placement office should do . The proposal contains certain provisions .
 The primary goal would be to help place Millsaps students and graduates in worthwhile job positions or the best graduate schools attainable . Millsaps grads and graduates would be placed in worthwhile jobs positions or in the best grads .
 These files could be sent to any firm or graduate school that a Millsaps student requested . Millsaps students could use them to send them to any law firm or school that they requested .
 A placement office must provide for, coordinate and publicize major job and graduate school interview sessions on this campus regularly throughout the year . The proposal's definition of a placement office is based on the definition of the proposal .
 This year such sessions were held under the direction of the Sociology department and the Chaplain's Committee . This year's sessions took place at the University of Cambridge .
 The placement office would constantly maintain relations with industry in the Jackson areas . Students would be able to easily find out about job opportunities in the area by checking with the placement office .
 These are things that are done by placement offices at other schools, such as large universities with thousands of students . The placement offices are often used to place students at large universities .
 The registrar's office maintains files with regards to the scholastic records of Millsaps students . Millsaps is a school that has a history of teaching excellence .
 Office of Alumni Relations and Church Affairs located in Whitworth Hall maintains files with information about the various achievements of alumni .
 The problem exists that the information maintained in these two offices is not coordinated for the use of trying to place Millsaps students in good job positions or good graduate schools . But the information is not used to help students find good jobs or good graduations .
 What is needed is an office that can take this available information and put it to use . What is really needed is a government office to take this information into account .
 The heart of the proposal is to meet this problem by proposing the development of a separate placement office, adequately staffed and under the control of the President's office only .
 At present there is a kind of placement division with the Office of Alumni Relations and Church Affairs .
 The staff for this division is too small and is primarily used for the work involving alumni and church relations with the college . The staff is used to work with alumni, church relations .
 These are problems which require solution by the development of an independent placement office . The placement office should be set up to deal with the problem .
 Such an office will be recognizable and known and can put its funds and manpower to use in helping place Millsaps students and graduates where they wish to be . The Millsaps will need to be recognized and known, such an office would be recognizable .
 Students at Millsaps need to know what are the best schools they can get in, what these schools will cost and what they can provide . Millsaps students need to be prepared for the growing demand for seats in graduate schools .
 Students need to know the best job opportunities available for liberal arts majors . The college is a liberal arts college and because job positions are few for liberals arts majors, students need to be aware of the job opportunities .
 A placement office can provide students with a good introduction to graduate schools and good jobs . Placement office can also provide an effective introduction to good jobs and graduate schools .
 The administration and faculty do recognize that there is a need for a placement office . The placement office will be set up at the University of Cambridge .
 There is always the problem of funding and, of course, at a private college, money is always scarce . However, there are always the problems of funding .
 Second part of proposal is to work with Belhaven, Tougaloo, Mississippi College, and Jackson State in setting up a Jackson college's placement office .
 Proportional funding by each of the colleges might not have to be so great and the quality of the office would not have been sacrificed . Proportions by each college would not need to be much greater .
 There is a need for a placement office for Millsaps students and that there is a way to provide for such an office . Well, I hope that you are convinced that there are a need .
 If there is an issue that the student body of this college could and needs to actively rally behind, it is this. Now, if there is there is a student body that could and should rally behind this issue, it will be this. The student body needs to rally around this issue
 A good placement office can make a big contribution in getting you at the best position you can have after you graduate . Remember academic freedom, beer in the dorms, visitation and other issues are minute compared to what graduate school or what job you are going to be in after graduation .
 It's insane to think that some Millsaps students who are supposed to be a cut above the other students in Mississippi wind up as waiters or gas station attendants or even janitors after they graduate . Millsaps is one of the most expensive and best schools in Mississippi .
 If you're concerned about the need for a placement office, write the Purple and White, talk to a class officer or even go by and see President Collins and tell him .
 The more people that express the need for a placement office to President Collins or a member of the Board of Trustees the more important the idea of a college placement office will be and the more likely it will become a reality .
 George C Scott has always been surrounded by controversy . The actor has a history of controversy surrounding him . He has been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 He once starred in a television show that tried to deal honestly with race relations in a big city police department before such subjects were chic . The show, which he starred in, was a reality show about race relations .
 He has spoken freely on talk shows about his crazy business and the people in it who make it that way . He has always spoken freely .
 His criticism and subsequent rejection of the Oscar brought condemnation from many of his peers and shocked outcries from that vast part of the American populous that reads movie magazines . And, of course, his criticism of the Academy Award brought condemnation .
 He has gone one step further and thumbed his nose at the entire movie industry by taking it upon himself to star in, direct, produce, and distribute his current motion picture .
 After seeing the results of his efforts, "The Savage is Loose" I think the strain was too much. "I think the strains were too much."
 The movie is about a teacher who is shipwrecked on a desert island with his wife and baby son . The movie was based on the story of a teacher shipwrecking on a deserted island .
 The tension slowly builds slowly, slowly builds until she finally gives in at the very end of the film . "The tension slowly slowly builds and builds up to the end," she says .
 She kisses him on the mouth, and we're led to believe she gives in . That is, she kisses him, and he kisses her on the lips .
 Instead of searching the horizon for a ship to pass like we do in most desert island movies, we simply search the screen for some action to take place . Instead of looking for ships to pass, we look for action in this desert island movie .
 "There were so many chances for character development, plot development, etc., but nothing ever came of them," says author . "Nothing ever came from them," she says .
 "The only thing I recognized developing was a sense of boredom in the audience. In fact, the only thing that I recognized was the sense of the audience being bored," she said .
 It seemed as if Scott was so busy with his other duties that he had no time to memorize his lines, so had to read them from cue cards . Scott, so brilliant in other pieces, was so often brilliant in others .
 L Abroad at Millsaps by Cathy Passailague . The student seeking an education in a foreign country is destined to encounter cultural barriers .
 Inescapable as these barriers are, they can be overcome, or at least understood, so as to make an opportunity to study abroad profitable . Students should be able to make a study abroad a profitable option .
 Marisol and Carmen Luz Valenzuela are natives of Chile and students at Millsaps . They overcome the natural language barrier to communicate with each other .
 The social differences between Chile and the U.S. have been noted in the past . But they have encountered differences in the social cultures and customs of both countries .
 Marisol, a freshman, and her sister, Carmen Luz, a sophomore, agree that people are basically the same everywhere . The environment is what makes such striking differences in people of different countries, the sisters say .
 People in the U.S. tend to be more indifferent than people in Chile, study finds . People in Chile are more indifferent to the people in the United States .
 The two girls agree that due to co-ed schools, in the United States, U.S. men have a tendency to treat women with less respect, than Chilean nen who respect women greatly as women .
 Marisol and Carmen Luz made the distinction that the family unit in Chile is much more closely knit than that in the United States . Though slightly disturbed by some things, the two girls seem generally pleased with their opportunity to study in the U.S.
 Millsaps students have similar opportunities to study in other countries, and while here, have a chance to experience something of another country through her citizens at Millsaps . Millsaps has students from all over the world .
 Holiday Pangburn's Candies Large Selection of Millionaires . John D WilliamsIAMS, R.Ph. John Williamsiams, Ph. R. Williamsiars, Phs.
 Millsaps return to form that brought talk of bowl bids to Millsaps, the Majors . The Majors won their fifth victory against three losses, and end their season on a happy note .
 The game was somehow reminiscent of the Texas jtheran game of two years ago . The Majors pulled it out in the final minutes before a standing Homecoming crowd . The final score was 12-7 .
 As far as the first half went, the ime was some what redundant with both teams battling and getting practically nowhere . The first half was some of the worst of the game .
 Trinity, however, on their first possession, did move the ball well, methodically driving, until a diving Jeb Dominick captured an end zone interception to stop the drive . Trinity's first possession was the first possession of the game .
 Millsaps kicker Doug Brindley kicked a 32-yard field goal attempt wide of the uprights in the second quarter . Millsaps kicking specialist Doug Brindley booted a 32 yard field goal in the first quarter . The only scoring threat of the half by either team came in
 Second half play resembled considerably the first half . A couple of good plays for first downs, stall, and punt . Second half plays resembled considerably .
 Trinity kicker Duncan Pringle boomed a field goal in the fourth quarter to put the first points on the scoreboard . Trinity's rugby playing, soccerstyle kicker Pringle kicked the first point of the game .
 Sonny Aldy grabbed another Haygood pass, falling into the endzone for the winning points . The Millsaps offense went to work with less than two minutes remaining . The 3-0 score held for most of the quarter, until the Millsaps defense went on to score .
 Amid the jubilation Brindley calmly split the uprights with the cake-icing extra point . The extra point was the only extra point of the game .
 Hinton and Aldy each had three catches for 57 and 59 yards respectively . Aldy and Hinton each caught three catches in total for the team .
 Domineck hauled in two interceptions, with Philip Maples and Steve McAlilly adding one each . Maples added one each, with McAly adding another each .
 Pikes Lead ""A"" League, Tennis Team and KA""B""S Lead ""B"" League . Unbeaten Pikes lead the ""A" league, and the KA"B""s lead ""B" league .
 Tuesday, November 26 6:00 Chemistry Dept. vs. KA""C. W 4 4 4 2 3 3 2 0 0 0 1 1 3 2 2 2 3 4 SCHEDULE Tuesday, Nov. 26, at 6 p.m.
 The Majors lost 10-0 to Austin College in the Division III national championship . Austin College was the winner of the championship .
 The Majors set their season's slate at 5-3, handing the team their eighth straight .500 or better season . Head coach Harper Davis and assistant Tommy Ranager led the Majors to a fifth straight season .
 Former Millsaps standout Bob Booth is a new coach at Millsaps . Booth is also a former Millsaps star .
 The athletic director may assign assistants with the permission of the Dean and the President . Providing for such an arrangement is a provision stating that the athletic director can assign his assistants .
 Booth has assembled a fine team, and is especially pleased with their latest effort against Co-Lin, last year's junior college state champs . Despite what the record might show, Booth says he's pleased with his team's performance .
 The Majors should be ready for their season opener against Birmingham-Southern on December 2 . The team should be looking to improve quickly this season .
 Booth's greatest area for disappointment is the inability of the better players to play because of injuries . Booth: "Injuries are the only reason for disappointment" Booth says he is disappointed by the lack of players who can't play .
 Mike Collins, Michael Ethridge, Mike Flautt, Bill McGuire, John McVey, John Paden and John Tedder have impressed in pre-season . Mike Collins has been in fine form during the season, with John Mcvey and John Parden also
 The ceremony will begin at 8:00 pm with remarks by ""significant people,"" whomever they might be, and the game will beginat8:30 . The game will start at 8.30.
 The P.A.C. gym will open up a new gym on December 2 . The gym will be open to the public for the first time .
 It was an exciting game, despite the almost non-existent officiating and the omnipresent horrible weather . The game was played in the middle of the worst weather in recent memory .
 I'll have some more interesting news on soccer at Millsaps next week . Millsaps will play at the Millsaps Stadium on Saturday night .
 With a measly two correct picks out of six last week, my batting average stands at .333 . My batting average is .333. I have two corrects out of two last week .
 MOSS POINT 21, LAUREL 10 — The state's top team beats the Tornados again to remain undefeated . The Tornados remain undefeated.
 The Saints won their one for the month last week . The Saints beat the Steelers 21-21 at home last week. The Saints have won their last two games in a month .
 Tuition assistance benefits the independent colleges thus providing a continuing diversity . Tuition help helps independent colleges stay diverse .
 The state can pay 1/ 3 of tuition for a student at a private school, or be in danger of having independent colleges close, then being forced to pay the total cost at a state school . Independent colleges close; the state could be forced to close .
 The grant could be awarded to any student who applies for the grant and is a citizen of the state of Mississippi . The student must be domiciled in the state for twelve months prior to enrollment in a independent college, is attending an independent Jr. or Sr. college .
 The bill authorizes that the amount of the grant would be 25% of the average per pupil appropriation for public senior colleges . The bill would be passed by the House of Representatives on Wednesday .
 Students at Millsaps interested in this legislation should tell their parents about it over the Thanksgiving holidays and get on their legislator's case .
 Our trained consultants will help you select the bridal gown and veil of your dreams, as well as those of your attendants . We are happy to let you select your bridal dress and veil and attendants .
 They will answer questions on etiquette; guide you in selecting your trousseau, invitations, music and flowers . They will also guide you to choose the perfect venue for a party .
 Our Gift Registry records your china, silver and crystal, so friends and relatives may avoid duplications and select gifts you'll treasure . Our gift registry records your silver, crystal and crystal .
 We also offer a special Trousseau Account for all those pre-wedding purchases . The account includes pre-Wedding expenses .
 No service charge if paid in 30 days, or extend over 12 mos. with service charge . Service charge can be extended to 12 months or more .
 MQRAE' JACKSON HATTIESBURG MfcRlQ'AN VICKSPURG GREENVILLE PENSACOLA ~ Millsaps College December 6, 1974 Volume 90. Volume 90 .
 Number 7 66: Kids like this are on a dead end street . Danny Bowling: "I robbed my first house when I was nine. I robbed his first house . When he was nine, he robbed his own house. When I was 9, I robbed my own house."
 "My old lady, she didn't ask where I was gettin' my money," he says . "She stayed drunk most of the time. My old lady"
 The first time the cops caught me, I stayed in the DC (Juvenile Detention Center) for six days, he says . "The first time I was caught I stayed there, I spent six days in jail," he says of the first time he was caught .
 The judge put me on probation and I started bustin' cars around Jackson, Jackson, Mississippi . "The judge put him on probation," he says . "I'm not scared anymore. I'm scared of it," he adds .
 The name and the face is different, but the story is reminiscent of countless others . The story is similar to countless others, with the name and face of many of the people involved .
 This is a 13-year-old child; in the eyes of the law, a juvenile delinquent . "This is a thirteen year old child," he said . "In the eyes the law," he added. "I'm not a criminal, I'm a juvenile."
 He comes from a three room plank house one block off Mill street, three blocks from Millsaps College . He lives in a three-room plank house near Mill street .
 The paint on the side of the house is cracked and weathered, and there is trash in the front yard . The paint is also weathered and the front is cracked .
 His mother is an alcoholic; his father left his family to the ravages of slum life years ago . His father is also an alcoholic and his mother is a slum dweller .
 The people in a position of authority who could mold them into responsible adults are nothing more than human wrecks . They should be molding themselves into responsible adult adults, the author says .
 These kids are subjected to racial prejudice downtown and social prejudice at school . These kids were subjected to social prejudice downtown .
 Last year in Jackson alone, a total of 2295 children appeared at the Youth Court . The institution was established for the handling of juvenile offenders from the ages ten to 17 .
 Clearly, these statistics indicate the presence of deep and dangerous cracks in our social fiber, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Social and economic factors can be singled out as propagating this rise in criminal behavior . What is even more significant is that certain social factors are singled out . The rise in crime can be attributed to social factors such as the rise in violent crime .
 High-crime areas are also areas of greatest poverty in Jackson, Mississippi . The high-crime area is also the areas of highest poverty in the city .
 Crime "becomes a way of life for a lot of kids down there by the time they're ten years old," police say . Crime becomes a "way of life" for many of the kids in the area, police say.
 Millsaps Players production of the musical ""Robert and Elizabeth"" will be presented Wed. thru Sat. Wed. and Sat. Sat. The musical is set to run Wed. & Sat.
 Regular admission prices for orchestra and balcony are $3.50 for orchestra . Tickets for orchestra are $2.50 .
 Millsaps students, faculty, and staff will be admitted on their I.D. cards for Wed. and Thur. night performances . Students and faculty members will be able to attend the shows on Wed., Thur. and Tuesdays .
 All seats are reserved for the game . Tickets are available in the Players' office as soon as possible .
 If you don't want youn name printed, we'll use a little more; discretion. discretion. If youj don't like to see your name, please use it .
 Come by the Registrar's Office for a change of adviser form . If you have found a faculty member whom you want for an academic adviser, come by to get a new adviser .
 You can then secure the new adviser's signature and the Office will notify your former adviser . You can also secure the signature of a new adviser .
 As soon as a student has chosen a major, he should sign a major card in the Registrar's Office . His major professor becomes his academic adviser . Students should sign the major card and then sign it to their major professor .
 P&W Prophecy: "We hold no illusions about the proposed College Senate" Paul Pittman: "P&W holds no illusions"
 Students have not been offered a meaningful role in college government . Students are offered a chance to be involved in college politics . Students say they are disappointed by the lack of a role in government .
 It would add another step to an already complex decision-making process . It would be another step in the already complex process .
 Hal Malchow: "These are the words of then editor Hal . Hal's words have proven to be true. These are true."
 The College Senate is a faculty dominated organization that has produced no constructive results in the two years of its existence . The Senate is faculty dominated by faculty, it is not a faculty-dominated organization .
 The only way for the College Senate or any student participatory group to be effective is for the students to elect representatives who are willing to challenge the stifling powers of the faculty and administration for the benefit of students .
 The productive senator is the exception rather than the rule . The people we could elect are present, able, but unsupported . The productive senators are present and able but unsupported, the author says .
 We must either restructure the present college organization, elect senators who are willing to challenge it, or support the senators now elected . We need to find a way to challenge the current college organization and change it .
 Chaplain Don Fortenberry's slide program was demonstrative of the intelligent, moving concern he and his committee have shown . The Chaplain was a Chaplain for the U.S. Holocaust Museum .
 Singer with awesome power and ability filled the cafeteria of all places with a thrilling movement . And to the > Singer, "Singer" was a master of power .
 We confess that we expected several members of the audience to rise in rapture during the performance . Without the slightest coyness we confesses that we confess that .
 "The feeling pervading the room was rather like a Southern revival when one wishes to go to everyone there, friend, enemy, and stranger, and thank them for sharing the experience," says the author . "I wish I could thank everyone in the room for sharing their experience with me
 Gene Triggs withdrew last week as a 1975 candidate for governor, only weeks after he had announced he would run . Triggs' withdrawal underscores painful fact of life that is dogging every potential in gubernatorial sweepstakes .
 The cost of conducting a serious campaign for the office governor in Mississippi has risen drastically in the past decade . And that is because of the cost of running for office governor .
 The political atmosphere is not at all conducive for the type of risk capital that has traditionally been forked out by would-be power brokers who have an interest in a specific candidate, Mor says . Mor: "For 1975 specifically, for 1975, the political atmosphere . is . not at
 There are a variety of reasons for this, and evidently Triggs got an inkling of all of them, as well as a few cold political shoulders, as he made the rounds in the past few weeks .
 Watergate has cast a longer shadow than some casual observers might think . Campaign finance reforms have given heavy donors in previous state campaigns pause for reflection .
 Triggs' entry and withdrawal in so short a time has to be regarded as significant . As for Triggs, who had the look of an attractive candidate, his entry and subsequent withdrawal is significant . Triggs had to withdraw from the race after just a few weeks .
 The amiable, pipe-smoking Triggs should know who the money men are, he says .
 He has been intimately involved in two gubernatorial campaigns, having managed one for Paul Johnson in 1963 and another for William Winter in 1967 . He has managed one of Paul Johnson's gubernatorial campaigns .
 He has statewide exposure, good contacts with state agricultural and industrial leaders . More than that, he has demonstrated an aptitude for organization, he says .
 Despite the knowing nods of the political wisemen who are always available, there was no deviousness involved in his ploy . And, despite the . knowing nods from the political . wismen who are . always available in the . political  available in the . world
 In the windup, this reporter is convinced, it involved simple arithmetic . "It was simple arithmetic," he says .
 Triggs' move unwittingly may have given still another boost to the candidacy of Lt. Lt. Triggs . Ironically, Triggs may have inadvertently boosted Lt. David Perry's chances of winning the Senate seat .
 Triggs entered the race by his own admission, because he did not think Winter, the current frontrunner, could win . Triggs said he entered because he didn't think Winter could win, but he entered .
 Winter has a financial, as well as a strong political, base . Most observers agree, however, that Winter has available a financial and political base .
 There is still another facet to the campaign financing problem that is a subtle one, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 uncertainty about the economy may also be influencing the political atmosphere within the state . That is that the present uncertainty may also influence the politics in the state, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A further downturn in the economy on the state scene could further tighten the purse strings for political campaigns . The state's economy is expected to be hit by a further downturn .
 Such a development would tend to tighten the field of potential candidates in contrast to the wide-open donneybrook originally seen as the outlook for 1975 . Such a change would also tend to . tighten the . field of possible candidates .
 Dr. David Anderson, Earl Aycock, Janette DeBoever, Sharon Edwards, Flinda Feurgeson, Mike Forester, Carmen Gettis, Pat Gleason, Mark Jones, Doug Minor, Cathy Passailague, Dean Pittman, Bill Ray, Derrick
 Charles Sallis is continuing an effort to get his recently published Mississippi history text on the state's public school ""approved list"" after it was denied such status in a controversial decision by the Textbook Rating Committee .
 Sallis plans to meet soon with Governor Bill Waller and the director of the state textbook purchasing board to see if there is some way to get the book approved .
 "Hopefully we can arrive at a compromise,"" remarked the Millsaps history professor .
 Chairman of the Social Sciences Division at Millsaps, Dr. Sallis co-edited book along with Dr. Dr. John Sall is co-chairman of Millsaps .
 Conflict and Change, the text takes a fresh look at the state's history . It takes an unusually open appraisal of racial oppression and the civil rights movement in Mississippi .
 The book has been widely acclaimed by educators and southern historians .
 Public school teachers have the option of using the text and buying it with state funds . By Mississippi law, for the Purchasing Board to put the book on the approved list, it must be recommended by the rating committee .
 Only two books were presented to the committee — the Sallis-Loewen edition and the Dr. Dr. Loewen version .
 J K Bettersworth text, which has been used in Mississippi history courses for years, is used in state's history courses .
 Only the Bettersworth work was given the go-ahead by the rating committee . Although there is room for five books of Mississippi history on the final approved list .
 The committee is composed of five whites and two blacks, all secondary school teachers . That committee is comprised of five white teachers .
 Conflict and Change have not been given to Sallis and Loewen — ""they won't even talk to us,"" remarked Salli . Conflict and change have not yet been given the title "Conflict and Change"
 The book was dismissed because of its candid treatment of slavery, Reconstruction, and the Civil Rights movement . It contains a picture of a racial lynching in Mississippi .
 State law holds that the book cannot be reviewed by the rating board for another six years . State law says the book can't be reviewed for six years before it is reviewed again .
 A number of letters in support of it have been sent to the Governor and other officials . Many teachers have contacted Sallis and Loewen saying they would like to use the book in their Mississippi history courses .
 The editors are going to the Governor and the Purchasing Board director to try to work out a way to get the book on the list .
 Teachers who want to use the book should have freedom to the access of its information . Teachers should be able to use it in their classrooms and pay for it out of state funds, not their own pockets, the author says .
 In defending the legitimacy of the text, Sallis noted, "This is not a new interpretation of Mississippi history"
 Neither of the editors are accepting personal royalties from the sale of the book . Both, in fact, will end up losing money because of extensive expenses .
 Alternatives is published by Alternatives, a nonprofit group located at 1500 Farragut Street N.W., Washington, D.C.
 The massive money-grabbing of the administration to ""Expand the Resources"" of Millsaps should have some needed improvement on our college-world . Millsaps administration is trying to expand its resources .
 President Collins called ""a definite priority"" of the almost seven million dollar program is the renovation of the Campbell Student Union . President Collins said the project is a priority for the university .
 This project would involve recreational facilities for students and expand services already located in the Center . Students would be able to use the recreational facilities already located at the center .
 Great progress has been made with the appointment of a committee to do research concerning the renovation . The appointment of the committee has also been made .
 They presented their recommendations to the President, who in turn reported to the Board of Trustees, where it became bogged-down . Progress came to a standstill and progress came to an end at the end .
 The delay results from confusion over the usage of the money already obtained of the 6. million dollar fund raising drive . The delay is due to confusion over how the money will be used .
 Until the Board of Trustees decides to allocate the necessary funds, the Millsaps students will have to endure the present conditions . The board of trustees has yet to make a decision .
 From the information collected, they learned that the suggestions sounded a common need . They learned that they learned from the information .
 Some of their recommendations were to enlarge the bookstore, moving it to what is now the grill, thus transfering the grill downstairs to that barren room . Some of the recommendations were moved to what's now the grill .
 Sullivan Harrell was once enthusiastic students who danced after Millsaps games . The Millsaps school was once a thriving center for students . The school is now home to a thriving community .
 A recreation room with pool tables and the like could be used by students to pass the time . Students could use the recreation room to pass time away .
 Delegations from Southern, Ole Miss, State, State and several counties combined with Millsaps to total nearly 65 delegates . Millsaps delegates are a tremendous improvement over last year's showing .
 Governor Waller gave a speech at the Young Democrats' convention . Discussion of resolutions, state and district officer elections, and resolutions took most of the afternoon .
 The resolutions passed included support for ethics and open government bills introduced by Common Cause and support for ERA and pay raises sought by teachers .
 These two islands are presently in grave danger of irreparable commercial exploitation . The islands are currently in danger of irreversible commercial exploitation. These islands are in serious need of urgent action to protect themselves .
 Two Vice-President offices were abandoned and a reorganizing of Congressional District and College District representation in Young Democrats were the basis of the Amendments to the Constitution . The amendments were the result of the amendments to the constitution .
 Millsaps delegation did particularly well in the elections of state and district officers . Millsaps delegates did well in their elections in the state legislature .
 The amendments created a 24 seat Executive Committee, consisting of state officers, college and congressional district officers, and two National Committee persons . The amendments create a 24-seat Executive Committee .
 Millsaps delegation won 14 of the 24 offices, including chairperson, Teresa Liles and treasurer, Daryl Plunk . Governor Bill Waller announced a tollfree, direct telephone line to the Governor's Office that any citizen in the State can use .
 Governor said the average citizen sometimes feels lost because he doesn't know where to go or how to get help . Governor said, "With government services growing more complex and complicated, the average citizens sometimes feel lost"
 This toll-free Hotline will allow calls to be placed at no cost, from anywhere in the State, directly to the Governor's Office in Jackson, Mississippi . The Hotline is a free, no-charge Hotline for Mississippi .
 Staff trained to put the caller directly in touch, in a matter of a few hours, with the State agency or department that can help solve the problem . The staff, manning this telephone 24 hours a day, is trained to respond to the call .
 Waller has an extension of the Hotline phone on his desk . Waller said he expects to handle a full range of service related calls from the elderly .
 2nd district reps., Bill Blair and Mark Herbert; 4th district chairperson, Glade Mclnnis; . Barry Cockrell and Jimmy Dempsey; . March Jones and Lisa Lumsden; . Rob McDuff and Dennis Mcintosh .
 The second organizational meeting will be on Tuesday, December 10, at 7:00 pm in AC-334 . The meeting will take place at 7,00 pm .
 Philip Nolan, played by Cliff Robertson, won the award for bravery in a sea battle against a foreign nation . Philip Nolan was portrayed as Philip Nolan in the Battle of Britain in the Second World War .
 Robertson stars in the ABC-TV telecast of ""The Man without a Country,"" sponsored in part by Kodak . The show is set for December 6 at 8:30m.
 At the beginning of this semester, Millsaps noticed a curious occurrence regarding enrollment . Saunders Conducts Survey by Pat Gleason at Millsaps University .
 It seems that quite a number of students who were eligible to return to Millsaps had chosen not to do so . Millsaps students were eligible for a scholarship at Millsaps .
 Dean Saunders, in an effort to uncover a reason for this discouraging trend, initiated a survey whereby these students could give their reasons for not returning . The survey was conducted by Dean Saunders .
 The purpose of the survey was to give the administration some idea of the problems of grievances such students have at Millsaps . The survey aims to eliminate or alleviate some of the grievances students have .
 Dean Saunders implies that such information would be of considerable influence in any decisions regarding requirements, finances, and the availability of a wide range of subjects . Saunders: Such information could influence decisions about requirements and finances .
 T The information obtained from the comments on the cards covers a broad range of subjects . T The cards are available for purchase .
 Of the 51 students who responded, 11 stated that their decision to leave Millsaps stemmed from financial reasons . 11 said they left Millsaps because of financial issues .
 Several students stated that they had been offered jobs too attractive to refuse . Several of the students said they were offered jobs that were too attractive .
 One student flatly said that Millsaps was ""too expensive,"" and that for this reason he had been forced to look for a cheaper education elsewhere . One student said Millsaps is "too expensive"
 The survey took the form of an explanatory letter from Dean Saunders, along with a selfaddressed post card .
 There was also a space at the iottom for any explanatory comments . The student was to check there were any explanations .
 The majority of former students complained that Millsaps was too limited in its offering of courses . Millsaps is too small in its offerings of courses.
 Departments singled out in the survey were education, physics, psychology, psychology and art departments .
 These students moved to larger universities which offered a variety of subjects in those fields to be taught each semester . These students went on to study at larger universities .
 One card had ""joined Air Force"" scrawled across the bottom of the bottom, as if it was desperate . The card had a message: "Join Air Force"
 Reasons for not returning to Millsaps: Academic difficulties, limitation of courses offerings, limited offerings, finances, and teachers that do not come up to the quality of Millsaps' motto AD EXCELLENTIOM"" Saunders in his study .
 Ideas must be developed to increase student awareness of and participation in college events . Ideas must also be developed for students to participate in college activities .
 The administration must realize that only through innovative measures can Millsaps attain the reputation it so richly deserved in the past . Millsaps is a great place for students and students to come to Millsaps .
 Students say Millsaps is a dead place, but it has deeper roots than these, which could threaten the academic life here . Millsaps students say they have heard it said many many times by students that Millsaps was dead place .
 It would be difficult to refute this claim, considering the lack of direction among students . Indeed, it would be hard to refute, considering this .
 There seems to be no sufficient cause (ecology being now more or less passe) for which the angry students may scream in outrage . There is no cause for which students may protest in outrage.
 Everyone is well aware of the shift from activism to relative conservatism on college campuses . This is not the first time conservatives have been criticized for being conservative .
 The lack of awareness of the student to the problems of the world is going to be a detriment in the future to all ases of society . However, the students should be aware of the problems they face .
 What we lack at Millsaps conr sists ironically of the basic purpose of higher education — ideas . Millsaps lack of ideas is what we lack in higher education, says Millsaps .
 The student government here is effectively dominated by faculty and administration . The faculty is completely ineffective due to petty internal bickering . The administration is totally immersed in the technical aspects of keeping this behemoth moving .
 Sadly, the ideas necessary to make Millsaps into a moving, living institution again must come from the students . Millsaps students must come up with the ideas needed to make it a moving institution again .
 "We have a ready forum in this newspaper, and we should avail ourselves of it," says editor-in-chief . We should use it, he says .
 A liberal arts education is more of a Sisyphaen than an asset in today's technological world . It has been said, and often said, that a liberal arts . education is not a good asset in the technological world, it is said .
 I do not wish to create an argument here, subjecting the idea of this article to a witty rejounder in the next issue of this issue . However, I do want to create a witty argument .
 There will be objections, but considering the value of the end result, I believe the only complaints to be heard will rise from delirious bombasts possessing no grasp of the very real problems facing this community . The only complaints will rise .
 I propose a series of programs to be held at least every two weeks, presided over by department professors, and concerning aspects of their fields which would both be of interest to students and beneficial to their academic life .
 Such a program would provide students with the opportunity to hear expert opinions on important subjects of interest outside their major fields . Students would be able to hear experts' views on topics of interest .
 Political science professors could give the history of terrorism as a political weapon . They could focus on Algeria's use of it against the French, the I.R.A.'s use in Ireland and its use by both Israelis and Palestinians in the Middle East .
 Personal opinion could then be given on its effectiveness, followed by a general discussion with the audience . Personal opinion would be then given on the effectiveness of the new technology .
 The Economics department could present, in layman's terms, the causes of the Depression in the 30's, and the ways in which economic stability was eventually re-established . The Economics Department could present the causes and ways to re-establish stability .
 They could then give the reasons for the present economic debacle . They would benefit the audience by giving their solutions to the problem .
 Discussion would follow which, I believe, would not be depressing, but encouraging . Discussion would be not depressing but encouraging, I say . I believe that discussion would follow .
 The English department could present a program pinpointing the role of the writer today . The program could be used to help students understand their role in writing .
 Current trends in literature could be discussed which would possibly open fields of interest to nonEnglish majors . Current trends of literature could also be discussed .
 At least it would provide them with some form of exposure to an important part of life — art .
 The creative process could be explored, along with the problems of the artist today . It could also be explored as well as the problems faced by artists today .
 Eudora Welty, Barry Hannah, and Margaret Walker are some of the remarkable talents that the South has supplied to the field of literature . This idea could be developed so far as to have authors come for future programs .
 Psychology department could give a report on the increase in the cases of schizophrenia in today's society . Psychologists could report on increase in schizophrenia in society .
 The professors could explore the cause of this mental disorder, certain to be of interest to the Millsaps student .
 Avenues of cure could be explained to the audience, defining Freudian and Jungian psychology . Aims to explain Freudian or Jungian theories in terms of how to cure cancer .
 Physics department could present a program on atomic energy power plants, focusing on their necessity and problems .
 The professors would be performing a valuable service to the community through enlightenment in this field . The professors' enlightenment would be performed by the community, the author says .
 Given in layman's terms, this program could present the argument so miserably handled by Henry Patton and the panel discussion on nuclear energy held on November 14 . The panel discussion is scheduled for November 14 at 8 p.m. ET .
 Anthropology, history, sociology, and other departments could provide fascinating programs designed to enlighten the student to problems of society outside of their chosen majors . Anthropology and history departments could enlighten students to problems outside their chosen major .
 It might help improve the student who is an ""authority"" in his own field, but a functioning vegetable in others . It might also help to improve the students who are an "authority" in their fields .
 It would promote discussion not just between the students, but also between faculty members, hopefully precipitating a thaw in that glacier, which has crept so slowly in recent years .
 The program would cost very, very little. And, perhaps best of all (for the administration), it would cost little. The administration would be very pleased with the idea .
 The subjects for discussion would not be extremely difficult to comprehend, but of interest of students . No extensive research would be required on the part of the teachers .
 Being the cream of the South's professorial crop, they should be able to speak with some competence on basic topics related to their fields of study .
 I would think that they should relish the chance to improve relations within this community . Also, I would say they should be relishing the chance for better relations within the community .
 I sincerely hope that what I have said in this article has not amounted to dropping the idea into a well, wishfully hoping that it will materialize, and all but excluding the possibility of retrieving it . It is hoped that this will not amount to dropping an idea into the well,
 At least it is an idea, and there are pitifully few moving around the campus these days . But at least it's an idea .
 Lying amid the bent rushes the young girl writhes . The sheen of her perspiring body reflects the afterglow of a momentary flash of dazzling white light .
 Her hands flail out flindly, wrenching tall rushes from the marshy ground . The emotional Hell inside her bursts and awareness floods her mind . Her hands are flailing out flailing wildly, but awareness floods the mind .
 The constellation Cygnus looks down upon her mockingly as a single white feather — indifferent to her suffering — floats gently to Earth settling in a webbed imprint beside her trembling thighs . The white feather is indifferent to the suffering .
 There will be a 1974 Major's football wrap-up in the near future . It will be complete with cartoons .
 Roundball always seems to draw more support than the other sports on campus . Now that basketball is upon us, the spotlight is a bit brighter on Millsaps intercollegiate sports .
 After-game comment from another major newspaper sports columnist, who will remain anonymous, was not able to attend the game . After the game, I solicited some after-game comments from another sports columnist .
 He didn't say too much about the second half, but I guess it's self-explanatory considering the score .
 He did mention that the return of Van Skiver would be a helpful addition to the team .
 The P.A.C. is to be the site of the Magnolia Classic Basketball Tournament, December 5-7 . The Magnolia classic basketball tournament will be held on December 5 and 7 .
 A major hardwood encounter will feature eight Mississippi College Division teams . The Classic will be held in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 From this point the ladder gets confusing and quite hectic, especially in the losing brackets . The ladder ladder gets confused and a bit hectic at this stage .
 Each team is assured of three games, although it is not a double elimination tournament . Each team has three games to play in the tournament .
 The tourney will provide a look at perhaps some of the best teams in the state . The tournament will be held in New Jersey on Friday .
 Jackson State, with Eugene Short, is ranked nationally in pre-season college division polls . Jackson State with Ail-American Eugene Short .
 Tennis is alive and well at Millsaps, but in a winter hibernation after a first rate fall season . Millsaps has a first-rate fall season in tennis . Tennis is still alive and thriving in the winter .
 The fall workouts saw the tennis majors practicing 2 1/2 hours a day, five days a week . Jim Montgomery, coach of the U.S. tennis team, says the workouts improved during the fall .
 Closing with a 5-3 record, the netters won two matches over Delta State, two over Southwestern at Memphis and one over a local tennis group .
 Mississippi State, Ole Miss, Mississippi State and Southeastern Louisiana lose . The losses came at the hands of Ole Miss and Mississippi State . The loss comes after three straight losses for Ole Miss .
 Coach Monty expects participation by eight men's and four women's teams . With both men and women's events, coach Monty is expecting participation .
 For the past couple of years many Millsaps students have shown an interest in soccer as an intramural sport . Millsaps has a history of playing soccer as a team sport . Students have shown interest in the sport in recent years .
 soccer is beginning to interest a tot of Millsapians as an intercollege sport . But now soccer is becoming more popular among students at Millsap University .
 Belhaven and Tougaloo have already declared soccer a varsity sport . Miss. Belhaven has already declared it as a sport at Belhaven .
 Coach Monty feels that with the right approach a varsity soccer league could be established with Millsaps on the ground floor . Millsaps coach Monty hopes to establish a soccer league in the future .
 Last week, I said I couldn't get much worse, and I didn't; I stayed the same — two for six. Last week's episode was a repeat of last week's 'two for six'
 This first basketball game of the year also marked the dedication of the Physical Activities Center .
 Montgomery gave speeches in which they recognized many people that helped make our new facility a reality . Montgomery's staff recognized many of those who helped make the project a reality, including many who helped build the facility .
 Our Alumni Association President spoke emphasizing the support continuously given by alumni of the college . Then the dedication prayer was made .
 President Collins closed the ceremonies wishing this year's basketball team a successful season . President Collins also wished the U.S. basketball team well .
 The first official field goal made in the new PAC was by John Paden 45 seconds into the first half . Paden kicked the first field goal in the PAC's history .
 The Majors jumped to a 10-4 toad in the first half . This basket sparked a hot streak for the Majors .
 Paden picked up his third foul with 9 minutes left in the first half . Dan Richards came off the bench to complete the half . Paden was the only player on the bench for the second half .
 Greg Hickman, nursing a bad ankle, also came off the bench in the second half . The team came from behind in the first half to win the game .
 The Panthers came out gunning in the second half and scored six quick points to grab the lead . The Panthers would never relinquish a lead they would not relinquish .
 Mark Lynch brought the Majors within nine putting two well-aimed free throws through the hoop with 9:50 to go . Mark Lynch's free throws came in the final minutes of the game .
 Southern practiced stalling techniques forcing Coach Bob Booth to pull his team out of the zone defense they had played up to that point . Coach Booth pulled the team from a zone defense to play a stalling technique .
 Millsaps, attempting desperately to pull the game out, had to double-team and really move on defense . The Panthers began hitting open men under the goal who in turn began hitting the basket . Millsaps was attempting to pull out of the game .
 Paden led the Millsaps scoring with 16 points followed by Mark Lynch with 12 . Paden scored 16 points . Lynch scored 12 points for Millsaps .
 John McVay had seven rebounds followed by Tedder and Paden with six a piece . Tedder had six rebounds . Paden had six in all three rebounds .
 Winston Davis had 14 points for Birmingham Southern . Jon Boydston and Jimmy Harris had 10 points each for the Southern side .
 The Majors next outing will be in the Magnolia Tournament to be played at Millsaps December 5, 6, 7 after which they will play Mississippi College here December 10 .
 CHI's, GDI's Win Women Volleyball . The undefeated Pikes lead the ""A"" league and the undefeated Tennis team leading the ""B"" league . The Thanksgiving holidays have kept the men's volleyball in the balance .
 O's amassed a perfect 6-0 record to win the ""A"" league crown, while GDI's defeated the KD team to win ""B"" league title .
 LXA ""A"" MEN'S STANDINGS ""A" LEAGUE TEAM W L PKA ""A:" 5 0 KA ""B"" 4 I KS""A"" 3 3 LXA "A"" 1 5 Tracers 0 4 ""B" Men's Standings
 Designed to help and guide a child rather than blankently punish him, it works to fill the supervisional void existing in most troubled children . Designed to provide guidance and guidance rather than punish him .
 An intricate system of counselors, probation officers, social workers, halfway houses, and correctional institutions exist in and around the system . The system offers a variety of options for the individual child's disposition .
 The court may return the child to his home with a set of social rules and behavioral guidelines . It may place him in a foster home, a group home, or a halfway house; or it may provide continuing psychiatric and medical help .
 Each of the kids we see is an individual and must be dealt with as such . Each of these kids is a child, and we need to deal with them as such. Each of them is a unique person, we said .
 The Court may require that the child be sent to one of two juvenile training schools in the state for intensive rehabilitive training, or it may refer him to Adult Court . In extreme cases, such as repeated or serious offenders, the child may also be referred to adult court .
 No matter how effective the Juvenile Justice System may or may not be, the fact remains that more and more of Jackson's young are turning to crime as a way of life . Crime is a means of attaining material possessions, achieving a reverse sort of peer status .
 To undermine the basic causes of youth crime, I contend, we must strike at the environmental and psychological strains that cause juvenile delinquency . We must also target the psychological and environmental strains that lead to youth delinquency, he says .
 We must provide and improve Scenes from the Millsaps area. housing conditions and recreational facilities in lowincome areas . We must work to involve young people in community activities and community organizations in youth programs. We must also work to include young people with community activities .
 We must equalize vocational opportunities among the young by improving the quality of the urban school system . We must also fight economic as well as racial segregation in all schools, the author says . We need to improve vocational opportunities, he says .
 Finally, efforts should be made to create new job opportunities and prepare our youth for future employment . The government should also make efforts to create jobs opportunities for young people .
 As we enter into the second half of this decade, the growing problem of juvenile delinquency stares each of us directly in the face . The problem is a growing problem for all Americans .
 Unless we strive to implement effective means of salvaging the young of the inner city, we will be forced to live with the consequences of wasted youth, a grim reminder of our society .
 Imari Obadeli was excluded from the campus . The senate proposed that a letter be sent to President Collins requesting clarification of his actions .
 Obadeli would be the first speaker of the spring semester . The letter would further state that ""the students feel this is not in the best interest"" of the school or students, the action .
 Senators Janice Johnson and Jim McCafferty defended themselves as members of the deciding committee . They concluded that the article that had appeared in the P&W was unfair to President Collins .
 Senator McCafferty expressed doubt about allowing a ""convicted murderer" to speak . Senator McCafferty expressed doubt about allowing a convicted murderer to speak.
 In a reversal of his earlier stand Senator Wells proposed that the senate fund the article Visits With Vinaruhu . Wells proposed the senate would fund the P&W article .
 Later in the session Senator Wells reintroduced two motions that had failed in the previous meeting, but with the opposite result . Senator Wells introduced the motions with the same result .
 The motions called for a report of unused student funds explaining why they were unused and what was to happen to them . A study of proportional representation in the senate as a more equitable form of student government .
 A resolution was introduced by James Galloway stating support for a program of delayed rush for Greek societies on campus . One of the most hottly contested actions was a resolution introduced by Galloway .
 He asserted that the senate had the responsibility of chartering these organizations and must be responsible for judging them in the interest of students .
 The senate, whose members are, with two exceptions, all Greek, rejected the resolution . The senate's members are only two exceptions to the resolution.
 Mark Jones introduced four proposals in the session . The first called for expansion of the committee studying feasibility of football to include an investigation of the proposed PE major and costs involved .
 The motion passed as did his motion to create a committee to investigate and make recommendations on tuition costs and the allocation of tuition funds . The motion was passed .
 His final proposal was made on behalf of a student . He called for a study of the Judicial Council in the areas of undue administration influence and selection of members .
 Steven's committee approved four charters which were accepted by the senate . McCafferty 's Entertainment . and Jones's Visitation committee announced a poll of freshmen attitudes; and Steven's .
 The charters were those of College Panhellenic, Junior Panhellen, the ERA Support Group, and the Interfraternity Council . The charter was created by the College of African descent .
 All senators were present or had substitutes with the exception of David Bourgeois and Donna Doorenbos . All senators had substitutes or were absent .
 P&W MAR Y N E I LL and the Governor saw eye-to-eye in a recent press conference . Millsaps College December 17, 1974 Volume 90, Number 8 .
 Sometimes when people are so damned close-minded, I feel like butting my head against a wall . Butting My Head is a challenge to those who are so close to me .
 If someone could reach this selfcentered group and use their hands — which are stuffing their faces and patting themselves on the back — for the improvement of our society, there would be no one dying from obesity while others are dying from starvation .
 Students pass BBA Proposal in College Senate . Students pass proposal in college Senate after effective presentation by Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 College Senate votes to send BBA proposal to faculty . College Senate voted to send the proposal to the faculty . After heated discussion among faculty members, the proposal was approved .
 In the session of the semester Dennis Wells as vice-chairman presided in Dean Saunder's absence over the often unrulely faculty and student senators .
 The Bachelor of Business Administration degree had failed in a faculty committee . It was being considered again for recommendation to the faculty . The degree is being considered for recommendation again .
 The proposal came under attack from faculty members . Baltz Baltz of the Economics Department said the proposal was not necessary for students .
 Frank Laney in the focal point of debate pointed to the reality of a BBA degree and the benefits it would have students . Laney said students would benefit from the BBA experience .
 SEB President Charlie Hinman spoke in favor of the proposal . SEB is the largest bank in the world, with more than 1,000 members .
 Students in the senate voted to approve the proposal . It was the vote of students in the Senate that won approval .
 For I am not an ""individual"" ; am not a separate entity in This conglomerate realm of butting bodies and headless prodigies . For I'm not an "individual"
 Reflecting everyone, but no one, reflects everyone, as a product of vast social whims . Reflects everyone in the world, but not everyone . Reflecting on social whims, reflect the world's most complex social problems .
 I am vunerable because of my totally open awareness in Seeking the answerable avenues of existence — a poetic patsy. I am a poet who is not a poet but a person who is a person with an open awareness .
 Barry Cockrell met Ashton Ashton in a dream . He met Ashton in dream her tentacled dark-blonde miasmas made you plead to me .
 The crash of endeavors, braked sentiments, the splinters of windshield perfection downshift . For now, you are going home to Ashton who slaps you into monoxide laughter .
 The thin patina of unity talk coming from loyalists and regulars on the heels of the Kansas City Democratic mini-convention only partially veils the fact that landmark changes are an established fact of life .
 To be sure, the time is pregnant with hope for an accommodation between the two political factions . To be . hope for a . accommodation between . the two parties .
 Loyalists are more receptive to cooperation and unity than ever before, says the president . The loyalists are now more likely to cooperate and unity, he says . "They're more receptive now than before," he adds .
 Bill Waller has effectively deranged the more militant of the loyalists by appointing them to state boards and commissions . The more militant loyalists have been appointed to boards and commission boards .
 Bill Waller attended, the first governor to attend such a meeting since Ross Barnett was nominated for president in 1960 . Waller was the first to attend the meeting since the nomination of Ross Barnett in 1960s .
 All three of the state's Democratic congressmen showed up, along with Wilson Golden, a personal envoy from Lt. Gov. Wilson Golden . Lt. Golden: All three congressmen from the state showed up .
 The national party probably faces its most crucial test here in 1976 . The political philosophy of the new governor and the composition of the Democratic presidential ticket will provide the acid test as to whether Mississippi's political power structure will rejoin the party or walkout .
 At least two elements, however, have altered the face of the national party . The party has been in power for more than a decade .
 The first major change is the end of the unit rule which previously gave all the delegate votes to the slate which got the most votes . The unit rule was previously given the votes of all delegates to a slate which had the most delegates .
 This was a rule which was insisted on by both the left as well as the right . Oddly enough, this was insisted upon by both sides of the debate .
 George Wallace of Alabama maintains that he would benefit greatly by getting a share of the delegates, based on the votes he might receive in a state primary . Wallace: "I think I would be better off if I got a share" of delegates in a primary .
 Mississippi Regulars have concluded that they need legislation to provide for a statewide preferential primary . Mississippi's present district caucus and state convention system is currently the state's current district caucus system .
 This is the second element involved in the state's future with the national party . This is a second element in the future of the state, with the party .
 There is a question whether the legislature can pass a law which would result in the selection of a qualified delegation . National party requirements are only minimal, there is only minimal .
 The present mood is in stark contrast to 1968 when the high hopes of the loyalists were dashed in Mississippi . The state went overwhelmingly for Richard Nixon when the state voted overwhelmingly for him .
 In spite of their self-conscious efforts to include whites, the loyalists ended up predominantly black .
 The Mississippi Democrats have always been outside of the state's political power structure . They bore the national Democratic mantle in Mississippi, but they've been on the outside .
 One thing to look for in the months ahead is how many of the vacancies in the loyalist organization will be filled with regulars .
 Democratic National Committeeman Charles Evers may be stripped of his post early next year . There are several slots open now, and several slots are open now .
 Only one Mississippi delegation will go to the national Democratic convention in 1976 . Mississippi will have one delegation at the 1976 convention .
 Whatever detente may have been achieved among state Democrats is still subject to numerous stresses and certainly, more pitfalls . But whatever detente might have been reached, there are many more pitfalls to overcome .
 There is a busy street in Jackson, Mississippi, which runs through town and along the sides of Millsaps and the Medical Center . The State of Apples is a state of apples .
 Sometimes at night a siren, be it police, ambulance, or firetruck, can be heard upon the hour . Police, ambulance and ambulance sirens are often heard in the night .
 Apple Street is the name of a street in New York City . The name of this street is Apple Street .
 State Street loomed before me like a vision out of Middletown, Amerika. Instead of State Street, it was State Street . State Street was a vision from Middlettown, a vision of the city .
 Let's change the name to Apple, Apple, a sound more pleasing to the ear and the instinct . Let's name Apple, the name of the company, to a more pleasing sound .
 An apple is a mediumsized semi-round red fruit which tastes very nice and is healthy (if without DDT or Halloween razorblades) and good for the digestive process .
 It's really nifty to sit in a big tree on a beautiful afternoon and eat a red, juicy Apple . And when you get right down to it, it's really cool to eat a big, juicy apple .
 I have thought late into an afternoon upon a golden leaf or the blue dome o'er me and could find nothing there of State. "I have thought . late into a afternoon upon . a golden . leaf or a blue dome," he writes . "I could find . nothing there
 "I have looked upon the material world of people and other things, and neither there could I find the wretched thing," he said .
 In fact, they might even seem to conflict, or to not ""jive""", as they say . But they might seem to not seem to "jive", or not "jibe""
 State is a material object naming a concept which I despise . And it seems that these concept are always fighting it out, as it seems .
 State is but a human concept, while Apple is an idea which the Self receives and interprets from nature, the Self . The Self is the Self, and Apple is the idea that the Self interprets the world from whence come Ideas .
 Ebenezer Pendergrass' last stand is a profound emotional shock . He asks readers to prepare for a profound shock .
 Imagine the most painful, horrifying revelation that could confront any intelligent decent-thinking Millsaps student . Sit down and imagine the horrifying revelation .
 I extend my deepest and sincerest apologies to all my faithful readers who have looked to Vinaruhu for inspiration and guidance in the daily affairs of life . I extend the deepest apology .
 I have no doubt been party to the greatest sham since the Destiny of Excellence . I'm not sure what happened to me, but I've been part of the sham since . I have been a part of this sham, I'm sure it's a sham .
 My suspicions were first aroufced only a week ago, and only under the most bizzare of circumstances . I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it's not a coincidence .
 The sky outside my window became black with clouds and the thunder rolled . The sky was black and thunder rolled as the thunderstorms rolled .
 A bolt of lightning struck a copy of The Greening of America . Then my window mysteriously opened and a lightning bolt flashed through, striking my copy of the book . The book was published in 2007 .
 The next thing I knew was gone, the book was gone and in its place stood a three-legged elephant and a giant python with the head of a man . The book was replaced by a giant snake with a man's head .
 The python had wrapped himself around the neck of the elephant and was squeezing tighter and tighter . As I looked more closely, I could see that the python was squeezing the elephant's neck .
 With that the serpent tightened his grip on the elephant's neck and the mighty pachyderm stumbled to his knees . With that, the elephant stumbled and fell on its knees .
 At this point the serpent loosens his grip and snapped the elephant with his tail . The serpent loosened his grip on the elephant . The elephant was snapped with its tail .
 Vinaruhu is no seer. He's out to wreck By egging on our moral flaws. He fights the cause of ethics laws And State dissension he does brew . County Unit won't go through. He is out of control.
 Then the serpent tightened his vise and the giant elephant fell moaning to the floor . The giant elephant had to be crushed to the ground .
 Sure Vinaruhu had never advocated the supervisors' cause in any of our conversations . Vinarahu had no intention of advocating for supervisors' rights, he said .
 Theodore Smith would never be governor, he said . And then he remembered his glee when he told me Theodore Smith never would be governor . "I remember him glee"
 I have been using your wretched column as an outlet for supervisors' propoganda. I have used it as a way to express my supervisors' opinions. I'm glad I've been using it for a few weeks, but I'm not happy with it. It's time to get
 "I have employed your clumsy satire as a weapon to alienate progressive minded Mississippians away from the call of positive political reform," says Mississippian . "I'm sorry for using this as a political weapon," she says .
 "No longer will I be a cog in the heavy equipment of political corruption," she says . "I'm not going to be part of the political process anymore. No longer will be the cog in political corruption"
 "No longer will I be a capitalist culvert on the manhole of corporate imperialism," says Julian Zelizer . "I'm not going to be a 'capitalist culvert' anymore," says Zelizer. "I've been in the middle of the world for more than a decade
 He had seen 'The Trial of Billy Jack' and thought there was still a revolution . But worse yet, he had seen the trial of 'Billy Jack' He had also seen the 'Trial of Billy' and still thought there were still revolution .
 I knew that I should never speak to him again, but my affections proved to be the stronger instinct . I knew he should never be allowed to speak to me again but I still love him .
 Burning torches lit night as sky pig circled above, i asked someone in the crowd what was the matter? i asked .
 He didn't know there was a Baptist revival going on inside the church . The church was filled with people from all over the world .
 Just as the preacher shouted, ""Satan is near,"" Vinaruhu comes charging in screaming obscenities and hurling wine bottles into the crowd . The preacher shouted: "Satan was near"
 Next thing anyone knew, Vinaruhu was fleeing for his life with the crowd in hot pursuit . The crowd was chasing him, but he was able to get away .
 Thunder rolled and the skies parted and a strange voice shook the earth . Suddenly, the thunder rolled . The voice of the voice was heard in the thunderstorm .
 At these words a giant culvert fell from the heavens and crushed my wayward friend . At these . words, a giant . culvert falls from the . heavens and crushes him .
 A tale that begins with the promise of divine revelation and ends in an expose of evil and a heavenly demise . The film is based on the story of a young woman who was murdered by a cult cult .
 For those who do not grasp the profound lessons that this story teaches, I say, I have no time for dullards. For those . do not understand the profound lesson that this . story teaches . I say to you, I'm not a dullard. I say you I have
 For those who grasp these inner truths and seek further reading in their metaphysical basis, may I suggest'the literature of Kafka, the teachings of Billy Graham, and above all, readings on the Destiny of Excellence .
 NEW ORLEANS PARISH HOT DOGs Hot Dog 65 Chili Dogs 65 Chili Dog 80 Chili Bun 75 New Orleans Hot Plates with FRENCH BREAD Red Beans . Grilled Frank 1.29 Grilled Franks 1.30 Grilled Hot Dogs 1.28 Grilled
 To the right is a single door at which, from time to time, harried individuals pause to peek in . The coffinlike desk dominates stage center, then on the nine tiers rising, rising into and beyond the wings .
 Each tier is lined with desk-seat units which, fulfilling no esthetic standard at the moment of their creation, have nevertheless been rendered less beautiful by the passage of time . Each tier has two tiers of seats, one of the most expensive in the world .
 Some of the harried individuals enter the dungeon to take their places at vacant desk-seat units and themselves begin scribbling . Some of them take their place at vacant desks and themselves start writing .
 Others shake their heads in perplexity, wander away and are never heard of again . Others shake heads and wander away from the scene, never seen again .
 Gerard Manley Hopkins is a modern poet; Rod McKuen is; and, for yet another, the first two men are wrong . For one man, Hopkins is the modern poet. For another, McKUen is the poet of the day . For another man, McKu
 After nearly two and a half hours during which, although the assembled scribblers have committed to paper almost as many words as are to be found in Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, nothing much (from the viewpoint of the Absolute) has happened . MAX enters .
 "He is of ageless middle age, and he wears a sober suit with narrow lapels," he says .
 SCOTT detaches himself from one of the desk-seat units and, jostling the elbows of other scribblers as he straightens the seams of his plus-four's, makes his way to stage center .
 MAX studies them, trying to restrain the involuntary movement of his lips, then adds them to a larger stack of papers already on his desk . MAX studies the images, adding them to the stack already on the desk .
 50,044 words by my count — though we certainly won't quibble about that . I know you did, Scott. Scott. I know .
 There are some glaring inaccuracies in this material you've added to the film . But what does bother us a bit is that there are some obvious inaccuracies . We're happy to clarify that there is no need to worry about it .
 "I quite naturally assumed that not securing any assistance (either from an individual or from a book) was preferably to merely getting my facts straight. But, of course, in accordance with your notes toward an articulation of an attempt to codify some of our practices, I quite naturally
 "I figgered if I dazzled 'em with my fustian footnotes no one would even notice that I hadn't got my facts straight," he said . Anyway, he said, "I'm going to dazzle 'em up"
 I do hope that I am not detecting a note of distemper in your tone, Scott. Scott. I do not detect that . Scott says, "I don't think you're distempered"
 Your writing is without — utterly lacking, as it does, the special excellencies for which we look at . The which, I hasten to say, is without . Your writing, your writing is . utterly lacking . As well as your writing, it does not have the special
 Max. In your ""notes toward a whatever"" you somehow neglected to complete your sentence in paragraph 4, Max. Max . Max. Somehow neglected to . complete a sentence in . paragraph 4 .
 "We clearly could not permit our imprint to appear on the book as you might write it. Well, be that as it may, Scott, Scott"
 Fearing the commandments of God or the laws of men, most of us seldom seriously entertain thoughts of killing a fellow human being . Most of us can conceive of circumstances which might justify our doing it .
 Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov provides justification for hammering in the head of a harmless old crone . To him, she is to him a fitting symbol of a society which fosters the mediocre and the meaningless while abandoning the superb and the heroic .
 At that, the reader, if he is anything like me, finds himself developing such compassion for Raskolnikov that he comes to share his guilt and must eventually come to wonder about his own capacity for capriciously doing dark deeds .
 Previously, he has supposed he would kill to defend himself or the people he loves or, if it came to that, his country . He has also said he would be killed to defend his people or his people .
 American Social Values between the Great Wars. But would he kill also for a principle so abAmerican Social Values .
 English professor Ellsworth Touhy smuggles copies of Kathleen Winsor novels . He stuffs the body into the coffin-like desk and immediately takes to drink .
 Let him leave the abstract now and ask if, after all, he might not kill in order to preserve, or to multiply, his possessions . Let's ask him if he may not kill to preserve or multiply his possessions, or preserve them .
 St. Petersburg and Mexico's Sierra Madre Occidental in the 1920's in a strange and powerful novel by one of the century's strangest and most powerful writers . The novel is set in the mind of one of America's most famous writers .
 Mr Huston has shaped a searching drama of the collision of civilization's vicious greeds with the instinct for selfpreservation in an environment where all the barriers are down .
 By charting mood of prospectors after they have hit vein of gold, he has done a superb illumination of basic characteristics in men . And, by charting the mood of his prospectors, he charts the mood after they hit a vein of . gold .
 Humphrey Bogart played the role of Fred C Dobbs in one of the few vehicles deserving of his talents . Bogart is best known for playing Fred Dobbs .
 Unlike Raskolnikov, Dobbs sees ordinariness as a blessing to aspire to . Dobbs: Ordinariness is not a curse to escape, but it's a blessing .
 Dobbs is down-and-out through no real fault of his own, warming public benches and panhandling for small change . Dobbs guilty of nothing more sinful than lewd thoughts and passing on to the very few people whose stations in life are higher .
 Given a change of clothes and something to jingle in his pockets, Dobbs becomes, even as you or I, generous to and considerate of his fellow man . Dobbs' petty inclinations towards evildoing evaporate .
 Dobbs is like us, but then comes as a shock to discover he's capable of gunning down a defenseless partner . Dobbs has been accused of being like us and acting like us in the past . He has been convicted of murdering a woman in prison .
 Dobbs and his partners calculate the various ways of dealing with the intruder who seeks to join in their enterprise and coldbloodedly reckon shooting him to be the most efficacious . But, though we may plead that at this point he is clearly off his bean (and that we would never
 It is not easy to say we would reckon otherwise, given the circumstances, here it is . And, given circumstances, there it is unlikely to be a surprise .
 The details are fast and electric from the moment the three prospectors start into the Mexican mountains, infested with bandits and beasts, until two of them come down emptyhanded and the third one, the mean one, comes down dead . Two of the trio of prospectors are killed in
 Most shocking will likely be the job that Mr Bogart does as the prospector who succumbs to the knawing of greed .
 The Traven mystery, insofar as there is one, resides in the question of how Mr Traven has been able to make himself a reputation with writing of this order, even if only in Texas and the Southwest .
 In the twenties, when this writer, a native of Chicago, was settling himself into his newly adopted Mexican habitat, his work, unpublished in the U.S., was being lapped up in Germany .
 An immense vogue for adventure stories swept over Germany in the postwar decade . Westerns were hugely popular in Germany during the 1950s .
 Dreamstuff about free zone beyond the dvancing frontiers of civilization, a place outside the urbanized world of rules and restraints where there was elbowroom and where action was allimportant, had an enormous appeal .
 Mr Traven's West is a egion of the mind, wholly related to the West of reality . It might best be described as its creator's anti-Chicago, Chicago being what he wanted out of when he was owing up there at the rn of the century as Berick
 One of the things Mr Miller tells us about this boy in his introduction sheds further light on the nature of the Traven cult .
 Young Berick idn't like going to school, id became a dropout at an early age . Berick dropped out of school at a young age .
 Mr Traven's heroes are men who know more medicine than most doctors, more Indian lore than any anthropologist, and n""ore of the true wisdom than is to be found in any library, all without ever having cracked a book . This piece of information helps one to understand why
 They are the natural consolers of the ignorant and of those who wish to make virtues of the narrowness and inconsequence of life . They are also those who have spent their lives in flight from every difficulty and responsibility .
 Another theory is Bendrich Traven, a Scandinavian, who came to Berlin in about 1920 and associated with an anarchist-syndicalist group led by Rudolf Rocker .
 It has been suggested that he is a deserter from the American navy, or that he had to flee from criminal prosecution in the United States . It has also been claimed that he was a Negro who fled from prosecution in America .
 The design behind the attempts to represent Traven as an American who writes in English, and who is still writing, is no less intriguing than is the unsolved mystery of the identity of B Traven .
 Charles H Miller offers, and refutes, still more solutions to the mystery of the Night Visitor . Miller refutes some of the latest theories .
 "It has been said that my sister . . . was B Traven, and that she wrote the books, while actually she was his secretary and translator," she says . "It's said that she was the author of many of the books."
 The mystery of B Traven does not exist simply because he refuses to state or clarify the facts of his life . But the mystery of his adventurous life does not exists simply because of his refusal to state the facts .
 It exists because of the nature of his obscure origin and his embattled career as philosophical revolutionist induced him to choose ""exile, silence, and cunning"" for his personal defense .
 Decades ago Traven's seclusion was a wise habit when Germany's Third Reich officials banned his books, confiscated his German earnings, and threatened his life . Traven: "Traven's books were banned in the Third Reich, confiscated and threatened to kill him .
 Even in his chosen land of Mexico, Traven's life was threatened by various landowners who considered his detailed accounts of guerrilla warfare as threats to their vested interests .
 They are strongly laced with Wobbly sentiment, heavily laden with contrivances of the kind which occur in real life but which are not permitted in fiction . Sometimes seemingly translated from the Venusian, they are sometimes seemingly translated to Venusian .
 The reader, if he is anything like me, will suffer with Fred C Dobbs precisely as he suffers with Rodion R Raskolnikov . And, of Sierra Madre, let me say that the reader, . If he's anything like myself, the reader will suffer
 This book deals with the West of reality and that region of the mind where even today the lust for gold possesses men and sends them with their spurious maps and tall tales to seek lost mines and lose their minds .
 The most celebrated mine, the ""Lost Dutchman,"" has already figured in magazine stories, articles and books . It is almost as numerous as maps which pinpoint its location .
 Jennings confesses that his early infatuation with the gold mines was as brainless as that of all the other questers . Jennings has done his homework — and his legwork — well. Well.
 Were it not that these matters were made understandable and enjoyable, there might be too much of the magma and continental upheavals — not the flora and fauna .
 Government and occupants of some 18,000 square miles of Arizona and New Mexico that, by virtue of an old Spanish grant, that land was his . The land was given to the U.S. by the Spanish in 17th century .
 The reader who hopes to find directions to a gold mine in this book will be disappointed . The reader will not be disappointed with the book .
 "There is a treasure here. And so I leave the Superstitions, knowing — not just believing, or hoping, as so many do — knowing that there is . There is not only believing, but also believing, as many do .
 It consists of some intangible compound of the mountains' terrible beauty; their awesome grandeur; their aloofnexx from both mastery and mockery . Their vast,»empty, echoing wilderness; their strange and wonderful inhabitants, both past and present . The legends and mysteries and hungers and
 Gary Jennings is my brother, but I feel I should mention that he's my brother . My critical judgment is, of course, unaffected by this fact, but he feels he should mention it .
 While people cry out for social justice and food for their families, we demand lettuce . We demand lettuce. We demand it. The lettuce is the answer to social justice .
 Little has been written about our team and its losses ; we have only read of Jackson State and its ""sky-king"" leapers . Little has written about us and our losses .
 Millsaps opened against William Carey in the Magnolia, with hopes of getting on the winning track . Millsaps opens with a win over William Carey, the first game of the season .
 William Carey shot 52% from the field while pulling down 38 rebounds to our 29-9 win . William Carey scored 52% of the field in the first half of the game . The team shot 52-52% of their shots .
 John Paden had 24 points and Mike Collins had 16 points for Millsaps . Mike Collins put in 16 points in the win .
 Millsaps kept with Rust through part of the second half, but then faded quickly . Millsaps keep pace with Rust though but then fade quickly .
 Three players in double figures for Millsaps, Mark Lynch with Paden with 13, and Bill McGuii with 13 . Three players also in double-figure figures .
 Rust had four players in double figures while the team tied in rebounds, 38 apiece . Rust's four players scored double figures in the game . The team tied the team's 38th rebounds .
 McGuire led all scores with 19 points, Paden had 15, and Hickman had 15 . McGuire scored 19 points and Paden scored 15 .
 We clinch last place with this loss, but we also dropped to 0-4 record . Not only did we clinch . But we also drop to an 0-3 record .
 Millsaps is off to a bad start with an 0-4 record, and the whole season ahead . Millsaps has been without a win in four games this season .
 Coach Booth has tried many players but has not found a winning combination . Booth has been trying to find winning combination of players and coaches .
 Several Majors have done well individually with Paden leading in scoring with 67 points and 16. average . McGi leads in rebounds with 28 for per game average .
 Each frosty bottle of Coke is the answer to • thirst . The JoUy Beggar . The BankThat Cares Member FDIC ad no wish hut .
 Crawford is leading a coalition of Black club owners in an effort to publicly combat alleged harassment by the Jackson Police . Crawford: "I'm not scared of the police. I'm scared of them. I want them to stop harassing me"
 Crawford Tells Of Police Harassment Against Black Clubs . Crawford tells of police harassment against black clubs . Crawford: "Jackson is becoming a city. Jackson is becoming the city"
 Business, industry and population rates are rapidly expanding, transforming a quiet and affable town into a complex metropolis . Business and industry rates are also rapidly expanding .
 The crime rate is soaring out of proportion, with a recent flurry of armed robberies bringing the Mayor's office and the Police Department under heavy attack . Several predominantly white business and citizens groups have attacked the police .
 Police Chief La veil Tullos declared a virtual ""war on crime"" to combat the surge of lawlessness . Police chief La veil has issued a series of directives, declaring a virtual 'war'
 Charges have been filed that Jackson Police may have overstepped their legal authority by trampling personal and civil rights in their increased efforts . Charges have now been filed, however, that the Jackson Police .
 Janiella Crawford, claims that large juads of non-uniformed olicemen have been harrassing owners and patrons of black htclubs in the Jackson State . Crawford: Large juads have been harassing black clubbers without just reason or cause . Crawford says
 Several charges of police brutality in the same area have been leveled st the police department . Concurrently, several charges have also been leveled .
 She was more than willing to vocalize her feelings and the feelings of the black community regarding alleged police harrassment . She said she was not afraid to do so .
 They just walked around shining lights in peoples' faces and demanding to see I.D.'s. They just shone lights into people's faces and demanded to see their ID'ss. "They just walked . around shining . lights into peoples' . faces," police officer says .
 Annual Student Executive Board elections are scheduled for tomorrow at Millsaps . SEB Elections to Open amidst Dissension .
 James Galloway, Chairperson of the Student Election Committee, announced late last week that nominations deadlines would be Tuesday . The elections will be held on Thursday .
 Allen Brehm, a junior here, plans to challenge the SEB elections schedule in the student Senate Tuesday night .
 Brehm 's challenge rests on the lack of time between the deadline for nominations and plans to point out the unfairness of possible candidates on the Student Election Committee having access to the slate of declared candidates .
 Brehm has hinted that if the Senate is unresponsive to his request he will attempt iniation of a campus-wide boycott of the election . If the Senate does not respond to Brehm's request, Brehm will try to create a campus boycott .
 The recommendation comes on the heels of a resolution passed unanimously by the faculty calling for a tuition increase to provide money for full cost-of-living raises to teachers and other college employees .
 Collins included the proposed tuition raise in the college budget for 1975-76 . Collins has included the proposal in the budget for the next year's budget .
 It will be presented for approval to the Board of Trustees in their meeting on February 7 . The board of trustees will meet February 7 to approve the proposal .
 The president feels that passage of the increase by the Board of the Board is very likely, in which case it will take effect next year . The president says the president feels the increase is likely .
 The proposal comes at a time when double-digit inflation has caused the administration to tighten its financial . The faculty has collectively requested a cost-of-living increase .
 It was hiked to $730 in 1973-74 and then to $805 in 1974-75 . The current $805 is the highest in the country's history .
 Faculty has been trying to secure an across-theboard 12% cost-of-living increase to supplement what is widely considered a very low salary level . Also feeling the squeeze of inflation, faculty has been .
 Whether they will get the full 12% is yet to be determined by Collins and the budget-makers .
 A tuition increase is the only way to provide the money for faculty pay raises, the president says . According to the president, a tuition hike is necessary to pay faculty members .
 The Board of Trustees instructed him to keep the college deficit at its current level . No more money can be spent from usual sources of income, he says .
 John Paden's side need to find a new source of tuition to cope with the high-pressure pressure . Paden has been in charge of the club since 2008 .
 A federal appeals court denied them any of the $13. million they were seeking in damages . The case will go to the U.S. Supreme Court, following a decision by an appeals court .
 The lawsuit was initiated ■ inst members of the issippi Highway Patrol and tti 'a 'a son Police Department as well as the State of Mississippi, the City of Jackson, and various other officials . The lawsuit is filed in Jackson, Mississippi .
 An appeals court upheld a trial jury's decision to exonerate the lawmen from liability . Despite the fact that the law enV forcement officers had used excessive force and fire on the J-State campus, the court upheld the jury's verdict . The appeals court felt that law en
 The court agreed with a trial judge's rubng that the city and state were immune from suit . The court also agreed with the trial judge that the state and city were immune .
 The Jackson State plaintiffs and relatives have sought recourse by petitioning the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari which, if granted, means that the Court will review the case . If granted, the petition will be reviewed by the Court .
 Department of Justice officials complain that twenty-five colleges and junior colleges are still predominantly segregated . Justice officials say they say twenty-seven colleges still have segregated campuses . The department of Justice says colleges are segregated .
 94th Congress started the new session on a note of promise, stripping several prominent committee chairmen of their posts . This comes after five years of effort by federal officials who now threaten court action . Wright Patman, Edward Hebert, and Bob Poage were among those stripped of their
 The move is seen as an indication of increased vigor by younger congressmen . The move was seen as a decline of the congressional seniority system .
 The C.I.A. left behind two decades of unaccountability this week with the opening of committee hearings in the Senate . The hearings are expected to last for more than a year .
 The hearings were to investigate domestic spying, which is strictly prohibited by the National Security Act of 1947 that established the C.I.A.'s operational functions .
 Louis Harris poll released on January 20 shows President Ford on shaky ground concerning the 1976 race . President Ford was in the lead in the 1976 presidential race .
 President Ford in his State of the Union message to Congress revealed his plans to halt the deepening recession . Ford's plans to stop the recession were revealed in his speech to Congress . Ford: "I want to help the economy. I want to make it stronger"
 His plans centered on fuel price increases, a 12 million dollar rebate on income taxes, and a recycling of the money earned by the fuel increases back into the economy .
 Detente suffered a serious blow last week when the Soviets rejected a U.S.-Soviet Trade Bill . The trade bill took three years to formulate and put into law . Detente has been a source of tension between Washington and Moscow .
 China took a step toward stabilization of its political structure during the first meeting of the National People's Congress in ten years . China is seeking to stabilize the political structure of its government .
 They placed continued desire for detente with the United States in accordance with the Communique of 1972 . o ceptance or rejection of the writ could come any time between now and June .
 The killings came after two nights of turmoil had rocked the virtually all-black campus . The killings come after two days of turmoil that rocked the campus .
 A force of 69 policemen confronted a crowd of students in front of a dormitory, a sharp sound was heard, several cried ""sniper"", and the officers opened fire . One dead student was found behind the police line across from the dorm where the sniper was supposed to be .
 Both local and federal grand juries held deliberations on the Jackson State tragedy . Grand juries refused to indict any law enforcement officers .
 Senate Corrections Committee scheduled to resume public hearings on Jack Reed's confirmation . Reed will be Superintendent of Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman . Reed was confirmed as Superintendent of the Mississippi State Prison .
 Reed charged that Corrections chairman Sen. Ted Cruz was wrong to criticize him . Reed: "I'm not sure what happened to Cruz, but I'm sure he was wrong"
 Corbet Patridge of Schlater had used political pressure tactics to interfere in the operation of the prison . Corbet. Patridge had tried to interfere with the operation .
 Bill Waller has charged that the move to block Reed's confirmation in the Senate is politically motivated . Waller says the move is a political ploy to block the confirmation .
 The Corrections Committee voted 5-2 against Reed January 15, but the full Senate voted 3022 to refer the matter back to the panel . The corrections committee voted against Reed .
 Bill Burgin of Columbus ejected 16 news people from Appropriations Committee meeting last Tuesday . Burgin rescinded his order the next day and let everyone back in .
 Minor and Burgin clash stems from a series of articles written by Minor last year which suggested that Burgin had possible conflicts of interests . Minor says Burgin has a possible conflict of interests in his articles .
 The Senate passed a bill which provides for a primary election to select 75 percent of the state's delegates to national party conventions . The bill also provides for the primary election which selects 75 per cent of delegates .
 The other 25 percent would be chosen by the state party's executive committee, which currently picks them all . State party would then pick the remaining 25 percent .
 He said he received a telegram from the Millsaps chapter of the union asking him to support the Cavagan Anti-Lynching Bill . Terming the American Student Union ""the originator and propagater of the germs of Communism,"" he said he had received a . te
 He said the sentiment was contrary to the attitude of Mississippians and other Southerners who felt lynching legislation should be State and not Federal legislation .
 The Hinman campus largely respected the Hinman administration for its motivations, efforts, and general efficiency, says Mark Jones . Jones says the change he instituted was a new optimism in students .
 Mike Stevens sees student government as "basically ineffective,"" full of good intentions and sinking ships . Mike Stevens says student government is full of "good intentions"
 The freshmen visitation proposal is a good idea for the new administration . Students will be able to see freshmen at home .
 Jones will ask for either second semester or full year visitation on a permanent basis . After a predatable questionaire to upperclassmen, Jones will decide whether to ask for a permanent visitation . Jones will be in contact with the deans and housemothers .
 His report will go from the senate through President Collins to the Board of Trustees . Jones is also head of a committee on tuition that will ""check into everything the student pays for""
 Later in the year the com mittee to study the feasibility of football and a P.E. major will report to the seante .
 Report will determine if the P.E. department should take the squeeze of rising costs, if emphasis should be placed on other sports, if the coaching is good, and if the football program should be reduced .
 An opinion poll was taken around campus to scout out students' opinions on a possible em tuition increase . The poll was meant to scout students' opinion on the possible increase in tuition in order to finance culty salary increase .
 The concensus of those polled emed to be against an increase in tuition . The ral concensus was against an increased tuition increase .
 Mariann Williamson: They'll have to increase the tuition or they'll loose the faculty . Mariann says they're going to have to raise tuition or lose faculty members . She says the tuition will be increased or they will lose faculty .
 Robert Kersh: I wouldn't want to work on the faculty here, but the tuition is high enough as it . Deirdre Mayes: I'm against raising tuition for any reason. Deirde Mayes says she's not against it raising tuition .
 Bruce Fairburn: "From an onomic standpoint the increase would be right, but I to see it god. The increase is not the increase, but the increase is right, he says .
 Carolyn Skinner: I'm in favor of increasing tuition if it's not raised too much because the faculty needs more money . Skinner: Tuition should be increased but not increased too much . Skinner says tuition should be raised to cover the costs of the faculty . Skinner also says he's in
 Ann Hendrick: If the tuition equalization bill was passed then tuition should be raised . She says if not, she says Don't raise tuition . Hendrick says the bill should be passed .
 The professors are putting too much into their work and not getting enough out of it, professor says . The professor says. "The professors are not getting too much out of their work," he says .
 Maura Mcintosh: To keep up the high quality here salaries need to be raised . But tuition shouldn't be raised, she says . Maura says tuition should also be increased .
 A proposal recommending the creation and institution of a Bachelor of Business Administration degree will be presented before the Feburary meeting of the Millsaps faculty .
 If it receives the favorable vote of the faculty, passage by the President and Board of Trustees will be just a mrer formality and the Degree will be instituted . If it gets the approval of faculty, the degree will be reinstated .
 The proposal isn't new having already gone before the Curriculum Committee and the College Senate . The proposal has already been approved by the College of Education .
 It was rejected by a vote of four to three in the Committee but received support and won in the College Senate . It received support from the college Senate, which approved it .
 The degree has been designed to meet the liberal arts criteria of education . Richard Baltz, orginator and designer of the degree, designed the degree .
 The degree is designed to offer a great deal of flexibility which is needed if Millsaps is to attract more business students . He stated that the degree is not intended to change the status of Millsaps as a liberal arts college .
 Proponents of the degree are of the consensus that if Millsaps does not attract more business students, they will have to attend other institutions to receive their education . Proponents say Millsaps needs to attract business students .
 Frances Coker stated that the degree is an excellent opportunity to meet the special needs of students entering the business world as well as graduate study Jn the fields of accounting and a'dministration .
 Peggy Hightower: "I think they'll be cutting their nose off if they raise tuition" Peggy says she thinks the university will be cutting its nose off . Peggy says it's a good idea to raise tuition for students .
 Pat Cooper: I'm all for a salary raise, but we need another alternative rather than tuition • increase . Pat Cooper says we need to find another alternative to tuition hike . Cooper: We need to look at the cost of raising salaries, not raising salaries .
 A tuition increase is not the means by which salaries need to be raised, says David Bourgeois . Bourgeois: 'I don't see how we've kept teachers here'
 Salaries need to be raised, but if tuition is raised, enrollment will drop . John McVay: Salaries must be raised to keep students enrolled . McVays says tuition should be increased .
 Those in favor of the degree say it will not cost the school any money . It could bring in an additional $100,000 annually . The degree could also bring in additional revenue .
 The B.B.A. does not represent a change in the department's course offerings, the department says . The department has not changed its course offerings .
 It would not require additional staffing, unless at a later date the degree program attracts sufficient enrollment to justify additions . The university would not need additional staffing .
 Frank Frohnhoefer said the crucial point of controversy appears to be whether or not a B.B.A. degre . degre belongs in a liberal arts college, he said . He said the question is whether a college degree should be held in liberal arts colleges .
 He added that professional and preprofessional studies are an integral part of the school . The college is a state-run college in the state of South Africa .
 The degree would be in keeping with the philosophy of the college. So logically the degree would have been in keeping . The degree is required to be given to students at the university .
 Frohnhoefer explained that the question of the B.B.A. degree is especially crucial at this time since many liberal arts colleges which haven't adjusted to the needs of students have either closed or will soon be forced to do so . Frohnhhoefer said that the
 There is a better than even chance that the faculty will approve the degree proposal when it comes before their meeting, but there will be opposition .
 Opponents of the bill feel that is is is a curriculum change without going through the already existing channels . Opponents say it is an attempt to change the curriculum without taking it through existing channels. Opponents feel it is a change that needs to be made through existing education channels .
 Others in opposition to the proposal see it as setting a bad precedent of moving to departmental degrees and thus breaking the backbone of the .liberal arts education .
 Robert Padgett stated that the degree doesn't offer anything new, but is only a way of getting around the foreign language requirement . The proposal as it now stands doesn't include language as a requirement, since the proposal .
 Others oppose the degree on grounds of its acceptance in the academic world . Others oppose it on grounds that it is accepted in academic circles .
 He too felt the degree was a way of getting around the language requirement without really offering anything new .
 You can fly with us at half and have a choice of dates for 4, 5, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 week duration during the summer .
 All you have to do to qualify is reserve your seat now by sending $100. deposit, plus $10. registration fee . And all you need to do is send a deposit of $100 plus a $10 fee .
 Government regulations we must submit all flight participants names and full payment sixty days before each flight . Government regulations must be submitted by the airline sixty days prior to each flight.
 If you take the June 21 August 19 flight to London for example, deposit reserves'your seat and April 15 you send the $199 balance . If you fly to London from June 21 to June 19, deposit reserve is $199 .
 Just one price for all flights whether you pick a weekend departure or peak season surcharg% date . The price of all flights is the same as the price of any weekend departure .
 Mail your deposit for one of our 3 to 5 weekly departures from June through September . So send for our complete schedule, or send for your complete schedule .
 You will receive an exact date confirmation and receipt by return 'mail'
 From London there are many student flights to all parts of the Continent, frequent departures and many at 2/ 3 off the regular fare . From London, students can find flights to Europe at a fraction of the student fare .
 It doesn't knock you out with its looks but you also don't get forks stuck in your upper pallette because of whistles blown in your ears while you're trying to eat . It also doesn't wind you out because it doesn't have whistles blowing into your ears .
 You don't get to listen to live music, but you don't pay sixty-five cents per beer for it, either . It's not only live music but you pay more than $60 cents for a beer .
 You also don't get draught beer that tastes like tap water poured out of an old beer can . The beer tastes more than tap water from an old can .
 George Street Grocery was built in 1912 as a grocery store . The upstairs was used off-and-on as a rooming house .
 At one time the building housed a dancing school and was rumored to carry a side-line business of prostitution . The building has been home to a dance school and rumored to have a prostitution side line .
 This was never proven, but certainly adds a bit of zest to the history of the country's history .
 The restaurant itself first started in August of '74 and is most palatable . The restaurant was first opened in 1974 .
 Its atmosphere ce nts a draught might be described as rustic or j f . f i . i§* * ** *** * * * ft ft ft f ft ft feet ft ft - -kl tf antique — sort of a nostalgia triple -|c with a touch of
 You don't have to worry about keeping up with the Ole Miss crowd at the fooseball table or the swinging singles crowd, because they're not there . Instead, you have to keep up with Ole Miss fans at the Fooseball and singles bar .
 They're off getting whistles blown in their ears or shouting over the sounds of dance bands . They're not off the streets of London, they're off whistling over the sound of music .
 The Dutch Bar crowd is unique in their common affection for what has become an institution, religiously attended . Dutch Bar is a popular club in the U.S.
 It is frequented by the young and the old, the alcoholics and the "just getting started"", the fooseball nuts, the freaks, and the not-so freaks . It's frequented .
 The beer is delectible and sensibly priced . The best food at the best prices in town and, of course, the beer .
 The beer is served in big,* frosty frosty mugs for 600 . Each mug holds* about 12 ounces of beer .
 Northview Drive meals (po-boy plates, red beans ^. and rice) cost about two .
 The Recovery Room is located at 342820 North State . You can't go wrong at *01d Canton Road George St. J So next time you want to make a big score with your date, head to the Recovery Room .
 Grocery ^255 George * Ireland's ^925 Lakeland Drive * r***-***************** HOURS 5:30 6:30 pm Mon.-Fri. 4:30 . 6:00pm Mon.-Thurs. 5:00 6.00 pm Mon.
 Quake offered to sell us a series of stories about his days spent with the remarkable courtroom wizard . Quake was broke and disillusioned, but offered to give us a look back at his days in the courtroom . Quake: "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to the great courtroom wizard"
 Bayonne Bayonne, Alabama Legal Editor, is the P&W's PBR Legal Editor . All we had was a hot sixpack of PBR, which he readily took in exchange for his services .
 What follows is the first installment in his serialized account of the one and only Oscar T Fornbush, Attorney at the Bar .
 P&W Bayonne, Alabama Legal Editor, Miller Quake. My name is Miller Quake .
 'I am now nothing more than a gutter bum, with a pocketful of memories my only possessions. I am now . I am . now . a pocket full of memories, my . only possessions .
 This is a tale of how a small college named -loofer and a alcoholic lawyer amed Fornbush destroyed one of the great investigative reporters of our time. This is my story, a tale . This is the story .
 Oscar T Fornbush, Attorney at the Bar, was named the defendants' lawyer . The story had the potential of a pregnant rabbit, says the author .
 Bayonne, Alabama, is home to Hoofer College, a small college in the state of Alabama . It's a quiet Tuesday morning, but it's a good day for the college students .
 The hairy young man chuckled rather loudly, then pointed to a heap of trash lying behind the cafeteria . Oscar T is a member of the famed defender, Oscar T . The hairy man chuckled as he pointed to the heap of rubbish lying in the cafeteria.
 I strode excitedly over to the smelly mess, certain I would find the legal-eagle uncovering clues .
 Out of the trash heap exploded a human form . For an infintesimal second, time and space stood still . Then with a shriek, out of a trash heap, exploded a form .
 If the apparition standing in front of me realized my surprise, however, his face didn't snow it . The apparition was not snowing it, however .
 He stared blankly at me for a moment, then fell ignobly back among the bottles from whence he had sprung .
 It was evening and I was sipping brandy on an abandoned pier with Oscar T . The sun was setting across the bay as the quiet waters gently lapped dead fish against pylons .
 Oscar T had polished off a case of his own, one of Dixie Beer . We had spent the afternoon diligently reviewing the Hoofer case from the relative quietness of Uncle Pete's Bar and Grill, as Oscar T polished off his own .
 Several Hoofer students had been in open rebellion against the will of the Lutheran church, the governing body that controlled Hoffer College . The college's governing body controlled the student body .
 An anarchist group led by editor of the notorious campus newspaper, the Blue and Yellow, ridiculed everything the college stood for . Led by ""Fire Breath"" Barker, editor of "Fire Breath" Barker, this Godless group of anarchists .
 OSCAR T FORNBUSH POURING OVER his law books . Nothing sacred to the saps Players was sacred to this iconoclastic subversives .
 A petition was published in the paper calling for the public hanging of Barker as a deterrant to others who would be ""sarcastic or sacreligious or unfair to the administration while in print" The administration acted, feeling it had the popular support it needed for a crackdown .
 Oscar T Fornbush is a renowned defense lawyer . He is the son of Oscar T. T. Forbush, a prominent defense lawyer who has been accused of murder . He was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 The writer had serious doubts as to this man's ability . But now, as he sat on the lonely pier and gazed into vapid eyes that resembled raw oysters, I admitted to myself that I had serious doubt .
 "This story was all I had, and this story was dependant on Oscar T Fornbush. This story was the only thing I had," she says . "This is all I can do, and I'm going to do it," she writes .
 Fate had cast my lot with his, and our only hope lay with a power far greater than ours . Fate was cast with his and fate had cast his lot with fate .
 Oscar T would recognize only greater power was a bottle of Jack Daniel's . Unfortunately, the only real power he would recognize would be his bottle of whiskey .
 I think that I must certainly be crazy, but I suppose that I suppose a neutral observer would just suppose we were two old friends relaxing on a quiet pier . I suppose I must be crazy. But I suppose it's just a normal observer would think we were just old friends .
 With those words, spoken as the last rays of sunlight disappeared from the horizon, he slipped to the deck of the pier . He slipped onto the deck as the final rays of the horizon disappeared .
 "The State of Alabama vs. Alabama" is a classic classic of the classic case . The case was the subject of a Pulitzer Prize-winning book .
 "I rose from the table and slowly walked off, not knowing whether to laugh or cry," she says . "I was not sure whether I was laughing or crying," she writes .
 Vice Admiral Frederick Turner, the Sixth Fleet commander, said the Navy didn't want to invade any oil sheikdom but was ""prepared"" to do so . Vice Admiral Turner added to the furor by saying the Navy was prepared to invade .
 Kissinger's views have been misrepresented by the press, Kissinger says . Kissinger is telling Arab leaders that Arab leaders have misrepresented his views . Kissinger says Arab leaders are telling them his views are being misrepresented .
 Secretary of State told associates during a recent secret discussion . We can reveal, however, what he told associates of a secret meeting .
 President Ford would not stand by while the Western world was destroyed by an oil squeeze, he said . Ford said he would not be standing by while Western world is destroyed by oil squeeze .
 Kissinger: Oil could be used as a weapon to destroy the free world's economy . Kissinger says it would be just as serious a threat as a Soviet military move against the West . Kissinger: If oil should be used to destroy free world economy, Kissinger said, would be a serious threat
 Kissinger stressed that the oil crisis can be solved without war . Kissinger: Of course, Kissinger said that the crisis can't be solved by war .
 He has vigorously opposed the idea of military intervention . And in the secret policy councils, he has vigorously fought against the idea .
 Kissinger has been scheming secretly with the Shah of Iran to find a solution to the Middle East mess . Kissinger was working secretly with Iran to come up with a solution . Kissinger has also been working with Iran's Shah to find an end to the crisis .
 Kissinger persuaded the Shah that another Middle East war would increase Arab dependency upon the Soviets . Another war would strengthen Soviet influence in the Middle East, Kissinger says .
 Shah has secretly agreed to supply Israel with the oil she would lose by giving up captured Egyptian oil fields . The Shah has agreed to give Israel the oil it would lose if she gave up the captured Egyptian fields .
 Shah is willing to join the U.S. in guaranteeing Israel's survival . Shah is also willing to give Israel a guarantee of its survival .
 This is significant, because Iran is emerging as a military power in the Middle East . This is important for Iran, which has been seen as a major military force in the region . Iran is also emerging as an emerging military power, says Iran's president .
 Egypt's President Sadat has told both Kissinger and the Shah that Israel must give up more than the oil fields . Sadat told Sadat and Kissinger that Israel needs to give up even more than oil .
 There must also be withdrawals from the Golan Heights on the Syrian front and the West Bank on the Jordanian front . The withdrawal must also include withdrawals from Golan heights on the Syria front .
 Sadat explained that he could never accept a deal that didn't also include his Arab brothers . Sadat said he would never accept any deal that included Arab brothers. Sadat: "I'm not going to accept it, I'm not sure what I want"
 Kissinger is bringing pressure on the Israelis to come to terms with the Arabs before it is too late . Kissinger is now bringing pressure to the Israeli government .
 A mimeograph of a handwritten letter was received by the Purple and White in an envelope bearing only a Brooklyn, NY postmark . The letter was sent in a Brooklyn-bound envelope bearing a Brooklyn postmark.
 Every time the American People voted for a President to end it, we were lied to, bomboozeled, and finally betrayed . Every time a President voted for an end to it, he was lied to and then betrayed .
 When college students were in danger of being drafted and sent to Vietnam, then we heard from you, that it was wrong . The college students told us that the draft was wrong, and that it wasn't .
 The implications of key Democratic committee hairmen in the U.S. House of Representatives have ominous overtones for veteran southern congressmen . Fink Paul Pittman: "Sometimes in the quiet, if you listen carefully, you can hear the disgusted voice of God"
 Since 1911, the most charished of all political icons in the Deep South has been the vaunted seniority system . The system has elevated southerners to positions of power on key committees .
 The one-party South had a tradition of returning its congressmen to Washington year after year . Simply put, the one-partied South had an annual return to Washington .
 In the process, they developed a skill in parliamentary maneuvering, added to the near sacred seniority which kept elevating them in committee positions, power and prestige .
 The House Democratic caucus cut the ground from under the seniority system last week . The move opened the door for more reforms in legislative machinery for the future .
 Poage also from Texas, who was chairman of the agriculture committee, and Edward Hebert of Louisiana, also from Louisiana . Poage is chairman of both agriculture and armed services committees .
 Jamie Whitten, Mississippi's senior representative in Congress survived the purge, but it was a questionable victory . Whitten is Mississippi's most senior Representative in Congress . He is a Democrat and Republican .
 He had to relinquish two of the four areas over which his subcommittee on agriculture appropriations held jurisdiction . The agriculture appropriations subcommittee had jurisdiction over agriculture appropriations . The subcommittee also had to give up two areas over that area .
 Wilbur Mills of Arkansas did not seek reelection to the powerful ways and means committee chairmanship . Mills' notoriety was foreordained by an obviously off-key involvement with a strip tease artist .
 Even Mississippi's flamboyant William Miller of Pascagoula was deposed after years of service in the House .
 Two questions loom about the final significance of the congressional bloodletting . CNN's John Sutter asks about the impact of the blood letting .
 Mississippi's two senators conceivably could find their power on two top committees, military affairs and judiciary in jeopardy .
 Developments in Congress could have a potent effect on the state political scene . So far, developments in Congress have a powerful effect on state politics .
 Mississippi's Democratic congressmen stake their re-election campaigns on their power, gained through long tenure in their offices . No longer can Mississippi's . Democratic congresswomen stake their efforts on their . power, they say .
 No longer can they defend their fidelity to the Democratic cause on the basis of a vested interest in retaining their power through the route of seniority . No longer . can they . defend their . fidelity to . the . Democratic cause .
 Senator Jim Eastland's decision, to seek another term in 1978 is less predictable . Senator Eastland was elected to office in 1978 . Senator was elected in 1964 .
 Senate will not eventually be touched by the mood that has finally come to fruition in the Democratic Caucus in the House . The mood is finally coming to fruition .
 It is, in fact, the end of an era lamented by some, greeted with high hopes by others by others . It is an end to an era lamented by some and greeted by others with hopes of a new era .
 Some state education leaders have questioned Outlook's assessment of teacher pay raise . By the fruits of integration we have learned that it is destructive .
 Conference committee to resolve differences between Senate and Senate versions of legislation . Segregation is a social and political production which is unnatural . Blacks are distrustful of white America — Aaron Henry .
 This column has verified the cost of the program as reported here last week . It is verified that the program costs $1.5 million .
 The Senate bill would cost more than $31 million plus the built-in cost-of-living increase of about $15 million . The bill would include a cost of $31.5 million .
 The House bill would cost aout $28 million, added to the cost-living amount . The bill would also add to the state's cost of living amount .
 Some legislative leaders admit that there is confusion about the cost, even among legislators . When contacted, some legislative leaders admitted that there was confusion .
 Outlay would make any new money appropriations highly unlikely this session, lawmakers say . They say they would not be surprised if the governor vetoes the ay increase so that other programs be considered .
 The diversity, the prominence, and the extremity of the speakers led to a really fine week-long program, the likes of which can rarely be seen in| this area .
 DeanPittman James Holland Doug Levanway Danny Bowling BillBlair WardEmling EarlAycock Lloyd Gray Glade Mclnnis Doug Brindley .
 Communal Bathing Replacing Streaking as the national campus pastime for 1975 .
 Following a hard day of classes, student neighbors now take to big back-yard tubs to sip wine, exchange tales of the day's woes, read poetry, and soak their troubles away .
 Scullion says group bathing is a far healthier form of tension release than simply running across campus nude . But, he says, it's a far better way to relax than running naked .
 For many of the participants, communal bathing has become a vital part of their social schedule . For many, it has become an important part of the social calendar .
 Scullion himself adds that the community-tub is a great way to get to know your neighbors . Scullions says the tub is a good way to connect with your neighbors and socialize .
 The former acid ""visioner"" turned government informer last summer . He has been the subject of a smear campaign by former friends, the focus of a major Justice Department investigation of the Weathermen .
 For six months, either the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, or Leary, have resisted efforts by Leary's friends and associates to sit down for a face-to-face meeting .
 The Justice Department and the Bureau of Prisons insists that Leary does not want to see anyone . Leary is being held in a federal prison in Washington, DC .
 Says United States Bureau of Prisons spokesperson Mike Aun, ""Leary is singing. The inmate is singing."
 Leary is being held under "extreme security" somewhere in the Los Angeles area . The latest word on Leary's whereabouts was that he was being held in an area of Los Angeles . Leary was the subject of much of the most recent news of his death .
 Leary's former associate and known drug informer Dennis Martino insisted that he had seen Leary ""several times"" and that he was content and happy . In a recent letter to the Los Angeles Free Press, Martino said that he saw Leary several times .
 Martino assailed those who conducted the so-called smear campaign against Leary, including Jerry Rubin, Ken Kelly, and Leary's son Jack . Martino said Jerry Rubin and Ken Kelly conducted the smear campaign .
 The latest twist in the increasingly Kafkaesque case was revealed this month by a small newspaper in Vacaville, California . Leary spent some time in the notorious prison where he spent time in prison .
 Leary is scheduled to appear as a star witness for the state in a case involving a former prison psychologist . Leary will appear in court in the case involving Dr. Dr. Larry Leary . Dr. Leary has a history of drug abuse .
 Hiler was fired last fall for allegedly smuggling a tape recording made by Leary out of prison and delivering it to a magazine editor . Hiler allegedly smuggled the tape recording out of the prison and delivered it to an editor .
 Hiler says if the state won't produce Leary for his reinstatement hearing on January 27th, he'll have him subpoenaed as a defense witness . Hiler: Leary will be subpoenaed to testify at the hearing . Leary is scheduled to appear in court on January
 Leary sought financial aid for the project from numerous backers, says Hiler . Hiler maintains that Leary actually received some support from some backers .
 Leary's decision to turn informer was a result of his determination to get out of prison and undertake the space journey . Leary says that Leary made the decision to become an informer after he was released from prison .
 This is being reprinted from the March 7, 1969 issue of the Purple and White . This is the first time we've seen this story in the U.S.
 It may, or may not offend the fraternity men of the campus, but we really don't care . The fraternity men may not be offended, but it's not going to offend them .
 They come in assorted sizes, weights and states of inebriation . They can be found anywhere, in fraternity houses, on dates, in arguments and always in debt . They come from all shapes and sizes .
 Girls love them, campuses tolerate them and parents support them . Girls love girls and campuses tolerate girls, support them. Girls say they want girls to be girls who want to be women .
 A frat man is laziness with a deck of cards, bravery with his fraternity paddle . The protector of the girls' dorm with a copy of Playboy magazine. A fraternity paddle and a deck .
 "He has the energy of a turtle, the slyness of a fox and the ingenuity of a con man," the author says . "His desires are for women, booze, money, and always a diploma," he says .
 Some of his likes are co-eds, women, girls, ladies, dames, broads, birds, chicks, chicks and members of the opposite sex . Some of the likes of co-ed, women and girls, he said .
 His dislikes are writing papers, chapel, wearing a suit, Deans, W.S.G.A., cafeteria food, yellow cards, and getting up for 8 o'clock class .
 No one person except a fraternity man can stuff into one pocket a little black book, a pack of crushed Marlboros, a picture of Ann Margaret, a comb, a church key, his draft card and what's left of last weeks' allowance .
 'He spends his money on women, booze, poker, and the rest he spends foolishly,' he says .
 A frat man is a magical creature; you can lock him out of a dorm, but not out of your heart . You can scratch him off your list of things you want to do with him, but you still have to think about him . The author of the book, "
 You might as well give in; he is your one and only good-fornothing bowl of joy . He is one of the best things to say: "I love you. I love you"
 I was hoping for a quick look at some fire and brimstone or a lot of outhful index fingers pointing pward and I could report to my litor that the story wasn't wsworthy; then I would be off to other pursuits . I was looking for some fire
 "What I saw instead was an auditorium full of people with their arms above their heads and their hands stretched out to the side as if they were holding up a tremendous weight" "I saw instead . What I saw was an audience of people holding up tremendous weight," she said .
 Some were translating what the tongue-talkers were lying and still others just waved ieir arms in ectasy . Others waved their arms to try and find out what they were lying .
 A middle-aged couple named Charles and Frances Hunter were on stage at the event . On stage was the reason for all the jabbering and hand waving . The couple is a couple from the same town .
 Standing next to them was an angellic-looking twenty-year-old who was leading the singing . Standing alongside them was a 20-year old who was singing .
 Meanwhile, I found a seat in the balcony and settled securely into my agnosticism . Meanwhile, the rest of the world was enjoying a trip to the Vatican .
 Frances was talking about how the power of God was too much for some people, how they just keeled over when they felt it . She said that some people keeled out of their faith when she felt the power .
 A row that had been standing collapsed when she touched the hand of one of them . A whole row of people collapsed when the woman touched her hand . The row collapsed when a woman touched one of the women's hands .
 Behind me two ten-year-old boys were in a trance with their eyes closed and their arms around each other . Behind me, two ten year-olds were in trance with eyes closed, their arms wrapped around eachother . Behind them, two 10-year old boys were also
 In front of me a pair of housewives swayed to the organ music between intermittent bursts of crying . In the front of them, the organistist played a song about the Holocaust .
 Frances made her way through the last rows on the floor and began climbing the steps to the balcony . She climbed the steps of the balcony to see her friends and family .
 Frances kept on waddling up the stairs and that angel on stage kept singing louder and louder . But Frances kept going up stairs and kept singing .
 My heart returned to its normal pace, my breathing slowed down, color returned to my face . My heart began to beat again, but my breathing returned to normal .
 The Bible tells us that we'll get back one hundred fold what we put in, Frances says . The Bible, she says, says, tells us to get back 100% of what we spend .
 They told stories about people who give $10.00 one night and find $20.00 in their mailbox the next day . And they told stories of people who gave $15.00 and received $20,000 in their mail the next night .
 The old man who came in on crutches, gives $20.00 for another chance and then leaves, still on crutsches . It's the part about the man who gave $20,000 for a chance to get back on the street .
 It's about all those who thought they had been cured of smoking cigarettes and realize that they had unconsciously smoked one for five minutes on the drive home .
 The Regulars of Mississippi's split Democrat party apparently will have to come ""under the Loyalist wing"" if the two faction's uniting ever becomes a reality .
 Aaron Henry, speaking candidly after the Friday Forum at Millsaps last week, projected a new feeling from the loyalist side of the fence, almost a laissezfaire attitude towards the Regulars . Aaron Henry is a veteran defender who has been a regular in the Premier League
 Henry, chairperson of the Mississippi Loyalist, stated that the Regulars are going to have to come to them (the Loyalists) if unification is to be realized . Henry said that the regulars will have to face unification with the Loyalists .
 Loyalist's national recognition is national recognition as the state's only Democrat party . One reason for this attitude, of course, is that the Loyalist is the only Democrat Party in the state .
 Supreme Court decision makes state Democratic party laws void if they contradict national party rules . This, however, has been compounded by the recent Supreme Court .
 This particular action strengthened the Loyalist's position in the state, says the historian . The Loyalist is said to have taken the action to strengthen his position in Scotland .
 Dr. Bill Waller attended the Democratic mini-convention at Kansas City . Dr. Waller says Waller's visit to Kansas City was a good fit for the governor .
 Loyalists are enjoying a feeling of euphoria, but they realize that as far as state politics go, their position is weak . However, although the Loyalists enjoy the euphoria they realize they are weak in state politics, they say .
 Pat Derian, Democratic national committee woman from Mississippi, recently commented that unless Loyalist candidates in state elections had Regular support, they would be forced to run as Independents .
 Henry pointed to the recent appointment of Jack Harper, a Regular Chancery Clerk from Sunflower County, to the Loyalist Board of Directors . Henry said Harper was appointed to the board .
 Henry also hinted that he had hopes that Congressman David Bowen would be the initial Regular to lead his faction to the Loyalist camp . Henry hinted that Bowen would lead his Loyalist faction to Loyalist camps .
 Loyalists in the Regular hierarchy and vice-versa will probably soon result in total integration of the two factions . With or without obstacles, the intermingling already of Loyalists and Loyalists will soon be complete .
 Tuition Equalization Bill appears to be doomed for the third straight year in Mississippi legislature . The bill was designed to save students attending private colleges in Mississippi up to $400 a year .
 Bill Alexander of Cleveland, Ohio, has been referred to the Committee on Universities and Colleges of the Senate . The bill will probably die an unnoticed death because of strong opposition by some members of the panel .
 Woodward has been Millsaps' primary lobbyist for the measure . The measure is sponsored by the Mississippi Association of Private Colleges . Woodward has lobbied for Millsaps, a private college .
 The bill passed the Senate last year, but was amended to include private secondary and elementary schools in state aid provisions . The bill was amended on the Senate floor to allow private schools to be included .
 The chief argument against the proposal in the Senate was that it represented a violation of the constitutional separation of church and state . The bill was defeated by a majority of senators .
 Monday night saw another step in the wrong direction for the young Millsaps Majors . No, this beat is not one of joy but one of frustration for the team .
 For the record, the Majors were facing a highly regarded group of Bulldogs from Tougaloo College . The Bulldogs were known to play very good basketball .
 Many people expected this to be the biggest rout' of the season since the Choctaws of Mississippi College came calling last semester . Mississippi College won the first game of its season .
 The Majors have a reputation for doing things backwards . But the Majors seem to have gotten the information a little mixed up .
 lsaps shot a torrid 86% from the throw line and an equally pressive 50% on the floor . The Bulldogs shot an 86% shooting from the free-throw line and a 50% shooting percentage from the floor.
 Expected first-round choices J included quarterback ^ Steve Bartowski of California, linebacker j J Randy White of Maryland, J )f and running back Walter J Payton of Jackson State . J is expected to be a first-rounder .
 According to some exjf. perts, Wepner is the *• seventh rated heavyweight J in the world . According to the exjfs, he is the 7th-ranked heavyweight in the heavyweight world .
 Ali is widely believed to give rematches + to former title-holders Joe J Frazier and George Foreman-possible on the same card during the same * night . Ali is believed to be planning a rematch with Frazier and Foreman in the future .
 Freshman John Paden led the Majors in scoring, blistering the nets for 26 points . Mark Lynch added offensive spark with slick ball handling .
 Millsaps now faces a Friday night rematch in the PAC with Louisiana College, an easy victor over the Majors last week in their initial' meeting of the season . Millsaps won their first PAC game last week .
 Millsaps has yet to find victory, but the Tougaloo game showed that they can play good basketball on occasion . Millsaps is yet to win a single game in a row, but it was a good performance .
 The team includes freshmen Nancy Barksdale, Shawn Evans, Isabelle Ezelle, Karen Gladney, Gail Gober, Carol Humphreys, Carol Middlestead, Mary Jo Milling, Ellen Sessions, and Cindy Wilson . Janet Dykes and Valerie Hodgens are seniors
 The game showed inexperience in handling the ball and working as a team . The game was the first time the team had a game without a win in six years .
 Constant turnovers during the first half proved fatal as did the outside goals by Belhaven . Constant turnovers led to the loss of points for the visitors .
 The women have had to adjust to the new rules of five-member team, full-court play, and twenty minute halves . The new rules include full court play and twenty-minute half-time halves .
 They plan to use a strategy of quick offense and effective defense to compete with the experienced teams of Tougaloo, Jackson State, and Unifirst . The team plans to use quick offense to compete .
 Extramural basketball offers an excellent opportunity for women to participate in organized competitive sports . According to Miss Mary Ann Edge, coach of the team, extramurals is an excellent option for women .
 Basketball is the most competitive and surely the most participatory intramural sport on campus . Commenting after the first game, she was optimistic that the full potential of the team will be accomplished in future games .
 Starting Tuesday, there will be no less than fourteen teams vying for the championship in one of the two leagues . This can be verified by noting that, starting Tuesday, the teams will be competing in both leagues . The two leagues will be divided into one league and one league .
 The ""A"" league will be composed of one team from each of the men's fraternities, KA, Pike, Lambda Chi, and Kappa Sigma . The Turkeys, representing the Black Student Association, the Tracers, last year's champions, Chalk, and
 Athletic Director Jim Montgomery also informed team captains of the new rule concerning the referees . If the team scheduled to play does not have at least five players present at game time, then a technical foul will be levied against that team .
 If the team remains inadequately numbered, then two other technicals will follow which calls for a forfeiture . The team will be forfeited if the team is not at fault for being under numbered .
 If a forfeit is called, then the team forfeiting will be responsible for paying the officials . If a team forfeits, they will have to pay officials . The team will then have to forfeit the match .
 Each team will also be required to have at least two other persons attending each game to act as score keepers . Each team must also have two other people at the games to keep track of the score .
 Chalk Volleyball, which finally ended last week, saw the Pikes whip the KA's in a two out of three contest for the ""A"" league championship . Pike ""C"" team also saw the Pike ""A" team put the ""B"" team easily under
 Crawford was arrested for violation of state liquor laws . Crawford was charged with possession of an illegal pint of gin . Crawford has been charged with a felony charge of possession of alcohol .
 Several other nightclub owners also had been arrested, each on charges as flimsy as mine . They were just looking for an excuse to arrest, he says . The charges are flimsy, he writes, and they were just an excuse for arrest .
 "We had a meeting the Sunday night before our court hearing and one the next night. We had to meet the Sunday nights before our hearing," she said . She said: "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with my family and friends"
 He wouldn't even talk to us at first — said he didn't want to involve himself . But after a group of us planted ourselves outside his office the next day, he gave in and agreed to meet with us .
 When asked if the incidents concerning the police officers were isolated occurences, Ms. O'Neill said they were not . She said the incidents were not isolated incidents .
 The night I was arrested was the third consecutive night the police had been in my place . The night of the arrest was the fourth consecutive night in the police's place . It was the first night I had been arrested in a row of arrests in the UK .
 Crawford related numerous accounts of police harrassment in black nightclubs across town . Crawford related to numerous reports of police harassment . Crawford: "I'm not scared of police. I'm scared of them. I don't think they're scared of cops"
 Anyone hesitant in complying with the order would be immediately arrested . Anyone hesitant to comply would be arrested immediately .
 Ms. Williams will appear before the City Council on January 20 . She says she will make an appearance before the council .
 Crawford spoke angrily, 'They weren't ready to listen ot us; they just didn't care' Crawford spoke . 'They were ready, they didn't want to listen to us,' he said . Crawford said. 'They didn't really care'
 Mayor Davis and Chief Tullos promised a complete investigation into the allegations . A report will be released within two weeks .
 This was not enough to satisfy the coalition of nightclub owners, however, however . This is not enough for the coalition, however.
 "I'm not going to have anything to do with it, but sooner or later somebody's gonna get pushed in a corner and fight back," he says . "I don't want to be involved in it. I'm not gonna be a part of it."
 Crawford described the effect of police techniques on community morale . Crawford described tne effect the police techniques were having on the community . Crawford describes the effect the techniques had on morale in the community.
 "My business, it isn't one quarter what it was three months ago," says owner . "I can't blame people for staying away from here. My business isn't going to be as good as it was," he says .
 Governor Bill Waller, discussing the possibility of having their £ J book reconsidered for approval + ^ as a state recognized textbook . Without this recognized status, £ the schools of Mississippi would £ J not be allowed to purchase the . book with state or federal money, * jf making
 Both Sallis and Loewen are * )f pleased and encouraged by the £ J governor's decision .
 Nobody has talked torts and physiology and Tagore in a long, long time . Nobody's talked about torts, physiology and handball and good dates and new movies in Steamboat Springs and Joni Mitchell .
 We want to hear you talk about what you did over the holidays and what you're going to be taking next . What else you want to talk about? Share your thoughts with us at CNN iReport .
 Don Fortenberry, speaking in behalf of the committee, said that they felt freshmen need time to indoctrinate themselves into Millsaps life before they should be thrown into the situation of first semester rush .
 The committee hopes to incorporate the support and assistance of the IFC in making an official decision in regard to second semester rush . Realizing the sensitivity of the issue, the committee hopes for the support .
 The idea of second semester rush is not new and was, in fact, discussed in the school senate last year . Second semester rush was discussed last year in the senate .
 Greek Summer Aspen Lodge, Estes Park, Colorado, is located on the outskirts of Aspen, Colorado . The lodge is one of several of the summer lodges in the state .
 Employ college students and high school seniors from June 1 to September 10 . Employ students and seniors from college students to work for summer jobs .
 Need 6 waiters, 6 cabin boys, 2 kitchen help, 2 dishwashers, $130 plus equal split tips, room and board . Need 6 . waiters . 6 boys, 6 . cabin boys and 2 kitchen . help . Need . kitchen help and $130 .
 Need 4 costume assistants, 12 actors and actresses, 4' technicians, salary commensurate with experience . Need 4 'costumes assistants' and 12' technicians . Need 12 actors, 12 'actors and actresses' roles .
 Organizations were so vehemently opposed to the idea, its failure was not a surprise . For more information on over 90,000 summer jobs around the United States see the Summer Employment Directory in Dean Woodward's office .
 Without the income of new pledges during that first semester, several of the Greek organizations claim they will literally ""go under"", financially . Without new pledges, many Greek organizations will literally "go under," financially .
 The burden of what will probably result in a semester of undeclared rush for both the Greek member and the potential rushee, a situation that could prove detrimental to all involved . Another important objection to this issue is the burden of the student body, a student body member .
 If the IFC agrees to work with the Chaplain's Committee on this issue, these and other pitfalls of both first and second semester rush will be aired . The IFC will also air the issue with Chaplain Committee .
 Committee hopes IFC will assist in reaching an agreeable school position . Committee hopes school position can be reached with IFC assistance .
 The deadline fori [entries is February 5, and I [these may be turned in to [Dr. John] Dr. John].
 The I manuscript should not be bel signed, but a separate card I with the author's name, I [college, division, and manuscript title] should be I I turned in with the entry .
 I Winning manuscripts in I I each category will then be I submitted to the 19751 [Southern Literary Festival | eneral competition] Winning manuscripts are then submitted to be submitted to a 19751 contest .
 Exam Schedules are the dates of graduate and professional exams given in the Spring Semester . Exam schedules are published by the University of Cambridge .
 David Watson need a student to visit hospitals all over the state of Mississippi to collect abstract information from hospital records . David Watson needs to visit all over Mississippi hospitals and collect abstract data .
 She has one child attending the School for the Emotionally Disturbed Children . She needs someone who owns a car to pick her child up from school at 11:30, take it home, feed it lunch, etc. She has a car .
 Anyone interested in babysitting only will receive $.75 per hour, plus gas . Pay is 2.00 per hour . Anyone who wants to babysat will be paid 2.0 per hour or 2.75 an hour .
 El Palacio Restaurant on 1-55 North is taking applications for waitresses and day bus boys . The restaurant is located in downtown Chicago .
 "Please apply in person between 10:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., and ask for Chuck or Debbie Singletary. Please apply in . person between . 10 and 5 p.m. and 10:30 p. m.
 The REPORTER needs someone to work about three hours every Wednesday delivering papers and collecting money from local stands . The newspaper needs someone who works three hours a week delivering papers .
 Operation of the new gym has come under attack from individuals and campus groups alike . Campus groups have attacked the operation of the gym in the past .
 Limited access comes as a result of the complete gym floor often being occupied by intercollegiate teams or by outside groups who have rented the facility .
 The Student Senate and College Senate have formed ad hoc committees to look into the nation . Complaints about the way the PAC is being operated have become so intense that the committees have formed . The committee will look into how the PAC operates .
 College Senate panel is supposed to draw up guidelines for use of the new gym . The College Senate is expected to come up with guidelines for the gym .
 The committee includes athletic director Jim Montgomery, whose appointment by Dean Saunders was challenged by several student members of the Senate . Students felt that a conflict of interest existed in Montgomery's appointment .
 The Millsaps tennis squad has practiced in the gym around 50% of the afternoons this semester . They often occupy all three courts from around 1:30 to 3:00m. The team is preparing for their February 21 indoor tournament .
 On at least two occasions, the football team has moved inside from bad weather and taken up the whole floor with spring training drills from about 3:00 until 5:00m.
 The courts are naturally used on a regular basis by the mens' and girls' basketball teams and the P.E. classes . The courts will be used by the school's basketball teams .
 Gym open for normal student use four hours during the day on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Sunday, three hours on Monday, and two on Friday . Gym open only four hours a day during the week, three on Monday and two days a week .
 Little controversy or discussion surrounded the Board of Trustees' recent passage of a tuition hike which will increase the average students' cost of attending school by $100 per semester . This semester, the facility has been used approximately thirteen nights for high school basketball tournaments, ac75-76 Tuition
 Beginning next September, tuition will be charged on an hourly basis — $60 per semester hour . The tuition will start at $60 an hour .
 For the average 15 hour load, that will be $900, which is nearly $100 over the current level . Hours will cost $720 and 18 hours will cost more than $1,080 . The average load will be nearly $900 .
 Board action follows recommendation of President Ed Collins for a tuition increase . Board action followed recommendation for tuition increase by President Collins . Board vote follows recommendation by Collins .
 Faculty asked for a 12% costof-living increase in salary and passed a resolution recommending a tuition raise to provide the revenue . The faculty passed the resolution several weeks ago . It is the first time they've asked for collective bargaining .
 The increase came out to be only 10% but from all indications, the faculty is pleased with that . The faculty is looking forward to the increase .
 The vote comes after months of deliberation on the BBA proposal . It virtually insures the institution of the degree on campus . The vote is the culmination of months of deliberations .
 Richard Baltz and other proponents of the measure feel that it will help attract new students to Millsaps . The measure would allow students to attend Millsaps schools in the future .
 Board Denies McCafferty Vote . Trustees hold winter meeting amid speculation of tuition increases and freshman visitation . Board denies vote to increase tuition at Millsaps .
 The meeting got heated when the ex-officio status of S.E.B. president Jim McCafferty was brought into question . He was denied the right to make proposals and to vote .
 Controversy over student body president's position came during argument over Freshman visitation, which the Board approved for implementation next fall . Freshmen visitation is set to be implemented in the fall 2015 .
 The word given by the administration prior to the meeting was that the S.E.B. president would be an ex-officio member of the Board of Trustees with the power both to make proposals and vote .
 Board chairman temporarily ruled in middle of meeting that McCafferty could do neither . Board chairman Jim Campbell ruled in midst of considerable confusion, temporarily ruled that he could do nothing .
 A permanent decision would come after the Trustee's next executive committee meeting and consultation with the school's lawyer . Campbell said that a permanent decision will be made after a meeting with the trustees .
 President Ed Collins apologized to McCafferty after the meeting for misleading him . Collins himself never said anything to the Board in behalf of the student body president's position .
 Dean Harvey Saunders, who was not present during the controversy, stated that, in his mind, McCafferty 's ex-officio right to vote is indisputable . Saunders was not at the time of the controversy .
 In the Board's Student Affairs Committee, freshman visitation on weekends was approved for this spring, pending a favorable response from 60% of the affected girls' parents . In the committee, the committee approved the move .
 The committee's motion received heated opposition in the board meeting . The motion was met with heated opposition .
 Methodist Bishop Stokes and George Pickett led the discussion as to why visitation should not begin this year . Methodist bishop Stokes led the debate on why visitation shouldn't begin .
 Bishop went on to say he would have to face people and explain what is going on here . Bishop said he would be forced to explain the situation to the public .
 Pickett suggested that the visitation we have now is the cause of the declining female enrollment here at Millsaps . Pickett said that visitation is the reason for the decline in female enrollment at Millsap .
 David Mcintosh, whose student affairs committee presented the original motion, followed up the opposition by amending the motion to provide for weekend freshman visitation . The Board of Trustees met last Friday .
 He was barred from making motions or voting on Board of Trustees meeting last Friday . He was later barred from voting or making motions during meeting .
 In brief, it requires high schools and colleges to let students have access to their records . High school and college students must also be able to access their records, the law says .
 The impetus of the law is the removal of the control of student records from administration officials and placing control into the hands of students and their families, the law says . The impetus is to remove the control from administration .
 Millsaps College, as of this date, has failed to come into compliance with the law . Millsaps has not been able to comply with the requirements .
 Certain sections of the statute have yet to be dealt with by Millsaps . Millsaps has yet to deal with those sections of statute .
 The law specifies that unless a student waives his right of access to letters of recommendation, then he may see those letters . The law says that unless he formally waives the right to access to those letters, he can see them .
 Millsaps' recommendations, written in confidentiality, are vital to the cooperation of graduate and undergraduate schools . Unless Millsaps initiates action to obtain waivers, they could become meaningless . Millsaps: "Such recommendations are vital"
 The new law states that educational institutions must inform students (or their parents if the student is not yet 18) of their complete rights accorded by the statute . The law also states that schools must tell students of their rights .
 Dean Harvey Saunders voiced concern for the far-reaching effects of the law . The Millsaps Administration needs to start work on a policy to bring the school into compliance with the law, Saunders said .
 Saunders stated that the matter had not been fully considered yet, but since the law went into effect January 1, 1975, it did seem that consideration should begin quickly .
 He suggested he may call a council meeting in the near future to discuss the matter .
 Saunders suggested that this article serve that purpose . Saunders: Students' rights should be fully disclosed to the public . Saunders said this article should be used to promote transparency of student rights .
 It is the opinion of this newspaper that it is not an official administration publication . It should not be used to convey official notifications .
 President Ford released his budget outlay for fiscal year 1976 which officially begins in July . Fiscal year 1976 officially begins July 1 .
 Ford's struggle against recession/ inflation fails on both accounts . Ford's struggles against recession and inflation fail on both account .
 Unemployment is expected to hover at 8.1% for 1975, 7.9% for 1976, and plus 6% until 1980 . Unemployment is also expected to be higher in 1975, 1976 and 1980 .
 Inflation will continue at a double digit rate, 11.3% in 1975 and drop to 7.8% in 1976 . On the other hand, inflation will continue to drop to a double-digit rate in 1975 . In 1976 inflation will drop to an inflation rate of 7.
 The actual budget proposes a record $349. billion in federal expenditures with a proposed deficit of $51. billion . It is the highest peacetime flow of red ink in United States history . The budget is proposed for the first time .
 Former President Richard M Nixon has speculated that he wouldn't mind being the ambassador to Red China, if the position were to be offered him in the future . It has been reported by Time Magazine that former President Nixon would like to be the ambassador .
 Planned Parenthood announced last week that 892,000 legal abortions were performed in the U.S. since the operation was ruled legal by the Courts . Planned Parenthood says last week it performed more than 800,000 abortions in the United States since the decision was made legal .
 This figure is an increase of over 300,000 from last year and makes abortion the second most prevalent major surgery, next to tosilectomy . Abortion is the most common major surgery in the world, with abortion the most commonly performed .
 Shah of Iran offered continued hope in an eventual breakup of the oil cartel by announcing that the Western World should not fear economic strangulation . Shah said that any further embargos would have only minimal effects .
 California students appear to have provided the margin of victory for the state's new governor . Edmund G Brown, Jr. was elected as governor of the state .
 The student lobby based its student vote figures on a survey of more than 18,000 students and 70 campus precincts .
 About half the state's 800,000 registered student voters turned out for the election . About half of those registered students turned out .
 Millsaps had records of confidential nature as late as freshman year of this year's seniors . Millsaps did have records of a confidential nature, Millsaps says .
 Dean Paul Hardin said the Registrar's office is in compliance with the law and will not reveal any information without the request for such by the student involved . The law requires that, on request, the school must provide personal records to students or their parents within 45 days .
 If the information is deemed inaccurate or misleading or in violation of the student's privacy, the student may challenge the contents in a hearing and have the records corrected . The student can challenge the content of the records at a hearing .
 No release of information, except to highly restrictive sources, without written consent of the student or parent . Student or parent is permitted to submit any information .
 All of the contents of this law apply to high schools as well as colleges and each student is urged to check his records . The law applies to all high schools and colleges .
 Job opportunities can be easily missed by inaccurate statements that one never knew existed . Job opportunities are easily missed when people make inaccurate statements .
 All schools, public and private, who receive federal monies must comply with the law . All schools receiving federal funds must comply .
 Security Guard ""Buster"" Whammle in recent panty-raid at Franklin Dorm . Security Guard has no chance against the deadly aim of deadly aim .
 Security Guard ""Buster"" Whammle opened fire on a group of ""panty raiders"" as they streamed out of Franklin dorm . Security guard killed seven Millsaps students and injured another three .
 The seven dead were identified as members of various fraternities on campus . They were participating in one of their periodic ""raids"" on womens' housing . The seven died in the attack .
 President Collins issued a statement Tuesday afternoon expressing ""deep sorrow"" over Officer Whammle's ""regrettable lack of discretion"" and promised a full investigation into the matter .
 The House Judiciary En Banc committee okayed a drastically altered version of an ethics bill . The bill deleted six sections of the legislation dealing with mandatory financial disclosure by public officials on the local, district and state levels .
 The remaining portions of the proposed legislation would deal with conflicts of interest and registration of lobbyists . The legislation would also address conflicts of interests and register lobbyists .
 Bill Waller's fued with the legislature simmered again last week as committees of both houses killed proposed constitutional amendments which would have allowed the governor to succeed himself .
 Waller tried unsuccessfully to eliminate the issue of personalities by removing himself as a potential future gubernatorial aspirant . Waller has made it one of his primary legislative priorities . The state's lawmakers find no love lost between themselves and Waller .
 Other constitutional amendments also died in committee, including a measure calling for a constitutional convention . The proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution also died .
 Fear and Loathing with the Board by MILLER QUAKE P&W Bayonne, Alabama Legal Editor . Bayonne is Alabama's legal Editor .
 It had been three days since I had last seen Oscar T and no one I talked to had any idea where he was . Oscar T had been missing for three days .
 "In vain, I searched every honkey-tonk and bar and gutter and ditch between Bayonne and Mobile," the author says .
 Even Uncle Pete (proprieter of Uncle Pete's Bar and Grill and chief legal consultant) hadn't seen him. Oscar's legal team had no idea he was alive . Oscar's lawyer says he's been in the hospital for a month .
 Whenever Oscar T drops from sight like this, he's up tuh one of two thangs . (I think it gave him a kick.)
 "I knew it would be a complete waste of time. Since I had exhausted every other possible alternative, I agreed to accompany this character on what I knew was a pointless trip."
 Pete and the truck got us to Hoofer, however, and as we sputtered across the desolate campus, I saw a miraculous sight . Pete and Pete got the truck back to the campus, but it was a miracle sight .
 Running toward us, dressed in a baggy old suit, was the famed attorney . Running toward them, dressed as well as an attorney, is the famed lawyer . The famed attorney.
 "I called out as we sped toward him, close enough to see he wasn't just running for his health," he said . "He was running for the sake of his life," he added . "I'm not running for my life. I'm running for a life."
 Behind him, armed with pitchforks, stakes, rocks, and tire tools, was a howling mob of faculty members and alumni . Behind him was a mob of students, alumni and alumni. Behind him is a howled mob of angry mobs of students .
 Leading the pack, cursing and spitting and screaming worse than any of them, was the dreaded Dean himself, that Achilles heel of the academic world, J Harvey Sandbrain . Leading the raving pack was the Dean himself. Leading the .
 "I was terrified and ready to leave a hundred feet of rubber between us and the nearest exit," she says . "We were going to get into a panic," she recalls .
 The angered look in Sandbrain's face was rapidly replaced by one of terror as he saw the battered half ton pickup bearing down on him . Sandbrain was hit by the half-ton pickup truck .
 Pete leaned out of the window and let fly. I crossed myself and closed my eyes as he let fly . I crossed my eyes and closed myself and watched him fly .
 Pete had no need to warn the crowd, however, for they were cowering along both sides of the road, terrified to look upon the face of the Prince of Darkness . Pete was not alone, but the crowd cowered along the road .
 Pete slammed the ""Cruiso"" in reverse, slung open the door, and in jumped the cause of all the commotion, Oscar T Fornbush .
 Oscar T tells of his actions of the past few days at Uncle Pete's bar . Oscar T says he is proud to be able to talk about his experiences with the rapper .
 "I dropped out of sight for a few days — make 'em think I had left town — then showed up at the Board meeting incognito, disguised as a wealthy minister from Anniston, Dr. Dr. Gerald Ford . Ford: "I'm not a politician. I
 President 'Slick Eddie' Coolins and Dean Sandbrain were standing at the front, laughing over some private joke . President Coolins was in the middle of the joke .
 Numerous alumni scattered about the room with vacant looks on their faces . Numerous alumni were scattered around the room . The event was held in honor of former classmates .
 The only people in the whole place sitting down were three members of the Student Senate . Student Senate members were sitting down .
 After, of course, we jam a few more tuition increases down their dumb little throats . After, course, they will be forced to pay more to the taxpayers .
 J Harvey will keep 'em shut up in the Senate and Coach Haughty will keep them from getting our new gym dirty . J Harvey has been in charge of the Senate since 2010 .
 So, encouraged by righteous indignation, stirred by monumental injustice, and warmed by a pocket flask of Jack Daniels, I decided to act . I decided not to wait for the justice system to act.
 While Coolins was mumbling something about 'huge bazongas', I snatched the incriminating tape and made like Bob Hayes for the nearest exit .
 A minute later, with what seemed like half the campus after me, I saw you two . A minute after I saw them, they were back together, and they kissed .
 The whole case against Barker and the others a front for a conspiracy to subvert justice, abuse campus agencies, supress dissisents, and misuse tuition revenues . Barker and others have been charged with subverting justice, abusing campus agencies and supressing dissents .
 Most people, trapped in their own pedestrian morality, find the concept abhorrent . Now that may make sense to me, but most people find it abhorrent. Most people don't understand the concept .
 When we uncover more of this web of corruption, find the 'smoking pistol' that will prove 'Slick Eddie' wasn't just talking in his sleep, there will be such a wave of public indignation that Eddie and his whole gang will be swept from office .
 It's that militant bunch of Christian loonies, The ""One Way Street gang. The ""one Way Street Gang" The gang is known as the "Militar Christian" gang .
 He started out of the door, hesitated momentarily, grabbed a six of Dixie, and was gone . He was gone.
 "Uncle Pete and I followed close behind, but I had a sick feeling in the pit of my stomach," he said . Uncle Pete and Uncle Pete followed closely behind .
 "I knew that quicker than Oscar's six of Dixie, our case — and our client — were about to go down the drain," she says . "We were going to get our client back in court," she adds .
 The place looked like a typical redneck beer joint, and I was in no mood to get my fool head busted by a couple of local honchos out to impress Cindy Lou and Wanda . The place looks like a redneck bar .
 "I had to take a few calculated risks. Still, if I was ever to break out of the ol' North Jackson Big Mike/ X-Ray/ Recovery Room/ C.S. syndrome, I had to be careful . Still, I'm not afraid to take risks,
 On most weekends (if you shell out a small cover charge), you can hear a decent band and dance if you feel the urge . Most people prefer to just sit and listen to the music .
 The game room is like game rooms everywhere, with a few beer-bellied pool junkies endlessly racking balls and polishing cue sticks . It's like a game room everywhere, but the game room isn't the same .
 On Sundays, all the beer you can drink for a two buck cover charge, which in this day and time can't be beat . And on Sundays, there's a two-buck cover charge .
 The kind of guys that have shoulder length hair, beards, and customized Camaros are the kind of men who have shoulder .
 Long hair, a beard, a customized Camaro, and a customized car can be a big hit in the ladies' home .
 Student Voice Means Even Less at Millsaps . The voice of the students doesn't count for much at the school .
 SEB president Jim McCafferty was refused the right to vote in the meeting of the Board of Trustees — the same Board of which he is an exofficio member . He is a member of the board of trustees, an ex-member of the SEB board .
 McCafferty had been led to believe that he was a full voting member of the Board . He had been told that he would be a full-voted member of board .
 The tudent body president began to assert himself in the Board meeting by making a parliamentary move on ihalf of students wanting freshman visitation this semester . He was told by Campbell that he could not make motions or vote because he was only an ex-officio member .
 No copy of the by-laws was on hand to clarify the situation and considerable confusion resulted . The by-law was not available to clarify .
 Collins, who was so sure that the students had a vote on the Board, remained silent . Throughout this all, Collins remained silent.
 He later apologized to e SEB president for the misunderstanding . He promised to look into the by-laws for future clarification .
 Student Senate committee on Freshman visitation — spearheaded by Beth Edwards, Mark Jones, and Mark McCafferty — had spent considerable time and effort to present their proposal to the Board of Visitors .
 President Collins, Dean Woodward, and Dean Corder were willing to go along with it and do the work required to bring it about this spring . To their credit, President Collins and Dean Woodward were willing .
 Even the Student Affairs Committee of the Board recommended an attempt at weekend Freshman visitation to begin as soon as possible . Freshman visits are encouraged by the committee .
 David Mcintosh amended the motion of his own Student Affairs Committee to postpone visitation until next year .
 McCafferty, on behalf of the students who had worked so hard, then tried to maneuver around that amendment . The amendment was amended to allow the amendment to pass .
 The Board then went through the motions of approving freshman visitation for next year . The Board also approved freshman visitation .
 Public relations considerations came to bear on this decision and denied the visitation right to those who had worked most for it .
 McCafferty's lone effort to represent the students and himself in front of the Board was most admirable, he said .
 "He asserted himself and was forceful when several Board members tried to shove him into the background. He asserted himself," he said. "I'm not going to back down," he added .
 President Collins is estimating that the school will lose only ten students as a result of the tuition hike . President Collins estimates only 10 students will be affected by the hike .
 If student efforts to change keep meeting with disillusionment, there is no doubt that the total will be much higher . But if the student voice continues to be ignored, there will be more students disillusioned .
 In tomorrow's election for two Senators-at-Large, we urge that — personalities aside — you vote for independents . The U.S. Senate needs independent senators .
 Greeks now hold all five SEB offices and a substantial majority of the Student Senate seats . Greeks also hold a majority of student Senate seats in addition to the seats of the SEB .
 Millsaps is not like many universities where the whole social and political system revolves around Greeks . Fortunately, Millsaps isn't like many where it's the frat or sorority first and the college second . Millsaps has a strong reputation for its Greek culture .
 Independent Greeks are in a different position from Greeks as far as the social situation here is concerned and they deserve to be represented . But the independents are in somewhat a different . position than Greeks as well as Greeks as . far from social situation .
 Since 1925 Alpha Phi Omega has been the one persistent service oriented organization on college campuses . The organization is one of the most persistent service-oriented organizations .
 It is a student organization national in scope but campus-oriented in action in action . It is based on a national student organization that is campus-focused in action.
 It is unique in being a true fraternity in fellowship in fellowship, but one inclusive in membership, respecting each man's right to be proud of his race, his color, his religion, his political preferences, and his national origin . It is a fraternity that respects its members' right to
 Any male student duly enrolled on campus where a chapter exists, who joins with chapter's members in service projects, accepts its principles, and meets the standards of the chapter concerned is eligible .
 A committee of Millsaps students are seeking a charter from the Student Senate to be recognized as a campus organization . Millsaps is the largest university in the country and has a history of activism .
 If the request is accepted by the Senate, a petition for a charter will be made to the national board of directors of Alpha Phi Omega . If the petition is accepted, it will be sent to national board members .
 An initiation fee of twenty dollars and reasonable chapter dues are the only costs .
 Lt. Bill Waller blew his cool last week, confronting legislators, classing legislators . Waller said legislators are delaying progress of the governor's program . The lieutenant governor said legislators were delaying the progress of his program .
 Governor is up against the proposition that the legislature, based on a tradition artfully constructed by the late Walter Sillers, is a power of its own, not really amenable to the governor's wishes . Gov. Rick Perry is in the dying days of his term .
 Coleman, as governor of Mississippi, tried to implement reforms that were needed . Coleman: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm glad for it" Coleman says .
 Don't Count Waller Out. He incurred the wrath of the sheriffs, constables and justices of the peace . Waller's arrest was the result of a series of violent incidents against Waller .
 In 1963 he made a second try for the governor's office . All of this probably contributed to his defeat in 1963 .
 Waller has used federal funds that come into the state and can be dispensed by the governor or his appointees . The one thing he has going for him now is to use federal funds .
 Waller took himself out of contention for another term in his bid for a gubernatorial succession bill . He was in effect drawing down. Waller was in essence drawing down .
 Gov. Rick Perry is dabbling in the governor's race . He's determined apparently to get a strong opponent for Lt. Lt. Gov. Perry .
 At this point, Maurice Dantin of Columbia is that man. At this time, it looks like he's that man . The attorney for Columbia says he's looking for a lawyer to represent him .
 Political ambitions sometimes go awry, dashed on the rocks of time and the contradictory issues that belabor a man who has been in office . But political ambition sometimes goes awry .
 He keeps hanging in on the inside turns in spite of the rebuffs he has consistently gotten from the legislature and his critics, most recently identified as the news media . He says he has been in touch with the media and the legislature .
 Only this reporter came forward to defend Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz has been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 Eastland against charges of accepting a bribe which was reported by national columnist Jack Anderson . Eastland has been charged with accepting bribery .
 As a service to Millsaps students, The Purple and White will run all reasonable classified ads for free .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff bitterly resist arms deliveries to Israel . Behind the scenes, the Joint Chiefs have been bitterly resisting arms deliveries . Joint Chiefs oppose arming Israel .
 At first, they opposed the rapid rearming of Israel, which has now been completed . The rapid rearmament of Israel is now a complete success .
 Some of Israel's own units were short of arms, Israeli officials say . They complained that the U.S. was in such a hurry to restore Israeli military strength that some of them were short .
 The Joint Chiefs have argued against sending the sophisticated weapons Israel is now trying to get . Lately, the Joint Chiefs argue against sending such weapons .
 They opposed supplying Israel with deadly, deadly, 70-milerange Lance missiles, and other laser-guided weapons . They strongly oppose supplying Israel, for example, with the deadly Lance missiles .
 Some of these are so effective they can knock out enemy antiaircraft missiles before they can reach the planes . Some of the most effective weapons are designed to destroy enemy missiles . They can also knock out anti-aircraft missiles .
 Joint Chiefs have complained that U.S. units would have to be shortchanged if these weapons are made available to the Israelis . The Joint Chiefs say the move would be a blow to the United States .
 President Ford persuaded by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger that these weapons will help him bring peace to the Middle East . President Ford has been persuaded by Henry Kissinger to use them to bring peace in the region .
 Kissinger argued that Israel would not make territorial concessions until Israel had full confidence in its military power . Kissinger: Israel's territorial concessions are essential for a settlement in the Middle East .
 Despite the Pentagon's resistance, the truth is that it is not only Israel which is depleting our defense stockpiles . Despite Pentagon resistance, it's not only the U.S. military is depleted, says author .
 The United States is arming rival nations around the world at an alarming rate . The U.S. is arming rivals at an increasing rate .
 That iwas about twice as much as the Soviet Union, our closest competitor, exported . The Soviet Union exported more than twice as many as the United States .
 U.S. supplied 60 per cent of the arms needs of the Persian Gulf states last year, study reveals .
 One of the most effective weapons in the U.S. arsenal is the TOW antitank missile . The TOW missile is a key component of the American arsenal .
 Some 18 of the Israeli soldiers are headed to Lebanon . Some of them will soon be on their way to the Arab neighbor, Lebanon .
 The United States is either selling or giving away TOW missiles to 17 nations . The U.S. is either giving away or selling or selling the missiles to other nations .
 The missile is in such short supply that our own armed forces can't get enough . Yet believe it or not, this missile is not in short supply . It is in the hands of the U.S. armed forces .
 Alan Brehm initiated a drive in the Student Senate to delay the SEB elections . The vote was delayed on the Tuesday before the election .
 He claimed Tuesday deadline allowed no time for candidates to be known before Thursday's election . He claimed that the same people would be elected .
 Brehm did not fail completely — the reforms he (not a senator) initiated were finally passed . The reforms he initiated were passed and may be seen in tomorrow's election .
 Musical chairs are a direct result of the musical chairs election of student officers . And ^ronical^ttie^sjjec^ is a result of a musical chair election by students .
 Another Millsaps political game is BATTLE, and, like the card game for minors, it is tedious, precarious, and of questionable value . BATTLE LINES is like a card game played for minors .
 The College Senate is a team of 7 students, 10 faculty members and 10 students . Dean Saunders is the undisputed leader of the College Senate .
 In last weeks match, a committee was appointed and approved to study PAC policies .
 The committee included Coach Montgomery whose policies, they assumed, were to be scrutinized . To the student's dismay the committee included coach Montgomery .
 They were assured that he would be the most knowledgeable person in these matters . They were told he was the most qualified person in the country to be in charge .
 College Senate sends BBA Proposal to faculty with recommendation for approval . Motion for each division to study class scheduling passed in College Senate .
 Tuition ridden times and keeping the yt tuition low enough to attract students are key factors . Tuition is important for students to stay on the path of success .
 Jackson Music Association Presents Walid Walid)^ between raising enough money to . operate the school in inflation-)^ p e 21 — Holiday Hippodrome Small Animal Show H Feb., 25 — Jackson Symphony Concerts J Mar., 4 — Mass Piano Concert )^ Mar. 4 —
 Mar. BeBopji Mar. — Fiddler on the Roof Mar. – Gospel Sing: Inspirations Mar. . — Gospel Sing Mar. - Gospel Sing . Mar . — ""Daughters of the Regiment"" — Miss. Miss. Bopji . Mar.
 T % GEORGE STREET GROCERY J yt Cassandra Fowlkes and Alan Cameron, Mon.-Thurs., 8:00-^ J 11:00m. yi *T THE POOP DECK 3 Stephan Anderson, Tues.-Sat., 8-Sat
 Only ten full-time students are currently enrolled at yL Millsaps . Rumors among students around campus is that yL will lose a lot more .
 To raise money for teacher salary increases, a new source of income had to be found . Therefore, to raise money, teachers had to find a way to pay for their salaries .
 The only other means of obtaining the revenue would have been to dip into the endowment fund of the college . Probably the only other way to obtain the revenue right away would be to dip in to the college endowment .
 The interest from the interest is used to help support the college . That fund is invested moeny, the interest from which is invested .
 Dipping into the principal of that fund is often considered bad business practice . Millsaps has done it over the past several years to cover operating deficits .
 The faculty recommended a tuition raise instead of taking more money out of the endowment . Frohnhoefer said the Board would never have approved taking more than $1.5 million out of endowment money .
 J Board Meeting next fall and standard visitation in the second semester . Opera Opera next year . Board meeting next fall .
 At this point McCafferty rose to move that the original motion be voted on and he was told that he could not make motions . At the end of the session, he was asked to make a motion that was not voted on by the council .
 Campbell temporarily ruled that McCafferty could not vote or make proposals . A lengthy argument followed, Campbell temporarily ordered that the motion was out of the way .
 A tuition increase proposed by President Collins was passed . The athletic budget was trimmed from $73,000 to $56,000 . A recommendation was approved that the Physical Activities Center not be rented to outsiders while school in session .
 Collins disagreed with the motion strongly, hinting that the school needs the revenue from the gym . Collins: "I don't think it's a good idea that the gym needs the money"
 It's not only the answer to thirst, but a refreshing pleasure any time any time. It's a refreshing treat for the thirsty .
 All you have to do to qualify is reserve your seat now t,y sending $100. deposit, plus $10. registration fee .
 Just one price for all flights whether you pick a weekend departure or peak season surcharge date . The price of all flights is the same as the surcharge on all flights .
 The high point of the Majors' game came when a fight erupted in the second half . The Majors won the game 2-2 in the first half .
 Boxing was not the purpose of the Millsaps trip to Livingston . The Majors once again went down in defeat to the Tigers .
 The last time a progress report was made on the team was 0-14 . But there are signs of improvement in the progress report made by the club .
 Millsaps continue to drop games at a hectic rate . Millsaps continued to lose games in a row in the first half .
 They really didn't look terrible in either of these contests and actually lead Louisiana College for most of the game . They led the game in the first half of the contest .
 Birmingham College College defeats the Majors at Birmingham College . Birmingham College won their first game of the season . The Majors won the game by a margin of three points .
 Choctaws of Mississippi College are a team experiencing a frustrating season . Mississippi College has won just one of their last seven games .
 Millsaps suffered one of the worst defeats they have suffered in recent years . Millsaps lost their first game of the season at the hands of a Millsaps team .
 The Majors are down to their last five games of the season and victory still remains at least a hope . The Majorors are still in the hunt for their fifth consecutive win .
 They will face Belhaven, Southwestern, Rust, Tougaloo, Rust and Lambuth in February . They will play Belhaven on Feb. 15th, 18th and 20th of February .
 The first Mississippi Intercollegiate Indoor Tennis Tournament will be held at Millsaps College February 21, 22, and 23 .
 All of the state senior colleges have been invited to participate in the event which eludes both men and women . Jim Montgomery, director of athletics and tennis coach for the host Majors, has invited all of them to participate .
 This will be the first indoor collegiate competition to be played in the state . The event will be held in New Jersey .
 The Millsaps Tennis Club and the Millsaps Patrons Association will host the event . The new Physical Activities Center will provide the site for the event which is hosted by the club . The event will be held at the new physical Activities Center .
 Singles and Doubles matches will be played on three courts which have an uniturf surface . The center has a seating capacity of 1600, and the singles and doubles courts have three courts .
 Johnny Miller has won for the third time in this young golfing ear . The PAC will be the same site for the Mississippi Adult Tennis Tournament which is to be held later this spring .
 Miller has earned $108,343 in four tournament appearances this season, a record pace . In four tournaments this year, Miller has made more than $100,000 this year . Miller has also earned $107,000 so far this season .
 The United States defeated last week by Mexico in Davis Cup competition . United States were defeated by Mexico last week in the Davis Cup .
 The loss marks the second year in a row that the U.S.A. has lost in the early rounds of the tennis tournament . The loss is the second time in a year that the United States has lost early in the tournament .
 The Indiana Hoosiers remain unbeaten and the unanimous number one team in the country . UCLA are followed by the Hoosier Hoops in college basketball . Most observers feel that our Davis Cup squad is not stocked with all of our top players .
 Last season, the Majors' defensive squad ranked sixth in the nation in scoring in Division III football . The Majors won't play for the first time this season .
 Nine seniors will graduate this spring leaving six absent positions in the interior offensive line and three spots on defense . Six of the seniors will be seniors at the University of Columbia .
 Dan Richards, Phillip Maples, Ronnie Jurny and Robert Earl Granderson at rover . Dan Richards will return to the starting line-up at the back .
 The offensive line will consist of Paul Benton at right end, Sonny Aldy-split end, Mike Harrison-quick tackle, Paul Walker-strong tackle, Billy McAllily-quick guard, Hunter Lundy-strong guard and Mark Ikner at center .
 Ricky Haygood at quarterback, John Kirby at tailback, Stan Axsmith at fullback and Dees Hinton at wingback position . Ricky Hinton starts at quarterback . John Kirby is tailback and Stan Axmith is fullback . Dees is a wingback .
 Bob King and Granderson sustained leg injuries during the last season and will return for starting positions . Doug Brindley and Bob King will also be returning to the starting positions, as will place kicker Doug .
 During these games, Millsaps students are not allowed to even enter the gym without paying . Millsaps school students must also pay for entry to the gym .
 The Board of Trustees passed a motion that the facility should not be rented to outside groups during the school year . The board of trustees voted to not rent out the facility to outside organizations .
 The action was watered down by the proviso that it could be violated with the approval of the administration . However, that action was watery and watered down . The administration has said it can't be violated by the president .
 The new gym is available for use by student groups and Methodist groups, but they must pay a rental fee if they plan to collect admission for events .
 Kappa Alpha chapter looking for a place to hold its annual charity marathon basketball game . The local chapter originally quoted a price of $300 .
 KA's only had to pay for the cost of the lights — $100 . After talking to President Collins and Pete Wood, the figure was lowered to $100.
 Collins said, "It ought to be for every student on this campus" The gym should be accessible to students, Collins said .
 Dutch Bar and Lounge, North State Poets Corner and The Recovery Room are located in Highland Village . The Quarter is located at 2820 North State .
 16 ounce glasses everything half price . All drinks half price Tues. Tues. Wed., Wed., Thurs. Wed. Wed.- Wed. Mondays, Wed. Thursdays . Wed. Tues., Wed. Sundays, Wed., Tues. Mondays all drinks are half price. Tuesdays. Wed
 Ireland's 2:00-6:00 1925 Lakeland Drive Mon.-Fri. highball $.70 mixed drinks half price beer $.30 and $.35 Financial Aid Students applying for financial aid for the academic year 1975-76 should .
 Applications received by April 1 will be the first ones to go before the committee for action . Those applications received by the committee will go to the committee .
 Applications received after the April 1 deadline will be considered after those received by April 1 . Applications received before the deadline will not be considered again .
 Sign the list on the bulletin board in the student center to reserve your place . Please sign the list for the event .
 Further investigations by the city into specific charges of police brutality and harrassment are necessary, insisted Walker . Walker: Further investigations necessary for discussions to continue .
 If not satisfied with the progress of the investigation, warns Walker, owners may seek remedy through legal, administrative, or legislative action . Walker: Owners may seek remedies through legal or administrative action .
 When Colston attempted to escape, Barnes fired one shot, killing Colston . Barnes shot Colston when Colston tried to escape .
 Police reports state that Colston was shot once in the back with a .38-caliber pistol . Police reports say Colston died at the scene of the shooting .
 The murder conviction of a Republic of New Africa member was upheld Monday by the Mississippi Supreme Court . The conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court of Mississippi .
 The conviction was appealed by Offogga Quaddus, or Wayne Maurice Jones, who was charged along with several others in the 1971 slaying of Police Lieutenant Louis Skinner . Jones was found guilty of killing Skinner in 1971 .
 Most of the blacks employed on campus seem to be in custodial positions . Millsaps College has shown a very definite lack of concern for the hiring of black faculty members and administrative workers .
 The school's student body has been racially integrated since 1965 . Nothing has been done in the way of integrating the faculty and the administration .
 At the present time, approximately twenty per cent of the school's employees are black . When the jobs are viewed, discrimination becomes noticeable, according to the school .
 Only one Black is employed in the business office; none are in the Development office, Registrar's office, admissions department, or the other administrative offices on campus .
 Only three Blacks are in administration and none in teaching faculty . So we find a total of only three Blacks .
 The ture changes completely, wever, when the custodial staff, the ground crews, and other low-paying marginal jobs are looked at . The custodian staff and ground crews are among the low-paid marginal jobs in the UK .
 The custodial staff is all black, the ground crews are mostly black — except for the while supervisors . Cabbies are all black except supervisors .
 Of the present Millsaps faculty, twenty-seven have been hired since the school was integrated in 1965 . The school has been integrated since 1965 .
 The Millsaps administration has done little to correct the faults that exist in the school's hiring policy . Millsaps has been criticized for its hiring policy for years .
 Dean J Harvey Saunders is in charge of hiring faculty and academic personnel . Director of Services Pete Wood is in the non-academic arena . He is responsible for hiring faculty, academic personnel and staff .
 He added that sometimes a post is filled from unsolicited applications . He said sometimes a job was filled by unsolicited applicants .
 The Dean said that, if at all possible, a Black-faculty member would be hired at Millsaps . He added that it was hard to get prospects for a Black faculty member .
 D could pick his school and name his price, thus making it hard for the low-paying salary scale of Millsaps to attract qualified applicants . Millsaps is struggling to find qualified applicants for the job .
 Sociology professor Paul Murray has been pushing to get a black faculty member hired . Murray said many of the administration's excuses are myths which they hold on to .
 He noted that other institutions such as Tougaloo and Jackson State can get black Ph.D. He said other institutions can get a Ph. at least one of their Ph.Ds .
 President Collins has decided to change the plan for charging tuition next year . Murray remarked that the main problem was the way the administration goes about More Construction for Campus Tuition .
 It will now be an across-the-board fee for regular students of $903 per semester, beginning next September . The fee will be across the-boarded fee for students of regular students . It will start at the bottom of the line next year .
 As originally planned by Collins and approved by the Board of Trustees, there would have been charged on a basis of $60 per academic hour .
 Many felt this plan was inequitable, particularly to the student forced to take over 15 hours . However, many felt it was unfair to students forced to spend 15 hours a day studying .
 Collins has reverted to the flat-fee method of charging and says that its approval by the Board is a mere formality . Collins says that the approval of the Board by the end of the day is only a matter of a few minutes .
 Students taking from eight to 20 hours will be classified as regular students and pay the $903 tuition . Students taking between eight and 20 hours can pay the tuition, with small additional charge for going over that amount .
 Plans to divide the North campus with a large byway connecting the parallel State and West streets . For those taking under eight hours, it will cost $60 per hour .
 President Collins recently stated that the road would be built, probably within the next month . Although constructing details have not been finalized, President Collins said the road will be built in the near future .
 Who will contract the project and who will finance it, however, are not quite as certain . Who will finance the project is also uncertain, but the project could be a success .
 Collins continued saying that the Chairman of the Board of Trustees and he had been in contact with the city of Jackson in an effort to enlist their aid in financing .
 The city gave the two school leaders what can only be called a conditional maybe . The city remained uncommitted and gave the school leaders the chance to move .
 Possibly, aid from the federal government will materialize if the project generates a sufficient amount of new jobs . The project could be aided by federal government funding .
 The president listed two major reasons for undertaking the building of the new road . The president also listed two reasons for the project .
 The first is to remove city traffic from the present thoroughfare in the main area of the campus . The first step is to take place in a bid to remove the current thoroughfare .
 Collins wants to allow commercial development of the area north of the road, presently the Millsaps golf course . Second, and more important in Collins' mind, is to allow the area to be commercialized .
 Uhis is not bad. only necessary) also an affinity for politics, and the petty power struggles that accompany it .
 The SEB president and vice-presidents fit this description easily, even admirably . The new SEB leaders are a good example of a good leader .
 Students are concerned about the plight of the student . In addition, they even seem concerned about better food for the students .
 Their objective is to gain control over purely student affairs, and influence in matters that affect students, which includes about everything on campus . The group says they want to gain influence in all aspects of student affairs .
 Looking back on the wreckage of every concerned student administration, the prospects are indeed grey . The prospects of the University of Cambridge University's future are grey .
 He has organized a study of the total campus structure in order to prove his point . And as if to prove that he has organized, he has also organized a tour of the campus .
 One inviting alternative for the committee is a unified college government giving students 50% representation . The committee should be given 50% of the college government .
 The major impediment to any student thrust for influence in the workings of Millsaps is that students have the cohesiveness of a thousand cat-eve marbles . Millsaps students have a cohesibility of 10,000 cats, the school says .
 Second Vice-President Juliet Dantin feels we must first become aware of the different groups on campus . Juliet feels we need to bring them into the system with a more equitable method of representation .
 In the senate, this movement has shown beginnings with the last two meetings . In the Senate, the senate has shown its beginnings with this movement .
 First VicePresident Mark Jones pushed through a motion to cut off student funding of College Senate committees . Public Events committee has been spending studentprovided funds before any others .
 He was also working with President Collins on a new tuition proposal (recently adopted) providing a flat $100 raise instead of the earlier $60 per hour .
 "Our fledgling elected voice has great hopes for the improvement of student life," says student body president .
 Student committees were appointed and the charter of Alpha Psi Omega, a service organization, were considered . As the months wear on it will probably die under the crushing inertia of the Millsaps administration .
 Diane McMullen blasted the group for its all-male policy . Diane's criticism of the group's all-female policy was met with criticism . The group has a history of controversy .
 To deny a charter (and so, the use of campus facilities) would be to deny their right of association . To deny the charter would be denying their right to association .
 "This very interesting and provocative matter will continue in the next meeting," says President Vladimir Putin .
 It was introduced by Alan Brehm and rephrased to allow members of the Millsaps community the right to speak before the senate with majority consent .
 The interpretation given the previous wording had allowed one senator to deny this privilege to anyone . The interpretation had been used to keep a student with a complaint from addressing the body .
 Black representation in the Millsaps student government still remains at zero . Race Polarization Noted In Elections by ROB McDuffie .
 Controversy has surfaced about creating a Student Senate post which automatically goes to a representative of the Black Students Association . It all points up a controversy hich has surfaced on and off ver the past three years .
 Prior to 1973, all campus -rganizations, including the BSA, elected one senator . The BSA was elected to one senator in 1973 .
 The new constitution was changed with the new constitution and senators became chosen by class or atlarge . That was changed when senators were chosen by either class or large .
 Many black students and some whites continued to argue that the BSA still needed representation in the student government . Some whites argued that Blacks could not get elected through the normal process .
 This argument surfaced, among other times, at a Chaplain's Committee session last year where racial polarization was discussed .
 During this academic year, Blacks were candidates in four elections and lost in all of them . So, during this academic . year, they were candidates for four elections, losing in all .
 Candidates acknowledged possible peripheral factors in their defeats . All felt that race was the main underlying reason for their losses .
 Hubert Thompson ran for 2nd vice-president early this spring and then for senator-at-large in the special election . Thompson won a special election to be a senator in the fall .
 All of the black candidates advocated automatic inclusion of at least one minority race member in the student senate, possibly by BSA election . The candidates advocate automatic inclusion in the senate .
 Students who will apply for financial aid for the academic year 1975-76 should pick up applications in the Student Affairs Office . Financial Aid applications are available in the student affairs office .
 Conflict and Change placed on the state textbook commission's approved list . Conflict and New York State textbook commission approved list of state textbook books on state curriculum .
 James Loewen of Tougaloo made a presentation for the book at a special session of the commission called by Governor Waller . The book will be published in 2015 .
 The commissioners ruled that they had no legal right to approve the book because of an earlier rejection by their own Mississippi History Textbook Rating Committee . The commissioners heard the presentation and then ruled .
 Conflict and Change presents a frank and accurate account of slavery, oppression of Blacks, and the civil rights movement in Mississippi . The novel is set in the state of Mississippi, Mississippi .
 The rating committee voted 5-2 last fall not to approve the book . Apparently because of such frankness, the rating committee didn't approve it .
 The textbook commission would not get to review the text, that it would not go on the approved list for Mississippi public schools, and teachers could not use state funds to purchase it . The state textbook commission by-laws would mean that the textbook would not be reviewed by the regular commission .
 Governor Waller said authors had a right to a hearing before the regular commission and ordered such a hearing . The authors then went to governor Waller, who said that they had right to hearing .
 Commissioners refuse to pass judgement on book . Commissioners cite by-laws, citing their by-law, refusing to pass judgment .
 Sallis feels that he and Loewen have a very good court case which will result in the book getting placed on the approved list . The book is due to be released in September .
 Major would be available this semester, but program will not be realized until the 1975-1976 school year . Major would not be available until next year's school year, athletic director says .
 The faculty, curriculum committee, and academic council have all approved the basic format with one exception . The department may not hire any new staff members until a complete study is made .
 Montgomery says, ""If we have the same program with the same staff, it will be impossible to add a new course of study" Montgomery says. Montgomery says .
 To meet state requirements, a student would have to take 15 hours of health education and 15 hours physical education . Students would need to take health and physical education to meet requirements .
 This would include courses in biology, anatomy, kinesiology, philosophy, history, history and organization administration .
 All basic education certifications would be required as well as practice teaching . Basic education certification would also be required for the project .
 There is no forseeable study of the staffing issue, the major will probably be shelved for this school year . But since there is no future study, it is probably shelved this year .
 Montgomery believes that the general economic situation is the key factor . Montgomery believes the economy is the most important factor in the decision .
 So it seems that the proposed P E Major will remain a rumor for yet another semester . It seems that it will not be implemented for another semester.
 Montgomery is pleased with the attitude of the school towards a more open cirriculum . Montgomery says he is pleased that the school is moving towards an open-minded approach .
 Deans were not permitted to a me their own schools or rank e choices in order . Deans would not be allowed to rank e schools in order of schools .
 A compromise teacher pay bill passed both houses of the legislature unanimously last week . The bill is now awaiting only Gov. Patience Brown's signature .
 The bill was worked out by a Joint Conference Committee of both houses . Each chamber passed separate pay raises for teachers during the first week of the legislative session .
 Mississippi teachers will become the second highest paid in the Southeast during the 1975-76 school term . The compromise legislation would cost the state $24 million . According to proponents of the legislation, teachers will be the second most paid in Southeast .
 The increase averages some $1,335 per teacher . The increase was accepted by leaders of the state's two education organizations . Some teachers say the raise is not enough .
 The Senate was scheduled to vote on the confirmation of Parchman superintendant Jack Reed this week . The Corrections Committee wound up its month-long hearings on the matter .
 The panel voted 5-4 against recommending confirmation to the full Senate . Two abstained, two abstained . The panel also voted against recommending the nominee to be confirmed .
 The 55-year-old penologist has served in his present capacity since he was appointed by Gov. George W. Bush in 2003 .
 Time was running short this week for the Senate Judiciary Committee to take action on a strong ethics bill . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives two weeks ago .
 The bill that passed the House calls for complete financial disclosure by all public officials . The bill also contains provisions dealing with conflicts of interest and registration of lobbyists .
 A section of the bill prohibits legislators from receiving payment from any other public source, on the local or state level . In addition, the bill would also ban lawmakers from receiving payments from other public sources . The bill is expected to be passed by the Senate next week .
 Judiciary members say they expect the committee to report a revised version of the House measure before the Tuesday deadline . Other Judiciary members said they expected the House bill to be deleted with disclosure deleted .
 Wallace declared Wednesday that he was ready to make his fourth bid for the U.S. presidency . Wallace declares Wednesday he is ready to run for the White House . Wallace: "I'm looking forward to the next four years"
 He also stated that he will form a third party if Democratic leaders reject him again . He also said he would form a party if he was rejected again .
 Many economists publically scoffed at figures released with President Ford's budget . Many economists said the budget was 'unreal' and 'unfair'
 Dow Jones Industrial Stock Market continues its upsurge in the face of a recession by closing with another stray week . Stock market continues to close with another week of gains .
 The market is considered an early indicator of expected economic conditions . The rise, to close at 745, was a positive indication for the future .
 Commerce Department released figures this week that showed prices climbed at a record 14.4% rate during the last three months of 1974 . At the same time the Gross National Product fell at a 9.1% rate .
 This week President Ford nominated Carla Anderson Hills to fill the vacancy of the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development .
 Hills will become the third woman Cabinet member in U.S. history . Hills will be the third female Cabinet member to join the Cabinet . Hills is the only woman in the Cabinet in the country .
 Henry Kissinger offered continued hope in ""his"" stepby-step Middle East diplomacy . Kissinger announced progress in last week's shuttle diplomacy in the Middle East .
 Sources expect Israel and Egypt to come to terms before the shift back to the Geneva conference table is made . Sources expect the deal to be made before the Geneva talks are made .
 Ward Emling plays the title role in this practice scene . He is joined by Mark Samsel, Jean Moore, and Robert Morgan .
 The play will be run every night in the Christian Center through Saturday .
 It will be running every night through Saturday in lie auditorium of Christian ter. The show will be held in the Christian ter .
 Lynn ireene's review of the Tuesday night dress rehearsal of the production . A lack of cohesion is the principle flaw in the Millsaps Players' production .
 This adaptation employs the language of hakespeare in modern costume on an austere set . It is produced in the same manner as the well-known Burton's Hamlet .
 'There is no refuge vhen things go slowly in a roduction that is virtually devoid of scenery and costume' 'There was no refuge' for the play, says the director .
 Emiling's Hamlet vacillates in a somewhat jerky manner but you have to admire his zeal . The Hamlet is set to be shown in London at the end of this year's edition .
 Eileen Hawkin's Ophelia provides us with one of the strongest characters in the play, especially in her mad scenes . The play is set in London at the end of October .
 Sessums provides direction for the other actors in his every scene . He does more to dispel the productions inadequacies that any other participant .
 Brindley's Claudius is not as dispassionate as we would like to see him . The playwright is not always dispassionately interested in Claudius .
 In the same regard, Mona Perry's Gertrude is not as conniving and cold as her actions in the play imply she should be .
 Jim Matheny's Polonius is unfortunately nothing new, although it is an adequate portrayal, nonetheless . The play is set in New York, New York .
 Joe Reiff's Ghost has the expected melancholic dead-man drawl . Rosencrantz and Guildenstern don't say much of anything but do a commemoration job of bowing .
 Friday Forums for the next two weeks offer some fairly sharp and unusual speakers . Of the minor characters, two fresh appearances by Jean Moore and Robert Morgan .
 Christian is to arrive on campus today and spend some time in informal meetings and classes . Christian will be spending time with students and staff at the university .
 The author of three scholarly books on religion, Christian Christian will speak on ""Religious Doctrines and Insights"" at the Friday Forum .
 A week from tomorrow will see Barry Hannah, witty author of Geronimo Rex . Barry Hannah will appear on BBC Radio 4 at 8pm on Monday .
 The Millsaps Players' production of Burton's Hamlet is awfully long and pretty uneven . As far as a nights' entertainment goes, despite all the aforesaid dramatic brilliance, it's not all the best .
 Time, here, remains ""out of joint"" for about three and one half hours with two much needed intermissions .
 If you have never seen a production of Hamlet, or any of Shakespeare's, you should, as Claudius counsels ""strengthen your patience"" and stroll over to the CC and see whats offered .
 The SEB's Friday night campus movie series has been scheduled for the remainder of the semester . Friday night movie series will run for the next two weeks .
 March 7 — American Graffiti March 14 — In Cold Blood March 21 — Fritz the Cat April 18 — East of Eden April 25 — The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean May 2 — Executive Action aooogoooexwoocwooQ a p o aaBc
 For those who would consider vacationing and good-timing during this break, here are some suggestions .
 Panama City, Florida, is about six hours south of Jackson, Florida . It's a beach town of about 6,000 people . It is one of the world's most famous beaches .
 College and high school students try to attract their business . It is usually full of college and high-school students .
 Fair beaches and the Miracle Strip can lead to a lot of mass youthful partying . But it can also get too crowded and too commercialized . The Miracle Strip is one of the world's most popular beaches .
 It will be warm enough for laying on the beach, although the swimming will be rather chilly . It will definitely be warm for laying .
 Holiday Inn, Admiral Benbow, Holiday Inn and Old Dutch Club are the best bars in the city .
 Thirty miles up the coast from Panama, Florida, is noted for deep-sea fishing and some beautiful beaches . It's also known for deep sea fishing and beautiful fishing .
 Pensacola offers more of the traditional night life, with a beach thrown in . Pensacolia offers a good setting for a good nightlife .
 It is an hour southeast of Mobile, Alabama, and is beautiful and somewhat rustic . It's beautiful and rustic, and it's a little bit rustic.
 It has good camping and a couple of bars with unique reputations . Dirty Joe's and the Tiki House are among the bars with a reputation for their unique reputation .
 The Keys are beautiful, warm, and won't be too crowded . It is a 28-hour drive straight through, but it is a great way to explore .
 Ernest Hemingway lived in a quiet fishing village in a fishing village . It is a reflection of the type thing you would expect from the author who lived there for so long .
 There are few beaches, mostly coral reefs for good scuba-diving and snorkeling . The island is known for its coral reefs .
 A place on a small deep-sea fishing boat can be rented for around $15 a day . A place is rented for $15 per day for a place in a small fishing boat .
 A commercial campground in Key West rented out for $3 a night last summer . Hotels are expensive, but a campground rented out last summer was $3 per night .
 The local people are friendly — many in their 20's — and can show you to some nice places . The locals are friendly .
 The Green Parrot open-air bar and Hemingway's old hangout, Sloppy Joe's, are really good . Heming Way's old bar is really good, says the author .
 For colder weather, mountain air, good scenery, and some fine camping, this national park in Tennessee-North Carolina is nice . The Smokey MOUNTAINS are a good place to go camping .
 The regular campgrounds are around $3 but they tend to get overcrowded and full of family trailers . The regular camping fees are $3 per person .
 Ask at ranger stations about permits for the free trail campsites . Free trail camps sites are available near some beautiful streams . Ask about permits to camp in the park .
 The crowds may be piling in by early April (roads in the park get awful congested) and we're not sure how the colors will be on the trees . It's not known how the trees will be colored .
 Gatlinburg has gotten to be a drag as it is now wall-towall hotels, restaurants, and cheap family traps . The city is now a tourist destination for the first time .
 There are far less tourist traps here and campgrounds are genuine and unspoiled . Campgrounds are, as a general rule, genuine and genuine .
 Canoes are easy to rent almost anywhere in the Ozarks for around $12 a day . Canoes can be rented out for $12 per day .
 A few of the better spots are the Buffalo River, which is a seven hour drive from Jackson and offers good rapids and fishing . The Spring River is especially good for beginning canoers, especially for beginning canoeists .
 Devil's Bend State Park offers the Mulberry River, also good for canoeing along with excellent camping facilities . The park also offers excellent canoeing facilities and camping facilities.
 Further up in the Ozarks are numerous cabins for rent — some as low as $14 a day . Some cabins are available for rent in some parts of the country's Ozarks .
 We hope to add some more spots in the next issue, focusing on larger cities around the southeast and also on a couple of Mississippi state parks .
 A cloud of dust and smoke floated where only moments before Uncle Pete's truck had been standing . "Uncle Pete's" truck was blown up in the air, but the truck was still standing .
 Uncle Pete's truck was parked over near the guard shack, but the famed defense attorney was nowhere to be seen . Uncle Pete was not present at the time .
 A large mob of students had gathered around the shack where the student radicals were being held . The student radicals are being held in a shack in a bid to free students .
 I noticed iat the speaker was dressed differently from the rest of the crowd . I noticed that he was wearing different clothes than everyone else .
 He had on a dark blue jersey with the letters MQ printed on front, as did several other young men . Several young men ringed the crowd, with the help of several others .
 "Militar Christians" are a student organization dedicated to the ideals and principles of beatin' the hell outta everybody on campus who don't live right . They're a militant Christians dedicated to beating people out of their homes .
 They do whatever 'ol ""Slick Eddie"" or J Harvey Sandbrain wants 'em to do . They do what 'ol 'ol' Eddie' or 'J Harvey' wants them to do.
 As we headed for the truck, we heard a bottle smash and a scream fill the air . We felt the time had come to make our exit, but as we headed to the truck we heard the bottle smash .
 The speaker was lying on the ground, a smashed whiskey bottle near his head . He was lying in a pool of water near a broken whiskey bottle .
 He was dressed in a football uniform, the blue and yellow of the Hoofer Ducks . He was also dressed in an official uniform for the team, which he represents .
 He gazed placidly at the silent crowd for a moment, then began to slowly rotate . He then began slowly rotating his head .
 Oscar T shot fast the stunned mob, hopped into Pete's truck, and took off in a cloud of blue smoke . Oscar T was shot fast by the mob and shot fast .
 They had sneaked out of the guard shack and hidden in the truck while Oscar T diverted the mob's attention . Oscar T diverged attention from the mob while they were in hiding . The mob had snuck into the truck .
 Oscar T was driving the truck like a drunken mad man, which, of course, he was . He suddenly pulled alongside Pete and me and motioned for us to hop in the back of the back .
 Since the bloodthirsty crowd was about to grab us, we didn't argue and in a moment were speeding down Bay Highway toward Uncle Pete's Bar and Grill . "Bloodthirsty" crowd didn't want to get into trouble .
 I could hear ""Fire Breath"" in the front, ranting and raving about something . "Fire Breath" was ranting about something. "I could hear 'Fire Breath' ranting," he said .
 Oscar T was sitting beside him, silently shooting Jack Daniel's with a bemused smile on his face . Oscar T had been sitting next to him in the back of the room . Oscar had been drinking a bottle of whiskey .
 The X-Ray Room reminds us of the harlot who looks like a million dollars from across the room, but upon closer examination, looks more like fifteen bucks an hour . My picture is going to be on the cover of every magazine in every magazine .
 "You are struck by the cheapness of the appearance and by the insincerity of the product being sold," says author .
 It is a large place, covered with padded black vinyl and mirrors, crammed full of pool tables, fooseball tables and pinball machines . The jukebox is always set just above the safe level for intact eardrums .
 All of these offenses could be overlooked if it were not for the beer they sell . All of the offenses could have been overlooked if not for beer sales .
 A draught costs 40 cents and comes in an eightounce plastic cup with a head that just won't quit . The draught comes in a plastic cup that won't stop .
 We don't know for sure that they water down their brew, but for some reason it always tastes like the last swallow in a can of beer . You seem to spend at least half of your time there in the bathroom .
 The X-Ray Room fails to create an atmosphere with cheap plushness . Like so many other places that try to create a cheap atmosphere, the X-ray Room fails .
 Scrooge's is currently featuring some of the finest live entertainment currently available in Jackson — in the music of Julie Carr and Billy and Barney Chadwick .
 Cale, John Prine, and Cat Stephens; they are a pleasing compliment to the food, drink, and relaxed atmosphere of Scrooge's .
 All three sing well, with Julie and Billy trading most of the leads and Barney singing harmonies . Julie, Billy and Barney sing well together .
 I reached into the front seat, grabbed Oscar's bottle of Jack Daniel's, and took a long swallow . I reached for the bottle of Oscar's, "Jack Daniel's"
 The annual Omicron Delta Kappa Tap Day will be held March 13 . It will be during the convocation period in the AC Recital Hall . The event is held during convocation .
 U.R.E. tests will be given Saturday March 1, at 8:45m. in the Recital Hall . The U.K.E.'s U.S.E.: The tests will take place on March 1 .
 Students who have two majors will take their second test the following Tuesday at 9:45 in conference room of the Student Center . The test will be available to students who have multiple majors .
 Meridian businessman Gil Carmichael is quietly touting his plans to run for governor of Mississippi as a Republican . Carmichael has been married for more than 30 years .
 Carmichael is speaking to civic clubs and other groups . Carmichael's temper may echo the temper of the times, he says .
 It is a new and open politics, the like of which has not been seen in this state in a long time . It is not the first time the state has seen such an open politics in the past decade .
 The first is the fallout from the Watergate affair, which tended to send a number of Republicans down the drain in recent congresssional races . The second is the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, which sent Republicans down .
 The second is the enmity that Carmichael doubtless incurred when he ran for the senate against Sen. Richard Carmichael . Sen. Carmichael's Senate seat is likely to have been the subject of a bitter feud .
 James O Eastland is the established godfather of Mississippi politics and a man who does not take intrusions lightly . Eastland: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared" Eastland says he's not afraid of the media .
 Carmichael has been working to resolve the cross currents which he thinks developed in the Republican party back in the Nixon days . Carmichael: Pressure from Eastland literally put him in the back of the bus, even when such dignitaries as the vice president of the United States came to
 He never reacted to the snubs he got from his own party members that year . "I'm not surprised," he said .
 He has stayed in the ranks and worked, and he says he thinks that the political magic has come full circle . He says he has stayed on the sidelines and worked hard, and that he thinks he has worked hard .
 Iran's pledge not to go along with another Arab oil embargo . State Department quietly preparing for such an emergency .
 Henry Kissinger was exchanging toasts with Arab leaders on his recent ninenation tour . Kissinger's aides were meeting behind closed doors with oil company representatives .
 The scheme calls for the Western nations to share energy resources in case of another embargo . But in reality this means the United States would provide most of the fuel fuel .
 Kissinger may have more trouble negotiating with our own allies than he has with the Arabs . Kissinger may not be able to reach a deal with the Arab world .
 Several key points of his worldwide energy blueprint have raised hackles in France and England . The world leader's global energy blueprint has raised concerns in France, England .
 Kissinger may have trouble with the U.S. Justice Department . Kissinger may also have trouble dealing with the United States Justice Department. Kissinger is a known figure in Washington .
 His oil-sharing proposal would require the major oil companies to swap vital information . The proposal would also require the companies to share vital information with each other .
 The Justice Department's antitrust lawyers fear it would lessen competition between the oil giants . This would give them even more dominance over the American market, they say .
 If there is another oil embargo, the consumer may be picking up three tabs . One for himself, one for the European nations and one for even higher oil company profits .
 In private conversations with aides, he now talks confidently of winning the economic showdown with the Democrats . In his private conversations, aides say he now expects to win .
 He believes one-third of the populace supports his economic program and another third opposes it . He believes a third of the population supports his program and opposes it.
 The battle, he has told aides, is for undecided third . e has been encouraged by the response he has received on the road .
 He has suggested he has an advantage over the Democrats, he has suggested, in being able to concentrate on one program .
 There are too many disparate Democrats in Congress, he believes, ever to unite behind an economic policy .
 The President has acknowledged to aides that he can't completely control the economic forces . The President acknowledges to aides, however, that he cannot control the economy .
 His re-election will depend, he says, on whether the economic outlook is brighter in 1976 . He says the economy will improve in 1976.
 Much has been written about Secretary of State Kissinger's slipping popularity on Capitol Hill . Kissinger's popularity in Washington is on the wane as a result .
 Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger is also in trouble with the lawmakers . Basically, it boils down to personality .
 Senate sources who deal with the defense secretary tell us he's too professorial and condescending . Senate sources say he's not a good leader, but he's a good man .
 Schlesinger has made the situation even worse by appointing aides to handle Congress who are as unsocial as he is . He has made it worse by appointing aides who are unsocial themselves .
 His top assistant for legislative affairs is John Maury, who was a CIA man for over 20 years . Maury is a former CIA man who worked for the CIA .
 He is a man who is used to speaking in whispers and is singularly unsuited for the gregarious role he is expected to play on Capitol Hill . He's used to speak in whispers .
 As one Senate source put it, Schlesinger was a strike against the Pentagon . As one . source said, "Schlesinger's decision to step down was an attack on the Pentagon"
 The appointment of his two legislative assistants means he has struck out . The appointment is the latest in a long line of disappointments for the president .
 If anything, the White House, President Gerald Ford and all have finally come to be anathema to Mississippi Republicans . The White House and Gerald Ford have become anatheasma to the state's Republicans .
 Carmichael thinks that the time has come for the Republican party in Mississippi . Carmichael comes close to getting evangelistic on this issue .
 He thinks the Democratic party in the state is in disarray, and he may be right . He says he thinks the state Democratic party is in a disarray .
 Recent attempts to unify the party between the loyalists and the regulars have largely been abortive . The party has been split between loyalists, regulars and regulars .
 The regulars fail to realize on the one hand that there is a new ballgame in the works, and though, for the first time, the loyalists are sincerely trying to pull the party together, it remains fragmented .
 Gil Carmichael is a native of Columbia, Mississippi, whose family was driven there by the 1927 Mississippi flood . Carmichael's family moved to Columbia after the 1927 flood, and he was moved there .
 He is talking, perhaps a bit vaguely, about the new politics, candor from public officials, business problems and finally an injection of honesty in government . He is also talking about a new injection of candor in government, he says .
 If I were a candidate for governor, I would not take Gil Carmichael lightly, says Gov. Chris Brown . Brown: "If, by some miracle, I were to run for governor I wouldn't take him lightly"
 Cassandra Fowlkes, an Independent, said: "Their human development is exclusively for white Anglo-Saxon Protestants. Their human development was exclusively for whites"
 Ricky Graham, a member of Pi Kappa Alpha, stated that the Greek system offers another phase to college life . Ricky Graham said the system offers "another phase" to college .
 Everyone is entitled to his own way of life and should be treated with equality in all respects . Everyone should be able to live his own life and be equal to others, says the author .
 Independent Carol Middlestead, another Independent, stated, "Most people benefit from it because it helps them to adjust to college life more quickly" Independent Senator John McCain, a Democrat, said that most students benefit from the program .
 Chi Omega, May Lipe Zehnder, said, "The Greek system promotes higher ideals on campus and does a lot to promote school spirit" Chi Omega said the system promotes "higher ideals"
 Eva Roby, an Independent, remarked, ""I don't think that the system is beneficial at all. I don't want to see the system as beneficial"
 Dean Pittman is the Business Manager of the Department of State Government . He is also the National Sports Photographer of the Year for the State of the State .
 Carey opens against Belhaven tonight at 7:00 and Millsaps plays MC at 9:00 . Millsaps also opens against Carey tonight at 8:00.
 The consolation game will be at 7:00 Friday night and the championship at 9:00 . The championship will be held on Friday night .
 The game was never in doubt even though Millsaps stayed close until the final minutes . The game, played in Tennessee, was never a doubt .
 Too many turnovers and poor shooting (38% from the field) sealed the loss for the U.S. team .
 Belhaven came from across the street to whallop the Majors . A low point of a very low Millsaps season, it was a low point for the team .
 Lynx of Southwestern dropped in on the Majors on Friday, February 14 . The Lynx were the first Lynx to drop in on a Major League game .
 Down by two with six seconds left, the purple-men got the ball down the floor . Mike Flautt was fouled in the final seconds of the game .
 KA's appear to be the team to beat this year in intramural basketball . The Deltan Flautt calmly sand two free KA 's Lead Intramurals by EARL AYCOCK .
 KA's are tied for the league lead with the LXA's who also have a perfect record at 3-0 . With an untarnished 5-0 record, they are also tied for a perfect league record at 5-1 .
 The Pikes and the Tracers are tied for third at 2-1, followed by a 3-way tie for fifth among Chalk, the Masterballers, and the Wild Turkeys . The KE's have yet to experience the thrill of victory .
 Pike ""B"" team with a 1-0 record in the ""B" league . Pike "B" team leads the league with a 0-1 record . Pike is the first team to win in the league .
 In second are the Panthers at 2-1, then a 6-way tie for third among the KA ""B"; Pike ""C"", the Chemistry Department, and the Blazers . The Blazers are 2-2, then the Panthers and the chemistry department are at the bottom
 Competition has been bitter so far in both leagues, with many of the games being determined only in the last few seconds . Many of these games have been decided only by the last minute of play .
 The KA's defeated the Tracers by one point with only eight seconds remaining . The Panthers defeated the KA ""B"" team by three points with only three seconds left .
 Of the 26 games that have been played thus far, at least nine of them have been decided by four points or less . This fact can be further validated by noting that of the 26 matches that have already been played so far, nine of the games have been determined by four or less
 Millsaps looked like it might pull another victory in the first half . Millsaps was down to eight players by the Tougaloo game, but looked back to pull another win .
 The Millsaps team's short season put it at a disadvantage due to the lack of time available for developing fundamentals . Millsaps' short season puts them at an advantage due to a lack of playing time .
 It was further disadvantaged by the overwhelming experience of the opponents, says the BBC . It is further disadvantaged in terms of the size of the opposition, the BBC says .
 With only a light game season, the Lady Majors did a creditable job in holding their own . With only light games, the team did a good job of holding its own .
 Members of this year's team are Shawn Evans, Donna Sullivan, Valerie Hodston, Karen Gladney, Nancy Barksdale, Carol Humphreys, Isabelle Ezelle, Marcia McKee, Mary Ann Edge, coach, Mary Jo Milling, manager, and Janet Dykes
 Four of college basketball's top ten teams lost over the weekend, some embarassingly . Four of the nation's top teams lost .
 Number two UCLA suffered its worst defeat in over ten years, as Washington beat them 10381 . Washington beat UCLA 10381. UCLA suffered the worst defeat of over 10 years, with the loss of 1038 .
 David Thompson fouled out of that game with more than 15 minutes left . All-American David Thompson is a junior at the University of Maryland .
 Fifth ranked Alabama was upset by seventh rated Kentucky in their shootout at Tuscaloosa . Alabama dropped into a tie with the Wildcats in the SEC race with Kentucky .
 The eighth rated Sun Devils of Arizona State lost to unrated Texas-El Paso, leaving them with a 20-3 mark . The Sun Devils are ranked No. 8 in the nation's highest-rated college basketball .
 Number ten Southern California lost earlier in the week to Washington, regitering their sixth loss of the season . The number ten team lost to Washington earlier this week .
 Top ranked and undefeated Indiana won twice this week, increasing their record to 26-0 . The team leader, Scott May, broke his wrist against arch-rival Purdue . Indiana suffered the most crushing loss of the year, losing by one point .
 Simpson was most effective in the sports requiring a particular skill, such as bowling and baseball hitting . Simpson was best known for bowling, baseball and baseball skills .
 The former world-class relay sprinter at USC easily won the hundred yard dash in a new Superstars record of 9.69 .
 O.J. edged former champion, Bob Seagren, and last years winner, Kyle Rote, Jr. into second place . Added to other high finishes, such as a second place finish in tennis, in tennis .
 The league will play three round robins, the first of which was completed last week . The first round robin of the first stage of the tournament was held in New Jersey .
 This week the league will expand to include three ""B"" teams which will play each other twice . The league will also expand to three ""A" teams . The teams will play twice each week .
 Hiring looking for faculty prospects — it starts with the negative assumption that Blacks won't come here, then works from there . Hiring is based on the assumption that Black people will not come to the university, says the professor .
 He said informal channels used to contact many applicants rarely yields Blacks . He said that most of the Millsaps faculty members' contacts are white .
 This system needs to be supplemented with contacts that will locate more black candidates, says Murray . Murray: This system must be supplemented to find more black people .
 The sociology professor also remarked that another myth held bv the administration is that a black Ph.D. would not want to come south to teach . With the professorial job market as tight as it now is, the prospective teacher will go where the job is .
 A lack of Black faculty is supplemented by the other form of hiring discrimination here — namely Blacks in common labor positions and whites in administrative posts . Blacks are not allowed to be employed in labor positions, and whites are not hired in administrative positions .
 Pete Wood stated that all of the applications he received for custodial and similar positions were from Blacks . Wood said all of his applications were from African Americans .
 The Millsaps College Community Enrichment Program has expanded this year to include Millsaps' students . Such jobs not only offer a meager salary but Non-Credit Courses . Millsaps has expanded the program to include students at the college .
 The program, that is for ""enrichment and enjoyment"", consists of a variety of noncredit, five to eight week night courses with no grades or records . The program is for 'enrichments and enjoyment'
 Millsaps is offering its students wishing to participate in the program special half-price rates . Dean Harvey Saunders, one of the organizers of the program stated, "Millsaps"
 If the student preregisters, by February 28, the cost will be ten dollars per course, except the Beginning Piano for adults and the Travel Abroad courses . The cost is $10 per course .
 Beginning Photography George Johnson, Academic Complex 222, 7:30 -9:00 a.m. George Johnson will photograph George Johnson at the beginning of the week .
 Connie Beardsley, Academic Complex 310, 7:30 9:30m. ( Supplies Fee $5.00) Connie Beardley is a member of the U.S. National Geographic Society .
 Travel Abroad: Paul D Hardin, Academic Complex 215, 7:30 9:00 a.m. ., $4.50. .
 Lisa Kilgore, Academic Complex 218, 7:00 8:30 a.m. . promise little hope of advancement to supervisory roles . She will be interviewed at the end of the week .
 The cafeteria is the same way — all the supervisors are white; all being supervised are black . All supervisors in the cafeteria are white, and all supervisors are black, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The hiring is done by Mississippi Valley Food Service, but the school could apply pressure and demand more Blacks in supervisory roles .
 The tenative plans for the road, call for a wide boulevard to connect North State Street at the Riverside intersection and curve slightly ""S""-like across campus . Golf Course Construction is underway .
 This will place the road in the general proximity directly behind Franklin dormitory, the tennis courts, and the Physical Activities Center . The road will be placed in proximity to the dormitory .
 The soccer and baseball fields, now in the path of the planned new road, will eventually be reconstructed on the west side of the football practice field . After that area, including utilities shack, has been cleared, the utilities shack will be cleared .
 The baseball field has just had considerable work done on it in its present location . However, the baseball field is just having work done .
 Long range plans for the project will result in the complete closing of the North State gateway onto the campus . The new road will establish the new road as the main campus entrance .
 When pressed about student reaction to the destruction of a ""favorite"" part of campus, Collins replied, ""I don't want to cut down trees and tear up land either"
 Jackson Browne and Phoebe Snow will perform at the Holy City Temple Concert, 8:00 and 10:00 Mar. Mar. — Fiddler on the Roof and Gospel Sing with the Inspirations will be held at the Temple .
 Jackson Music Association — Jerome Hines, 8: 15i Mar. Mar. — Bill Gaither Trio, 8-00 Mar. – Daughter or Regiment; Mar. 15i .
 Feb.-Mar. —State Girls' Basketball Tournament . Mar.-8 — State Boys' basketball Tournament Mar., 9 — Flea Market Mar., 15 — Overall State Basketball Championship Mar. — Earth, Wind, & Fire in concert . Mar. 5th State Kennel Club Dog Show
 This second problem, however, has been set aside for the moment in order to deal with the first, the first . This is not the first problem, but the first is the second problem .
 At the most recent meeting of the Chaplain's Committee, held February 25, discussion of second semester rush was somewhat evaded . At the meeting, discussion was somewhat avoided .
 It leaned toward the void present on campusthe lack of involvement . Rather, it leaned toward a void .
 If the committee can stimulate involvement in the students, it is felt that perhaps a ""community"" atmosphere can be developed .
 A letter to President Collins was drafted supporting extended library hours . A letter was also drafted supporting extending library hours in libraries .
 Major thrusts have been made in two recent Student Senate meetings to establish student influence in Millsaps affairs . Motion to buy ticket lots from Bee-Bop Productions was raised as an alternative to staging Joe Lee Gibson Constitutes a Saps Institution in himself .
 From remodeling of the Boyd Cambell Student Center to buying beer for a Community Week picnic, the senate expressed its discontent . The senate under the capable Jim McCafferty expressed its willingness to act .
 Ex-President Charlie Hinman engineered the approval of seven kegs of beer for the April 12 campus picnic . The beer was approved by Hinman's ex-president .
 The motion was preceded by an affirmation of its legality under the Millsaps constitution and state law . The motion is preceded by a affirmation of the state's constitution .
 Only Royce Garvin and Paul Stephens voted against the measure . Though several senators voiced apprehension, only two voted against it .
 President Collins has reportedly stated there will be no beer in public on campus on campus . President Collins reportedly told students there will not be any public drinking in public .
 A unanimous resolution was passed to urge the speedy renovation of the dilapidated student center . The student center is located at the University of Cambridge . The resolution urges the renovation .
 The revamping has apparently received low priority from both the Board of Trustees and the administration . The board of trustees and administration has not prioritized the revamping .
 Senator May Lipe Zehnder in the earlier meeting voiced objection to the planned destruction of the golf course . Senator May . Lipe . Zehinder in an earlier meeting .
 She urged that a letter be sent to President Collins acknowledging the administration's failure to consult the students on this matter .
 Senator Zehnder also initiated an investigation into the book store's pricing methods on the request of a student . The book store has been closed since 2010 .
 The Thursday referendum on the addition of three students to the Academic Council was brought before the senate by Chris Wilkerson . The referendum was held on Thursday night .
 The council currently has no formal student input in academic decisions . Students have been advised by the council to make decisions .
 Tickets would be issued to Millsaps students for chosen concerts free or at a reduced price . The tickets would then be available to the general public before being made available to students .
 The charter of Alpha Phi Omega was reintroduced and became a more complicated issue when the national service organization decided to open its doors to all students but would not permit women to vote or hold offices . The charter became more complicated when the organization decided not to allow women to hold offices or vote
 The arguments remained unresolved though the group received less support than in a Feb. meeting . The motion on acceptance was tabled and the group was unable to find a resolution .
 Liberal Historian Max Lerner squared off with conservative political journalist-commentator Reid Buckley in debate last week . Lerner and Buckley debated last week as part of Millsaps' Arts and Lecture Series .
 Party plans to undertake a campus-wide membership campaign and organizational rally during Community week in early April . Currently under the guidance of a core group of around eight founders .
 Millsaps student government is now a Greekdominated student government . This ail stems from an effort to marshal independent voting strength and direct it toward getting more independents elected .
 Hubert Thompson is one of the key figures in the formation of the party . Thompson is a key figure in the creation of the new party .
 independents are the only group that is not organized in any fashion on the Millsaps campus . According to Chris Wilkerson, another prime mover in the organizational efforts, independents are about the only groups that are not organized on the campus .
 He said that the party would not only get more independents elected to student government, but would also increase the general involvement of independents in campus political affairs .
 He said that the party would probably have the same overall goals as the Greeks have concerning issues before the student government, with the exception of social matters . The party is expected to have a similar goals to the Greeks .
 Both organizers felt the idea would help get more Blacks involved in student government and furthering race relations on campus .
 It would have a core central committee of ten to twenty members, each of which would represent a large group (twenty to thirty) of independents in party affairs . Each of these members would represent an independent group of 25 to 30 members .
 This plan is not concrete yet and could be altered, dependent on the nature of tomorrow's rally . Millsaps is an institution of institutions. Millsaps has a history of 'institution of institutions'
 Some of the faculty have been around for so long that they almost seem to be a physical part of the college, virtually an institution in themselves . Things like the Major's tomb, the U.R.E.. an unfriendly Business Office, and some of the . faculty have
 Joe has been here since he was 17, beginning the year before Mr Roosevelt's War . Joe has lived in the same place since his 17th birthday . Joe says he has lived there since '1942'
 He is paid $2.10 an hour which, even for a school in severe financial straits, is unjustifiable after 35 years of work .
 The janitor let the dorm go to hell and back after Christmas break . He evidently takes pride in it for complaints when Joe is working .
 He is an intriguing personality in some ways, appearing at times both simple and complex but he never seems to be too concerned about it which makes it all right . He is a fascinating personality but never seems too concerned with it .
 At the risk of sounding moralistic, I would say that Joe is one of the few people at Millsaps to whom being kind appears to be a natu.ul action rather than a conditioned response . Being kind is not always a reaction to a negative reaction, it's a reaction
 Copeland loves to complain and question just about everybody that will answer him, and most people generally do . Copeland and the J.L.E. GIBSON school, he nevertheless love to complain, question and question people .
 A suggestion has been made, perhaps jokingly, that this writer not only agrees with but would like to see come about immediately . In return for Joe Lee's 35 years of work, this writer wants to see a return for his 35-year career .
 Since that announcement, he has become the man to watch — the favored dark horse, so to speak — in the upcoming campaign . Many feel he is a key contender for the Democratic nomination .
 Dantin hired political advertising wizard Deloss Walker of Memphis . Walker is the same man who engineered Governor Waller's successful media campaign in 1971 . Walker also worked for Gov. Waller during his successful 1971 media campaign .
 It is speculated that Walker can shape the political image of the relatively unknown, unblemished Dantin to fit the requirements of this ""new politics"" style of running for office .
 Formerly mayor of Columbia, the current district attorney has done well in local politics . He is respected in his own area .
 In an exclusive interview with the Purple & White, candidate Dantin discussed his own campaign and several of the issues now facing the government and people of Mississippi .
 Your image will be presented to the public through advertising. That is. that is your image . That is . your image. Your image . will be . presented to . the public. through advertising .
 Walker will be doing my advertising, he will not be my campaign manager, he says . Walker will do his advertising, but he won't be the campaign manager .
 "I've got my own program and my own ideas as to what I think needs be done for the slate of ississippi. Now I've got myself own program," she says .
 As good a man as Deloss Walker is, he cannot make chicken salad out of chicken feathers . Walker is a good man, but he can't make a chicken salad from chicken feathers, he says . Walker: "He is a great man. He is not a man who can
 President Obama says he thinks he's the best political advertising man in the business . He says he's "the best, the best ... in the political advertising business"
 Friends and clients in a four or five county area have shared their support for the project .
 "It's been a personal support, but it's been substantial," she says . "Some people who really believe in me. It's been some people ... I've had a lot of support," she adds .
 "I think that would just encourage the use of it and commitment to the drug culture," she says . "I'm not sure what I would like to see people use it," she adds .
 I think it's all we can possibly afford at the present time with the economy as it is. I think we can't afford it at the moment, especially in the current economic climate .
 "I think now we should see just what resources we do have for the next step in education," says governor . "Now we should ... see just how resources we have ... are available," she says .
 "I don't know that right now is the time for it, . are most important right now are reorganization for economizing state government," she says .
 "I think we have too many employees in the state, who, instead of being public servants, they're politicians," she says . "Number two, number three, number four, number five, number six, number seven, number eight, number nine . Number three: Number two
 I think that's the second most crucial issue, that we get more efficiency, we get better public servants if we don't require them to be politicians, if they become more professional . We get more efficient public servants, I think, if we're not politicians, we're better public
 The third thing that I'm particularly interested in is the need for a drug control center in the state, he says . "The third thing" is a need for the state's drug control control center, he said .
 "We have taken the drug problem and treated it like we have done every other crime. We have taken it seriously seriously," police chief says . We have treated it as a crime, not a drug problem, like other crimes, police say .
 "I'm not for decriminalizing drug crime, but I am for giving a response to it that fits the problem rather than compounds it," she says . She says she's not against decriminalizing drugs, but she's for giving the problem a response that fits it .
 Drug offenders could receive treatment, counseling, and handling which is responsive to their particular problem . If we had a center that was attuned to the problem, drug offenders could . receive treatment .
 I don't really know what we're talking about in terms of what it would do to our educational system. I'd like to give a little look at it, I'd say . I'd rather be able to talk about it. I'm not quite sure what it will do to
 "I understand that the number of black employees in the state government is very low. I understand that . I understand . That's very low," she said .
 I think if the person is qualified, it should not matter if he's black or white, male or female . State Govt. LLOYD GRAY: "I think if you're qualified, you should be qualified"
 The Mississippi State Senate confirmed Gov. Rick Perry's nomination after nearly two months of simmering debate .
 Bill Waller's nomination of Jack K Reed as Parchman superintendent last week . Reed was nominated by Waller last week to be the new superintendent . Reed has been in prison for 18 years . Reed is a former corrections officer .
 Reed was hired by the State Prison Board in December of 1973 . He came to Mississippi from California where he was employed for 12 years in that state's correctional system . Reed has served as the acting superintendent since 1973 .
 Supporters of his nomination claim the 56-year-old ex-Marine had greatly improved conditions at the Penitentiary . Supporters claim he was the first qualified professional peneologist to be hired by the state .
 The Mississippi House of Representatives amended its rules to require its committees to have open meetings . The rules were amended to require committees to meet in an open meeting . The Mississippi state legislature amended the rules in March .
 The move follows passage of a proposed state statute for the purpose of including all governmental agencies on the state, district, and local levels in the provision . The provision is currently before the Senate .
 A legislative reapportionment plan was okayed by the House Elections Committee . Lawmakers are trying to avert the possible court-ordered implementation of a plan that would require single-member legislative districts across the state .
 Civil Rights forces, led by Fayette Mayor Charles Evers, visited the Capitol last week and dramatically siezed the Senate podium . They say the present system of multimember districts prevents the election of blacks to the legislature .
 The House's plan calls only for the election of legislators from supervisors' districts in the counties of Hinds, Harrison, and Jackson . The House plan calls for supervisors to be elected in the populous counties .
 U.S. House of Representative's Foreign Affairs Committee voted to reject President Ford's request for a half billion dollars in aid to beseiged Cambodia .
 On the same day Prince Norodom Sihonouk, deposed leader, asked all countries with embassies in Phnom Pehn to close them down and evacuate the city .
 His action hints toward a Communist offensive drive to move actual fighting into the city . His action hinted toward an offensive drive .
 The United States unemployment rate remained at 8.3% in February . The U.S. unemployment rate is still at the highest level in the country .
 500,000 of the jobless had quit looking for work, as a result they are dropped from the official statistics . However, the figures compiled by the Bureau of the Census revealed that the figures were not accurate .
 The Senate Finance Committee voted to refund up to $2,000 dollars to persons buying new homes . The U.S. Senate began to move swiftly on financial matters as the Senate Finance committee voted .
 The Senate Democratic Caucus voted to stay in session until a general tax relief bill is in the hands of President Ford, even if it means no Easter break . President Ford is expected to lead the Senate on a bill that would provide tax relief .
 Secret guard jury met in Hamisburg, Pennsylvania, to investigate sighting of Patty Hearst . Hearst and her SLA companions, at a small farm outside Allentown, Pennsylvania .
 The CIA has been spying on Congresswoman Bella Abzug for the last twenty-two years . A House Investigation Committee drew an admission from Director William Colby that the CIA has spied on Abzugs .
 Portugal's President Games linked the secret organization with an attempted revolt by a right wing group in Portugal this week . In other CIA activities, the president of Portugal has linked the CIA to an attempt to overthrow a right-wing group .
 President Edward Collins and the administration facing their first student challenge in over two years . P&W: Student Government Challenging the Administration .
 Collins was diagnosed with an illness that has been dubbed the spring malady . Collins has been diagnosed with the illness since April 1 .
 What students are wanting this year, again, is a greater determination of their fate, i.e., more say-so . What students want this year is more say so. i.i.
 Students realize they are not receiving all the college owes them, but are not sure what they want, what stands in their way, or how to achieve it . Students say they want to know what they need to do to achieve their goals .
 The most poignant signs of dissent are not in the Student Senate . Student Senate has made great strides in its own right . Students are making strides in their own right, but the Senate is not the only one .
 All of the Greek organizations to whom it has been presented have unanimously passed a resolution urging that high priority be given to the revamping of the student center .
 College records show that in '71 and '72 Millsaps financed a $90,000 home for Collins . For at least 10 years no money has been put into the student center .
 The Board of Trustees has not included the renovation in the first $2 million of the Capital Fund Drive . Nor has the board of trustees included the renovations in the initial $2million of the drive .
 Studies for an adequate center have been available for at least seven years, studies show . Studies for such a center are available for more than seven years .
 This sense of priorities is repeated ad nauseum in administration policy . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 It would be fallacious to assume that President Collins has no authority in these matters, as he is wont to claim . And it would be a mistake to assume he had no authority, he says .
 Collins reversed the Boardapproved tuition plan within one week . Collins demonstrated "overwhelming power in the most essential matters of college administration," he said .
 Collins is a man of abilities — even if leadership cannot be included among them — and is very adept at the art of persuasion, it is his work . Collins is an expert at persuasion, even though he is not a leader .
 This is demonstrated in meetings with his recently-formed student advisory board . We learn from its members, he easily avoids confrontation on any issue, we say .
 To assume that change occurs easily at Millsaps would be equally fallacious, Millsaps says . Millsaps has a long history of not being able to adapt quickly and easily to accommodate that .
 It's easy to blame a single person or small group for one's dilemma, perhaps too easy . It is easy to say 'I'm sorry' to anyone who suffers from a problem .
 "What is difficult, especially when one is used to a cozy hibernation, is the struggle that must accompany a change in circumstances," she says .
 Without this, Millsaps will not view the student as its reason for existence, it is apparent . Millsaps students are not the reason for its existence .
 The school may lose what little appeal it has left to enter a permanent winter . And this winter may be the last of its kind .
 Committee Submits PAC Alterations to President Edward Collins . Millsaps Physical Activities Center needs to be flexible for students . Committee submits more flexible studentuse plan to president .
 Committee presented a sixpage report outlining the needs of the students and the present availability of the PAC for individual student use . The committee, headed by Dennis Wells, presented the report .
 The general report offered guidelines for the expansion and flexibility of the present gym hours . The report was published in the summer of 2013 .
 Committee report called for extension of open hours on Sunday from its present schedule, 1:00m. to 5:00 m. to 1.00m., and the opening of the gym on Saturday from 10:00 to 5 m.m. Saturday .
 Committee suggested cancellation of afternoon G period class in the gym . Committee suggested the cancellation of the afternoon class . Committee also suggested canceling afternoon G class in gym .
 There is an equivalent two hour open period in the morning and one hour in the afternoon . Presently, there is a two-hour period in each morning and a one-hour afternoon period in every day .
 President Collins has not given the proposals his bill of approval . Coach Jim Montgomery, also a committee member, recently stated that he saw little chance of the President vetoing the measure .
 Montgomery also added that the PAC is already adhering to most of the newly proposed schedule . Montgomery said the PAC already adheres to the new schedule .
 Montgomery plans to lengthen the hours of tennis practice, and restrict the team's use to only two courts . Montgomery also plans to limit the number of courts used by the team to two courts per player .
 This will provide students one free court every week day from 12:00 noon to 6:00m. Students will be able to play a free court each week day . Students will have access to the court from 12 to 6 a.m.
 Committee plans to reactivate each semester to insure that no violations of the schedule occur . Committee will monitor the schedule and monitor each semester .
 A growing number of students are protesting the proposed commercialization of the north campus, particularly the impendent ""access road" which will divide the property from the rest of the campus .
 The protest, however, has not been marshalled in any particular direction . The protest is not expected to take place at any time .
 Exactly two hundred signatures are found on the petition, but Jigs doesn't know what to do with it . Jigs has no idea what to give it to .
 The Kappa Deltas passed a resolution to request the senate set up such a committee . The measure has not been presented to the senate yet .
 The student senate voted to send letters to the President and the Board of Trustees expressing opposition to the current golf course development plans . The proposal was easily passed .
 Gale Mallette: "I can't see how the road would make any difference in the traffic around campus" Gale Mallett: "It would be hard to see how much traffic would be around campus. It would be difficult to see if it would make a difference in campus traffic."
 David Womack: "It is a big sacrifice to make because it is a beautiful place and a lot of money was just spent on the baseball field. A lot of time was spent on baseball field," he said .
 If it has to be developed it should be done closer to Woodrow Wilson which would leave us somewhere to go and the soccer and baseball fields . If it was developed it would be done close to Wilson, it would leave somewhere else .
 Two new professors with relatively good credentials will join the Millsaps faculty next fall . ISew Profs to Join Faculty will join Millsaps in the fall .
 Percy has concentrated his English studies in the field of Renaissance literature . Percy has special interest in Elizabethan poetry and drama .
 Percy listed exceptional competence in Chaucer, Nineteenth-century novel and Chaucer . Percy said exceptional competence was also shown in the study .
 The second new professor, Richard Freis, has been employed specifically as a full-time heritage director . The new professor is a professor of heritage at the University of Cambridge .
 Freis has specialized in Republican and Augustan Latin Poetry, Latin Prose Practice and Theory, and Greek Tragedy . He will also direct his efforts to revitalizing the Classics department at Millsaps .
 A RUSSIAN DIPLOMAT visiting Millsaps engages in exchange with Political Science professor Howard Bavendar . The visit to Millsaps is part of an exchange between Washington and Moscow .
 This gentleman, whose job dealt with Soviet political affairs, was joined by two of his cohorts in the trip to campus a couple of weeks ago .
 A ribbon-cutting, photographs, alumni, board members and such will all be part of an attempt to get some PR mileage out of the recreational facility . The recreational facility will be open to the public .
 The heated pool will open for student usage at least by then, possibly earlier this year . It will be open for students to use by the end of September .
 Director of Services Pete Wood stated that details such as insurance and legal arrangements were being worked out at present and hopefully would be taken care of by the end of this week .
 President would make a decision as to when the pool would actually open for use . Wood said that once such details are taken care of, the President would decide when to open the pool .
 Todd Rundgren reportedly has just taken the glitter-rock movement one step further by dying his public hair blue . It is everything you would expect out of a Terry Road hot spot .
 The decorum at Peacock's Pub is vintage redneck . The pub's decorum is just like the decorum of the pub .
 A lot of middle-aged country folks dancing and drinking with . spouses and friends . A 1 lot of . middle . aged country folks danced and drinking .
 There's a liquor store a block down the street and you can buy set-ups at the inflated price of 50 cents . There's also an inflated 50 cents for set-up sets .
 Millsappers David Womack and Victor Hawkins take their band out there and the dancing gets started up . The Millsappers are known for their dancing .
 Sammy Peacock has been known to keep the place open past twelve if the band is playing and everybody's having a good time . It really can get rowdy-fun and Sammy keeps the venue open past midnight .
 The Poop Deck in the Quarter is one of the most appalling places on earth . For a person who rarely breaks the Hollingsworth and Dutch Bar tradition, it's one of many appalling places .
 Barmaids bring beer, mixed drinks, and eventually the bill right to the table, as if that was the way a bar was supposed to be run . Instead of getting up from the table and going to the bar to get yourself a pitcher, you can't go to the
 The floor is carpeted, the paneling looks real, and the drinks are served in real glasses . The drinks will be served in a real glasses and the floor has carpeted .
 Stefan Anderson performs nightly at the end of each night . Stefan Anderson is the star of the show . The show is set to be held in New York City .
 This only goes to show that the Millsaps student, no matter what he thinks, is prepared to cope wjth new and different environments and get along quite well .
 The Poop Deck is the place for a quiet evening with a few friends and a few drinks in a pleasant atmosphere . If you're looking for a private evening, it might well be the place to go to .
 Dean had just made another $3,000 . To the vocal dismay of about half the 1,000 students in Alumni Hall, Dean had made $3.000 . Dean had already made $2,000.
 Ahead was a $4,000 paycheck for another speaking engagement later in the day . Ahead of the day, the actor was set to take on another speaking gig .
 Americans remember him as the ramrod-straight pedant of the Senate Watergate Committee hearings in 1973 . He was a key witness in Watergate hearings .
 Dean Dean talked quietly about Watergate . He handled the audience with the aplomb one might have expected on the president's accuser .
 The following poem is a reprint from ""The Vanderbilt Hustler,"" who reprinted it from "The Quaker Campus,"" the student newspaper of Whittier College . The poem was reprinted from the student paper of the same college .
 "I'm living like a king I'm always learnin' somethin' new," he says . "Every year here at Millsaps is really Tough on you. Tho I'm livein' something new"
 Oscar T took a long sip and tossed the empty can of Dixie in the corner of the room . Oscar T threw the empty Dixie canister back into the corner .
 The famed attorney was discussing the Hoofer case with his young clients over a round of drinks in the back room of Uncle Pete's .
 Barker wailed about his mistreatment at the hands of the Hoofer Security Guard . Barker was wailing about the security guard's treatment at the time .
 The strain on his intellectual sensibilities had obviously been more than he could bear . The strain was obviously too much for him to bear .
 While Oscar T calmed ""Fire Breath"", Uncle Pete and Uncle Pete walked out on the pier that stood behind Pete's Bar and gazed at the muddy waters of Mobile Bay . Uncle Pete: "Uncle Pete and I walked out . We're looking forward to a great day in the
 The State of Alabama the State of tississippi. Quack,"" drawled Pete, "this reminds me of one of Oscar's greatest cases,"
 Guv'nor Waller kept moaningin' and groanin' something T)oul had to give 'em Muscle als and Bear Bryant . Waller's even year old daughter Fifi had run off tuh Ipulco with Guv
 Mississippi's lawyer interrupted lawyer with a, HAW-HAW Haw-Haw, rap on the head with a Jack Daniel's bottle, and made a motion to have the case dismissed .
 Oscar T Fornbush is a shyster lawyer specializing in cheap courtroom antics . Oscar is the legendary defender of truth and justice; just another shyster .
 We'll have to focus the attention of the trial on their accusors, 'Slick Eddie' and J Harvey ' Sandbrain' J Harvey . The trial will be held in New York City .
 President Obama has promised to use the construction of the White House as a diversion while he starts a few places that are sure to be financial smashes . Or that he's going to use its construction as a distraction .
 Captain Eddie's Catfish Corner, Friendly Eddie's A-OK Used Cars; Colonel Coolin's Southern Fried Chicken; McCoolin's; and Slick Eddie's Finance and Loans .
 'I was glad, for in the weeks to come we were gonna need all the help we could get. I was glad,' she said . 'I'm glad,' the woman said .
 Judges prefer shorter subjects because of space limitations . There is no limitation as to form or theme, although the judges prefer short subjects .
 Each poem must be typed or printed on a separate sheet, and must bear the name and home address of the student, and the college address as well .
 Manuscripts should be sent to the OFFICE of the Press; NATIONAL POETRY PRESS; 3210 SELBY AVENUE; L.A. 90034 .
 OSCAR T CLOSING WITH THE SUMMATION OF A CASE . Time and a Hobo by DOUG LEVANway Features Editor . I saw him walking on the side of the road .
 A small old man, wearing non-descript clothes and a cap pulled down to shade his eyes, struggled with a large brown bag that forced him to lean over almost horizontally . The small man was struggling with a small brown bag .
 The same Mr George I had met over five years ago in some woods near where I was now driving . The same man George I met over 5 years ago . He was the same man I met five years earlier .
 Someone had heard about a hermit who lived in the woods . So being fifteen and determined not leave people alone, I went with some friends to find him .
 Wandering through the sparse underbrush, we found him sitting on a large can turned upside down . He sat on the can upside down, sitting in the grass on the ground .
 He talked for hours about the South Seas Islands he had been on, about how he knew Henry Ford . He talked about his life with the railroad and even about a night he spent in jail for hopping a ride on a freight car .
 He showed us his hair, for he was very proud of it, which was thick"" and pure white despite his years . He was proud of his thick white hair, which he showed us .
 Mr George was found in the woods in March after five years . He had been missing for five years before .
 I stammered out my name along with an explanation about why I was there, but he paid no attention to it . I stuttered out a few words to the man but he ignored it . "He paid no notice," he said .
 "I told him that I'd like to interview him sometime for the Purple and White," he said . I told him I'd want him to interview me sometime .
 "That lady from the ClarionLedger told me she'd give me a cherry pic, but I didn't get nothing," he says . The Clarion ledger gave him a cherry photo, but he got nothing .
 The blue had all but disappeared in his eyes, replaced by a general redness . The blue was all but gone in the eyes of the man in the middle of the night .
 1 didn't know what to say to him. "They catch you and you won't be down this way again," he said .
 "I picked up a stick and drew circles in the dirt to avoid meeting his eyes," she says . "I was so scared to see him again that I drew circles around the dirt," she said .
 "They'll only get me in trouble, think you're giving me drugs or something," he says . "I don't think they'll get me into trouble," he adds. "I'm not going to get into trouble. They'll get you in trouble. Think they're giving
 "Well, it's obvious that you're gonna sit there until you get us both in trouble,"" he said . Then he stood up, grabbed the funny papers and walked away .
 I walked slowly back through the woods, stopping only once to kick over a large can that was turned upside down . I stopped to kick the can over .
 The 1975 race for the governor's office is taking shape . Paul Pittman Winter is frontrunner in governor's race .
 Lt. Bill Winter, lieutenant governor, is the acknowledged frontrunner for governor . Winter is a veteran of more than 25 years in state government, ranging from legislature to the present office .
 Dantin has Deloss Walker, the Memphis ad man, in his corner . Walker is going to have adequate financing to make a creditable race . Dantins has a good chance of winning .
 He has been hacking Winter at every turn and will probably play that role if he decides to run for the top office . Winter has been a thorn in the eye of the White House .
 The word out, not all-together substantiated, is that he will have the backing of organized labor . Organized labor with possibly some substantial financing from that source .
 Dave Perkins, a ackson oilman and former chiropractor, has formally announced that he will run for president . Dave Perkins is the first person to formally announce he is running for office in 2016 .
 The indication is that the campaign will be much shorter, media oriented and geared primarily to television and the newspapers and radio . The indications are that it will be a media-oriented campaign .
 Republican Gil Carmichael is going to be a formidable candidate in the general election in November . Carmichael will be a strong contender for the Republican seat in the Senate .
 "He is personable, attractive and is the type candidate who fits like a glove into the media situation," says the candidate for the job .
 It's conceivable that he will have opposition in the primary in Texas . Carmichael Strong With Auto Dealers t. Carmichael strong with auto dealers .
 Governor says he is developing strong support among automobile dealers in the state . But this reporter has learned that he has strong support from automobile dealers .
 Carmichael is a car dealer, holding the Volkswagen-Chrysler dealership in Meridian, Meridian . Carmichael also owns a car dealership in the city of Meridian .
 Winter's chances of making the big play this time around are slim . Still it's difficult to discount Winter's chance of winning the title this time round .
 He made a strong race in 1967 and disappointed many of his supporters in 1971 . He stepped down to the lieutenant governor's race in 1971 after a strong performance in 1967 . He was disappointed in stepping down in 1971 to become lieutenant governor .
 What it boils down to is whether he can put together the kind of campaign staff that will project his image in a positive, vote-getting way, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Memphis ad man Deloss Walker in the picture . With Memphis ad . Walker's Memphis ad agency .
 Letters extend Sunday lunch to students who can't afford to miss their meals . Not all students are rich and not all students can afford their Sunday afternoon meals . It is a known fact that not all are rich .
 I kind of have some misgivings about making this request, but I will go ahead and make it anyway . "I'm going to make this request," he says .
 This school is a church-affiliated one and so, one would logically expect that the school make some adjustments to certain things that concern students and their religious life . The school is an affiliated church, so, it is expected to make changes .
 The school's cafeteria opens to students between 12 noon and 1:00 m.m. on Sunday afternoons for their meals .
 Many students go to church on Sundays and do not get back from there until around 2:00m., by which time the cafeteria is closed . Many students do not return from church until around 3:30 p.m.
 The extension of this period; by just one hour to allow these students to have their lunch when they get back is surely not anything that will harm the school or the kitchen management and staff in any noticeable way . This extension of the school's lunch period is not something that will hurt the
 The Sunday evening snack rarely ever does much good anyway. On the other hand, it will help the students immensely in that they do not have to go on empty stomachs until Monday morning .
 Other schools, including state schools around here, make provisions for students who go to church and come back late to still have their meals .
 State schools can do this, how much more should a church-related school be willing to do the same. One wonders if state schools can .
 This action, if taken, might also encourage more students to go to church . This is a thing that this school will be very much interested in . This action could also be seen as a way to encourage students to attend church .
 It will also be another feather in the administration's cap to consider this — modest proposal — in that they will only be seeing to the welfare of these God-fearing students .
 I'm one of 'those' who was under the impression that Greek was the way to go. My point, dear generalizing sir, is that I am one of those . My point is that he is not 'one of those' who thinks Greek is the best way of going
 You should realize there are usually three sides to any such situation, or at least two, in any situation . You should also realize there should be three sides of the story .
 Perhaps it is a few dozen years and an untold number of lost lives too late, but just the same, there is vidence that Mississippi may be emerging ever so slowly from the dark ages of penal philosophy .
 Jack K Reed superintendant of the State enitentiary at Parchman last week was confirmed . Parchmen students were not excited about the confirmation of Reed's superintendent .
 Borinski's criminal justice class or with the average man on the street . Borinski: "I'm not afraid to go to prison. I'm glad to see people in prison again."
 Parchman superintendants have been a dime a dozen the past few years . State Senate's approval of a 56-year old chest-beating, cigar chomping ex-Marine may hardly seem on the surface a cause for celebration .
 It was a significant blow struck at the heart of the crumbling political power structure in this state . It was the first time a governor has lost his seat in the state legislature .
 The politicians have run Parchman in the past, and the politicians have been responsible for its 15th-century retribution philosophy of penal operation .
 This philosophy has kept the penitentiary in the category of the nation's leading hell-holes over the years . It has effectively prevented anyone's rehabilitation. This philosophy is effectively preventing anyone's rehab.
 Farmers have enjoyed the benefits of cheap labor, the free use of expensive farm machinery, and the use of farm machinery . The system has worked to the advantage of its farmers, who have enjoyed it .
 The men were sent to Parchman to pay their debt to society . After all, that's what they had been sent to the first place .
 The power-brokers would make sure that debt was paid, and paid to a chosen few . The debt would be paid to the chosen few, and not everyone else .
 Despite his faults, Gov. Rick Perry did have a few progressive bones in his body, he was a progressive governor .
 The time had come to hire a competent professional to run the penitentiary and clean out the political scum that infested it . And something told him — perhaps it was the federal courts — that the time was coming to end .
 He is gruff and strong of tongue, quick to sing his own praises, a lover of stiff gin, and not the least bit tactful . He's gruff, strong and strong, but he's quick and strong .
 He is a heretofore unknown quantity in Mississippi — a man who knows something about peneology and has had some significant background experience in the field .
 He was an out-of-stater, and that upset more than a few folks to begin with . But he was not an out of state, but he was a good guy . He was a national hero .
 He incurred the double wrath of some powerful people who didn't particularly like the idea of letting a trained professional run the prison .
 They thought their suggestions in the past had worked quite well, thank you . They thought they had worked well .
 Jack Reed was repeatedly harassed by the White House, including attempted frame-ups of him on public drunkness charges . Reed was accused of being drunk at the start of his presidency .
 The chairman of the Senate Corrections Committee allegedly threatened to ""cut his throat"" as well . The chairman was allegedly threatened by the senator as well.
 One senator said the state was ""at a crossroads"" in its approach to the problems of the state penitentiary . The state is at a 'crossroads' in its way to dealing with the problems .
 More than seven years ago, a committee started working on a plan to remodel the Union . The committee came up with a comprehensive and workable proposal .
 One of the first uses of money obtained from the massive funds drive that Millsaps is caught up in was to implement that plan and renovate the Union for maximum student use . So here's the deal .
 No one can say when the renovation will start . Over $2.2 million has been pledged in a campaign to get the money .
 President Collins has said maybe this summer, but it is very speculative . President Collins said maybe it will happen this summer .
 This only seems to confirm what is often said about the way any problem at Millsaps is handled — give it to a committee, let the committee tie up the issue for a few years, and then forget about it . Millsaps: Give it to committee, tie up it for a
 We supplement that :all and ask that something be done, that the promise of high priority for Union remodeling be kept . We supplement . that . the promise to be kept.
 Perhaps there are legitimate reasons that the remodeling cannot be financed right now . Perhaps there is a legitimate reason for the decision to delay the remodel .
 We call on the administration to show an immediate effort to make the student center more enjoyable for students .
 Students at the University of Cambridge hope to see the basement and ping-pong and pool tables installed in the basement . The university is looking to renovate the building and use it for students .
 Consumers are cutting back on consumption in the United States . The economic pinch has caused consumers to cut down on consumption . Prices are still rising in the U.S. economy .
 Prices aren't coming down for aluminum, cans, steel, tires and certain industrial chemicals . Despite declining demand, prices aren't going down for certain industrial products .
 Most of the profits reaped from the high prices, go straight into the pockets of the middlemen . Most profits are reaped by the middleman, according to the author .
 The middle men add about 52 cents to the price of every piece of choice meat, study finds . Agriculture Department study: Middle men add up to 52 cents per piece of meat .
 A congressional investigation has concluded that higher profit margins, not higher costs, have pushed prices up . A congressional probe has also concluded that profit margins have also pushed up prices .
 The congressional sleuths have already turned up evidence of meat pricefixing among the major chains . The meat price fixing scandal is under way in the meat industry .
 High-priced food and consumer goods are not only depleting the housewife's budget, they are also hurting the poor . The poor are suffering from high-priced consumer goods .
 18 million Americans are now on food stamps . Confidential figures show, for example, that 18. million Americans now are on food stamp .
 Of these, 4. million have joined the rolls iust since last July, when the nation first began to feel the economic pinch . Of the 4.million people who have signed up to the rolls have been added since July .
 Despite the negotiations with Russia to limit arms, the U.S. nuclear stockpile is proliferating wildly . Despite the talks with Russia, the United States nuclear stockpile has proliferated wildly .
 We are accumulating nuclear weapons so rapidly that Congress is thinking of limiting production by legislation . Congress is considering limiting production of nuclear weapons by legislation, experts say . Congress also considering limiting nuclear weapons production by law .
 These can be attached to missiles, carried on submarines and flown in bombers . They can also be carried in bombers and carried out in submarines .
 New ""strategic"" bombs are being produced at the rate of three a day . New 'strategic' bombs are also being produced in China .
 There are about 7,000 tactical nukes, for example, in Europe alone . Greece, Turkey, Spain and Portugal are among countries that are turning increasingly anti-American .
 Some members of Congress are worried over the frightening growth of the nuclear stockpile . The nuclear arsenal has grown dramatically in recent years .
 House members argued strenuously against establishnent of a separate first offenders acility at the prison the day after leed's confirmation . James Abourezk, for example, has told us he may introduce a bill that would limit production and call for the withdrawal of our nuclear weapons
 "Oung dope smokers should be scared out of a life of crime"" by xposure to repetitive murderers and apists. And there will still be, for quite a while longer, he folks who will hold to the theory .
 There is still a ray of light naking its way through the lark dungeon of Mississippi penal perations .
 State Government Student Government National Sports Photographer Staff: Beth Edwards, Ralph Wells, Steve Terrell, Kevin Sessums, Jeanette Deoever, Lee Howell, Rob McDuffe, DougLevanway, Earl Aycock, Lloyd Gray Glade and Jimmy Dempsey .
 In another two weeks, she ll be back at Columbia Training School for her third visit . She ll return to Columbia training school for the third time this month .
 "She doesn't seem overly concerned about this fact; she talks quite openly and cheerfully with me," she says . She doesn't appear overly concerned with this fact .
 Jackson Police Department doesn't see anything so bad about it either . Jackson, Mississippi, police say it's not a bad thing about the city .
 Police records show only 60 arrests for prostitution in all of l'.)74, with an even smaller number actually prosecuted . Several brothels operate in and around town quite openly, police records show .
 Wilkins admits that organized prostitution does exist in Jackson, Jackson . Wilkins says the majority of prostitutes in Jackson are "freelancers" operating individually .
 He uses an establishment called Tim's Boarding House on North Farish as an example . Tim's boarding House is an example of a popular establishment in Edinburgh .
 Tim's modus operandi doesn't hold true for other houses of prostitution in Jackson, however, however . Tim's house of prostitution is located in Jackson .
 Customers enter the lounge and are directed to specific cottages, where the girls await them . The girls are expected to be in the girls' bedrooms .
 The operation is quite slick, allowing for little waiting time before assignment to a cottage . The operation was quite slick .
 Most of the EIDorado's customers prefer to spend as little time in the public lounge where they could easily be recognized . Most of those who work in the lounge don't want to spend too much time in public .
 This, as one local businessman confided, can make things ""pretty sticky"" at home . This, however, makes things "pretty sticky" at home.
 They are instead independent operators, struggling for business where they can find it . "Independent operators" are struggling to find business where it is found .
 "Up on North Farish is where you find a lot of this activity,"" says Wilkins . Wilkins says .
 Downtown moieis and restaurants are other popular spots for "hustling" Downtown moiesies are also popular places to hang out .
 These men leave the wife and kids back home and find themselves stuck in a strange city with nothing to do in their spare time . These men are stuck with nothing else but nothing else to do .
 Doug Brindley, Eileen Hawkins, and Jean Moore will individually direct three one act plays, to be presented this Thursday and Friday nights in the Christian Center . One act plays will be presented in Christian Center this Thursday, Friday nights .
 Doug Brindley will present ""Hands Across the Sea"", a humorous play by Noel Coward . Doug will present the play . The play will be a humorous version of Coward's novel .
 Cast in the play are Lynn Pledger, Ward Emling, Dianne Wiltshire, Steve McGraw, Bill Presson . The play is set in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Jean Moore has chosen a play typifying the Theater of the Absurd and entitled ""A Game"" by Dennis E Nobles . The play is entitled "A Game" and is called A Game .
 Appearing in the play are Cindy Thomas, Cassandra Fowlkes, Mildred Barrett, and Frankie Ellis . The play is set in New York, New Jersey .
 Th Strongest Man In The World is the Strongest Men In the World . Young Frankenstein m pushing girls into the business of prostitution . Murder On The Orient Express is the first film to be shown in cinemas .
 They come in all sizes, shapes, and colors from a myriad of personal backgrounds . They come from all sizes and shapes, from all backgrounds .
 Others are like the inimitable Sally Redd, an aged streetwalker who has been working the Capitol Street nightclubs for at least fifteen years .
 There has been a market for the services of prostitutes since the beginning of civilization, and there probably will be until its end . So no matter who they are, or where they come from, the fact remains that there has been there for centuries .
 The ""oldest profession"" is alive and well in Jackson, Jackson, and it's here to stay . The "Oldest profession" is still alive in Jackson .
 Parchman prison superintendent Jack Reed will speak outside the Student Union . Reed is scheduled to speak at Convocation during Convocation period . Reed has been a controversial figure in prison for years .
 Saturday night, the SEB has arranged for live entertainment in the Union basement, starting at 8 o'clock .
 Next Thursday <M»r.), veteran Times-Picayune capitol correspondent Bill Minor is scheduled to speak on the upcoming Governor's race . Minor will be speaking on the race for Louisiana Governor's .
 Cystic Fibrosis Association sponsors motorcycl races . Jackson Entertainment will be held during Convocation Jackson Entertainment . This will be an opportunity for students to participate in the races .
 March 24 and 25 — Jackson Symphony Concert with Susan Mildonian . March 28 — Gospel Sing. March 28 – Gospel Sing . March 24 — Jackson Symphonic Concert . March 26 — Jackson Orchestra Concert .
 April 24 — Jackson Ballet Guild . April 25 — Gospel Sing with the Oak Ridge Boys. April 25 – Gospel Sing . April 26 — Jackson Ballat Guild .
 This is the second part of our effort to get students interested in traveling during the spring break . OeOgQgO QB BB BB BB B a BBBOOP Vacation in State Parks .
 All of the state parks have facilities for fishing and skiing . Skiing may not be available in the off-season .
 Cabins are furnished with a kitchen, including a refrigerator and stove, basic cooking utensils such as pots and pans, dishes and silverware, linens, pillows and blankets . Cabins also have a refrigerator, stove, stove and a refrigerator .
 Park policy is that when reserving a cabin, you should make reservations for at least two nights . Park policy states that when booking a cabin for two nights is required .
 Rates for cabins vary depending on the park they are located in and the number of people it sleeps . Rates vary depending upon the park where the cabins are located and how many people they sleep in .
 Milton's Coituu Milton must have peered uno a crystal ball to write these lines . C/jie sip of this ~±3 will bathe the drooping spirits in delU beyond the Hiss of dreams .
 The Lambda Chi Alpha aternity and the Chi Omega sorority walked away with the coveted Scholarship Award . The award was given to the Lambda Ch Alpha and Chi Omega sisters .
 The prestigious national leadership society, Omicron Delta Kappa, sponsors the traditional event, added 14 new nembers . The event will be held in New York, New Jersey .
 Students who are hosen on their skills and participation in leadership roles . Patsy Pharr, Marsha McCarty, Don Wells, Diane Carroll, Clifford Ammons, Earl Aycock, Jim McCafferty, Eileen Hawkins, E. Elizabeth Holmes, Royce Garvin,
 Sigma Lambda, women's leadership honorary: Bev Barnes, Cindy Guild, Elaine Henry, Mary Jane Mace, Marsha McCarty, Mary Dell McCoy, Rachel Wallace, and as alumni member, Mrs. Mrs. Rachel Wallace .
 Charlene, Abraham, Connie Boozmani, Diane Carroll, Claire Chastain, Jamie Chastin, Judy Guice, Marion Hathcock-' Anna' Anna .
 Zouboukos is the author of the book, "Sledge" and "The Night of the Night" at 8 p.m. ET . The book was written by Marilyn Thorton, Jack Sledge, and Mena Zoubouou .
 As alumni member, Dr. Byron Brasseux, George Eyrich, Royce Garvin, Michael Humphreys, Steve Jenkins, Stacy Jenkins and Stacy Jenkins, Robert Lewis Owen Patterson, Michael Robertson, Scott Shows, and as alumni member Dr. Michael Robertson .
 Elizabeth Allen, Amelia Bordeaux, Laurie Brown, Gerda Carlson, Jiggs Dantin, Cindy Guild, Margaret Hemphill, Melissa Hudspeth, Sue Humphrey, Janice Johnson, Nancy Lang, Mary Lloyd, Deirdre Dell McCoy, Marcia McK
 Peggy Clayton, Elizabeth Holmes, Don Wells, Jeff Cook, Marsha McCarty, Hollis Tidmore, and Donna Tadlock are among the panelists .
 Gale Mallette, Mary Jo Milling, Dennis Pratt, John Oliver Paxton, and Lisa Lumsden are featured in this week's edition of The Daily Mail . This week's episode is based on the book, "Lumsden"
 Elizabeth Allen, Joe Bennett, Janet Bergman, Royce Garvin, Brenda Millstead, Steve Germany, Pat Lucovich, and Paul Sumerall .
 A growing number of Americans are thinking seriously about changing the present marijuana laws . But now a growing number are considering changing the laws .
 The state of Oregon has successfully de-criminalized the personal use of marijuana . The state's marijuana use is now legal for personal use only .
 The American Bar Association, The National Council of Churches, Consumers' Union and The National Education Association have urged other states to do the same . The National Bar Association has urged the move .
 The organization is open to all students interested in deepening their understanding of the natural world and contributing toward its preservation .
 The society is flamed for Aldo Leopold, a prominent American .conservationist, who wrote the . ""father of game management"" and wrote the first textbook on the subject .
 Among other accomplishments, he was an environmental advisor to the United Nations at the time of his premature death .
 Thames first sketched a profile of the large majority of regular pot users in Mississippi as . young white males of middle or upper social strata . He then pointed out that pot use and arrests have increased at a tremendous irate as pot becomes an alternative drug choice .
 Criminal felony sanctions have failed miserably for at least 35 years as a deterrent to use, authors say . These sanctions have only increased the individual and social harm, they say .
 He presented a recent article in the ""Reporter"", a weekly newspaper, that directly contradicted the assurance of Ken Fairley (head of the Mississippi Computers in the Classroom Urbana, 111) that he had been assured .
 Richard Anderson, professor of educational psychology in the College of Education, is supervising the project . Richard Anderson is a psychology professor at the University of Cambridge .
 Anderson's course in basic economics offers no lectures or quiz-based discussion sections . Anderson's class offers no lecture or quiz sections for basic economics .
 Students read four-to eight-page assignments, immediately take a test covering the material given and are graded by a machine . Instead of reading assignments, students read four to eight page assignments, then take tests covering material given .
 Students type their names on a PLATO computer terminal and order the appropriate review quiz . After students finish a reading assignment, they type their name on a computer terminal .
 PLATO can test students who have completed all the quizzes in unit of work . It will require essay answers graded by teaching assistants, as well as multiple choice .
 PLATO presents a list of times he can receive extra help from a teaching assistant before he takes another version of the test . If a student does not achieve at least B work on a test, he can get extra help .
 To make an appointment, the student types his name in the appropriate space on the display panel using the terminal keyboard . The student uses the keyboard to make the appointment .
 The most pressure has been on the pot user possessing small amounts, according to the article .
 Consumer Reports has published a collection of essays from the ~, editors of Consumer Reports . The essays outlined many .' longstanding and several recent controversial health studies on marijuana . Consumer Reports was . ..distributed .
 Thames complained that the general public is often left with an unfounded impression long after the claims have been disproved .
 NORML listed a number . of orominant organizations supporting decriminalizations of pot . The American Bar Association, the American Public Health Association, and the Board of Governors of the American Medical Association support decriminalizations .
 Thames also spoke of the many county and city level level Mississippi law enforcers who favor decriminalization . Thames said he has never been subjected to police pressures for his political beliefs and activities . Thames: "I'm not afraid of police pressure"
 Thames says he grew tired of, bitter about, and finally angry at the constant felony threat hanging over his head, so he decided to work for reform . Thames: "I grew tired, bitter and angry" He says NORML is an organization that aims to reform the government .
 He expressed optimism about the rapidly changing attitudes in Mississippi over pot . He closed with a question and answer period to discuss pot legalization .
 Principia took the irst splitting game 7-5 and 'Saps won the second 6-3 . The 'saps' won the first and second games by splitting the other 7-4 .
 This year's 19 man squad consists of 8 lettermen who were the nucleus of last year's ball club . The squad is made up of 8 players who were part of last season's nucleus of the squad .
 The only position which is vacated, the catcher's position, is now being handled by freshman Keith Self . Self is the only player at the catcher position .
 The Majors have a 9-8 record of a year ago . They have a chance of improving on their 9-7 record of last year .
 The pitching staff will most likely hold the key to the success of this season . The pitching team will be the focus of the season .
 The pitchers are Steve Haygood, Johnny Jones, Bill Ray, and Mike Harrison . Mike Harrison is the starting pitcher for the first time .
 First baseman Danny Bowling, second baseman Dees Hinton, shortstop Earl Aycock, third baseman Ricky Haygood, and outfielders Bob King, Rusty Buys, and Jeb Dominiek .
 Other members of the team are Bruce McKinley, Rem McNealy, Steve Hall and Ricky Price . Don Bailey and Don Bailey are also on the team .
 Howard Smith is the student assistant and Jimmy Ranager is the manager . Howard Smith also plays for the student team . Jimmy Ransager is also a student assistant . Jimmy Smith is Howard Smith's assistant .
 Millsaps will play another afternoon doubleheader with Principia tomorrow, here . Millsaps are playing another doubleheader tomorrow, Tuesday .
 Johnny Jones pitches against Principia in last Monday's double-header . Jones has a history of pitching in the majors .
 Second round of play now underway in the ""A"" League . KA's remain the only unscathed team in the league .
 This should not, however, lead one to the conclusion that they are unbeatable, but it should not be the case for them to be unbeatable .
 The KA's have won their last three games by a combined margin of only nine points . The LXA's last week saw tough competition from Chalk and the Chalk . Chalk has won only one of their last five games .
 Both games were see-saw battles with the KA's having the lead throughout the game no more often than their opponents . Both of these games saw the teams having a lead throughout each game .
 Last year's undefeated champions, the Tracers, are the KA's second in the league . The Tracer are the reigning champions of the league, having won the title last year .
 In third place are the Turkeys, followed by the LXA's, the PKA's, Chalk, the Masterballers, and the KE's . In third are the L.A.'s, followed .
 The ""B"" Leagus is much closer in that most teams are near the .500 mark in the standings . Most teams in the league are currently in the middle of the season .
 It seems as though only five teams have any chance of copping the league championship, however, since that league is only playing one round of competition . Only five teams are in contention for the title .
 The LXA ""B""s are closely followed by the Chemistry Dept. — which has a four game winning spree going — the Panthers, the Pike ""C"", and the Blazers . The present league leaders are the LXA "B"s .
 The tourney is indefinite as of yet because of outside considerations such as girl gym times and tennis and baseball gym times which have not yet been set . Tournament is indefinite due to outside considerations .
 There will be no A League tournament this year . Turkeys 5 4 * LXA 4 3 PKA 4 4 Chalk 4 5 Masterballers 2 7 KE 9 ""B"" LEAGUE won lost KA 8 u Tracers 6 1 .
 Ricky Haygood belts a Principia pitch in last Monday's game . The third-baser is a key figure in the Principialia side's defence .
 You can just about have a choice of dates for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 week duration during the summer .
 Millsaps golf team placed second in Jackson State Invitational held last Friday at Livingston Park . Millsaps Golfers finish second in tournament . The Millsaps team is ranked No. 1 overall in the state .
 The golfers competed in two earlier dual matches, but came up on the short end in both . Good selection of Polaroid Cool Ray Sunglasses across from Millsaps in the 1600 Medical Plaza Bldg.8-1027 .
 Minor was low man with a 75, Frye and Campbell finished with 78, Campbell and Frye 78 . Minor and Campbell were low man in Cleveland .
 Coach Edge is hopeful that this year's team performance will be good enough for an invitation to the NCAA Division III Tournament . With 10 tournaments remaining in the season, Coach Edge hopes to invite the team .
 The netters of Millsaps have shown potential but have been erratic in recent matches . Millsaps netters have been an erratic figure in recent games .
 They have been close in all of their competition except for a match against Mississippi State, which was lost by the score of 8-0 .
 CARE is the non-sectarian, non-governmental link between generous Americans and poverty-stricken people abroad . CARE is a non-profit organization that helps people around the world . You can save many lives through CARE .
 CARE's experienced staff people are in 36 countries including many of the famine areas . CARE is in the midst of famine in many countries, including many famine areas. CARE is based in the United States, Africa and Latin America .
 Without your help they cannot cope with the mounting waves of starvation . But without your help, they will not be able to cope with rising tide .
 Your empty plate will fill many empty plates overseas and send seeds, tools and equipment to help hungry people grow more food . Send seeds and tools to help grow food .
 Please fill out the pledge coupon and return it with your initial gift today . The pledge coupon is available at the bottom of the pledge page .
 I will send the money to CARE for the emergency expansion of its programs to feed those families and help them grow more food."" each month □ I . will send CARE at least $ each quarter □ If I save more, I will . send more. If I . save more
 Here is my total ""Empty Plate"" contribution so you can rush more aid immediately, Name Address. Name Address . Name address. Name address .
 CARE World Hunger Fund sends you regular reminder envelopes for your convenience . I Make your tax-deductible check out to check out the CARE WorldHunger Fund . I
 Coach Montgomery has designated Mike Woods to play the number one position for the Majors . Coach Montgomery sends seven netters into action .
 Tarn Uhles, Miles Hill, Elizabeth Allen, Frank Buchannannan and David Carroll are among the writers of this week's new book . The book is based on the book, "American Dream"
 NCAA tournament began this weekend with 16 games being played in eight cities around the country . Tournament expanded this year to include 32 teams, including 32 teams .
 The Mideast regionals were played at Lexington and Tuscaloosa . Unbeaten Indiana defeated Texas-El Paso in a thrilling game .
 Oregon State defeat Middle Tennessee, Central Michigan ease past Georgetown, and, somewhat surprisingly, Kentucky maul fifth ranked Marquette At Lubbock . Central Michigan eased past Georgetown .
 Louisville wins over Rutgers and Notre Dame over Kansas in Midwest regionals . Louisville beats Rutgers in Tulsa . Notre Dame wins over Kansas over Louisville .
 Far Western regional games were played at Tempe, Arizona and Pullman, Washington . Far Western regionals were also played in the U.S.
 Montana wins over Utah State and UCLA over Michigan in Pullman . UCLA defeats Michigan .
 At Tempe, Arizona State outplayed Alabama.-94.94. and Nevada -Las Vegas got by San Diego State, 9080 . Nevada-Las Vegas beat San Diego-9080. and Arizona State beat Alabama-94 .
 Arizona and Drake advanced to the finals of the year old National Comissioners Invitational Tournament, being held in Louisville, Kentucky . Drake advanced in the tournament .
 Kentucky Alcorn State of Mississippi reached the semi-finals of the NAIA championship tournament at Kansas City, losing to the eventual champions . The team won the tournament by reaching the final two rounds .
 I think we should see that there is not any discrimination on a man on the state payroll simply because he's black . I think it's not just because of the fact that he is black, it's because he is a black man .
 I certainly wouldn't reject anybody for a top level appointment because he was black, nor because the applicant was female. I would not reject anybody who was black or female, nor would I reject a black applicant for a job, I said .
 "I don't know that I would go out and seek someone just because he was black," she says . "I'm not going to go out looking for someone because he's black. I don't think I would," she said .
 I want to seek the very best person for the staff that I would have and for the appointments I would make . I want the best person to be the best for staff, appointments and staff,’s .
 "I don't believe there should be districting to specifically exclude people," says mayor . Districting should not be districted to exclude people, he says . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to live in a different way of life," he adds .
 I don't think it should be to just include people or to just give a chunk of territory, see that somebody is represented . I don’t think it’s just to see that someone is represented, I think it's important to include people, not just to just
 "We've been moving in that direction, and we've got to continue moving that direction. We've been ... moving in the right direction," coach says .
 Society can be protected, but also there can be more emphasis on rehabilitation . Society can protect itself, but there can also be a focus on rehabilitation, says Simon Tisdall .
 "We have one of the most advanced mental institutions in the nation. I don't know, the information I have at hand is that we have a . very advanced mental institution," he says .
 We keep grying to crowd too much in on Whitfield that's not Whitfield's responsibility, such as drug-related problems . And I think we keep crowding too much out of Whitfield, says former mayor . Whitfield: "I'm not going to be able to
 I think the open meetings laws should provide for some penalty if they're not complied with . I think there should be some penalty for not complying with the laws, he says. I think it should provide some penalty .
 An open meetings provision for all state agencies that will provide for executive session in certain situations . Not just at the arbitrary will of the commission or board involved . An executive session provision for state agencies .
 What about the provision for financial disclosure of all sources of income by public officials? What about a provision for disclosure of public officials' income?
 "I just want to see how it has worked. Complete disclosure of all of a man's sources of income — I'm not saying I'm opposed to it," he says .
 To totally show his entire resources, you might then be getting totally into a field of invasion of privacy . You might then get totally into the privacy field of privacy.
 There is an amendment to the House ethics bills that said legislators should not receive any state money from other jobs . There is also a bill that says legislators shouldn't receive money from any other job . The amendment was passed by the House of Representatives on Wednesday .
 "I think conflicts of interest — perhaps disclosure of it might be the best thing right now," she says . "Perhaps disclosure might be best thing for the public to know right now"
 Gov. Rick Perry: "I think if you go into the governor's office with the attitude that you're going to tell the legislature what to do and how to do it, nothing is going to be accomplished" Gov. Perry says he's concerned that the legislature won't be able
 "If you have a line of communication with them and . sit down and convince them of the soundness of the program and the need of the . program you'll stand a much better chance of getting the program accomplished."
 "It's got to be leadership which is also responsive to their viewpoint in order for there to be a coordination and cooperation between the executive and legislative branches," says President Obama .
 Northwest Mutual Insurance is looking for a receptionist . Ken Hudson is seeking a new receptionist at Northwest Mutual .
 The disastrous fire occured in the third act of a performance ridden with hilarious mishaps . The show was part of a musical tour of sorts .
 The mirthful tone of the play was set in the early going when Jimmy Thrasher, playing Jackson Fire Chief Burt McDing, inadvertently drove a fire engine into the orchestra pit to the guffaws of the crowd .
 Stage hands lost control of flame throwers they were wielding and started the dramatic holocaust that soon had the CC tower in flames . Nothing could compare, however, with the exciting grand finale .
 Musical stars Ward Emling and Lynn Pledger were rudely roasted when they were roasted .
 A further tragedy was narrowly averted by the quick thinking of football coaches Harper Davis and Tommy Ranager . Davis and Ranager were able to save the life of their players .
 All exits to the auditorium on that side of the building were sealed off in a successful effort to contain the blaze . Sensing the imminent danger to Major Millsaps tomb, the tomb, was the ""Mecca of the Middle Campus"
 These men are to be congratulated for the courage and self-sacrifice they exhibited, ignoring the pitiful screams of the trapped victims as they defended their bones .
 Dean J Harvey Saunders announced this morning that a full investigation into the matter is planned . Dean Harvey Saunders said he will investigate the matter further .
 Director Goss revealed plans for the musical version of Gone With the Wind . The musical version will be a musical .
 Funeral arrangements for the 23 identifiable victims are incomplete at this time . Funeral plans for the victims are still incomplete .
 Several of the top-level staffers jumped bail the following day and are reportedly hiding near Bourbon Street in New Orleans . They are in consultation with their lawyer — Oscar T Fornbush, Attorney at the Bar, of Bayonne, Alabama .
 Members of the national chapter of the Journalists Commission for Freedom of the Press have moved onto campus . They are continuing publication of the student newspaper from an underground location . The student newspaper will continue to be published underground .
 One of the newsmen in Jackson for the project, Walter Cronkite, said, ""We hope to keep the spirit of the P&W alive"
 "We plan to get rid of the shabby journalism so prevelent before and sensationalize the news a bit," says President Obama . "Of course, we plan to ... exaggerate the news," he says .
 The raid was led by Chief Nichols of the Millsaps security force . The raid included members of the Jackson Police Department, Mississippi Highway Patrol, State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, and the Secret Police Force of the United Methodist Church's Division of Morality and Decency .
 George Boyd, a proponent of CRAP, announced that he was pleased with the success of his organization's efforts to rid the campus of the current staff . Boyd: "I am pleased that I was able to get my hands on the job"
 Political Science professor John Quincy Adams noted that he too was satisfied with the departure of the student editors . Adams said he was pleased that the editors had left the university .
 "If I had been there, I would have done something to protect the students,"" he said .
 Several members' of the Journalists Commission for Freedom of the Press have already made plans for future editions of the Millsaps publication .
 No substantial student protest has been mounted in behalf of the exiled staff . At press time, no substantial student protests had been mounted .
 Student Body President Jim McCafferty did express his dismay at the situation saying, ""I hate to see them go," he said .
 The dining hall has been used for experiments with biological and poison-food warfare . This follows an announcement by the U.S. Army that the dining hall was used for the experiments .
 Five cafeteria workers were killed in six days of student terrorism which left five cafeteria workers dead . Three more are still missing and three more still missing .
 Later that afternoon, cafeteria manager Stuart Roberson was forced to close the facility while being held at gunpoint . Roberson had been forced to shut the facility down .
 Roberson, now being held hostage in the basement phone booth of the Student Union, was in tears as he said, "We tried, we tried everything we could to please the student" Roberson is now being kept as a hostage by the student .
 In the interim, informed sources indicate, the Dutch Bar has been contracted to cater the Millsaps cafeteria . The Dutch Bar is currently serving as a catering outlet .
 Federal Bureau of Investigation agents have found no clues as to the identity of the six terrorists who were seen chainshipping a cafeteria worker to death in front of New Mens' Dormitory before escaping into the night .
 Jackson policemen surrounded Murrah Hall following the Saturday night sniping of one of the name-check girls . in the cafeteria on her way to work . Jackson policemen surround the hall after the attack .
 The sniper, who had fired from the roof of the building, has yet to be found . However, the sniper has not been found .
 Workmen continue to repair the roof and walls of the cafeteria, where a mortar had been sent through on Sunday .
 The single round unfortunately fell short of its apparent target, and marked a direct hit on the Sig table, sending fragments of food, bodies, and blood all over the partially shattered wall .
 Troubadours booed off stage during a lunchtime performance at a North Jackson grade school . The Millsaps Troubadour were booed out of the stage .
 Hoover Elementary School students reportedly threw mashed potatoes and milk cartons at the singers . Funicello medley was a sugary Annette Funicellian .
 When asked why the outbreak of violence occured, second grader Mark Moon replied heatedly, "We didn't have to sit there and listen"
 A spokesman for the Troubadours said the remainder of the group's elementary school tour had been indefinitely postponed . A spokesman said the rest of the tour was indefinitely postponed.
 Terrorists hung three cafeteria workers who were hung Monday at the peak of the indigenous student movement against the cafeteria . Terrorists hang the bodies of the three workers at the end of the uprising .
 The student body has been bickering for years about beer in the grill, so we give it to them . The beer in a grill is a favorite of students .
 Woodward stated drains would be available in the grill for the disposal of purchased beer . Woodward stated that drains would also be available to dispose of beer purchased .
 Rare primate will be on public display free of charge Monday through Friday only at the zoo . The rare primate is on display free from charge at zoo only at zoo .
 Special reservations for groups exceeding ten persons can be made through the zoo's public relations office . Special reservations are available for groups of up to 10 persons .
 Such an honor as this not only improves Jackson's image, but gives it national publicity as well as national publicity . Such an award as this gives Jackson the chance to be recognized for his work .
 Millsaps College professor Dr. Collins comes home to Millsaps . President returns to campus after a visit from the president .
 James Loewen, the textbook gained national attention last fall when the Mississippi Textbook Commission refused to authorize it for usage in the state's public schools . The Mississippi textbook is now being used in schools .
 The decision to rewrite the text comes, says Sallis' new publisher Flesh Press, in an effort to appeal to a ""wider and more diverse audience"" than those ""old panty waists"" on the textbook commission .
 "We decided it was ridiculous to waste gimmicks like that on a bunch of dip-stick juvenile delinquents," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The new version of Conflict and Change will be an epic novel entitled Passions of the Land . It will trace the public and private lives of a family of Mississippi planters, the Beauregards .
 Passions of the Land is scheduled for publication this summer . The book is set to be published in the summer .
 The bright Mississippi sun beat mercilessly down upon the rich Delat soil and bo's bare shoulders as he slowly turned and squinted into Maylou's pale face .
 Maylou threw herself into Bo's sturdy arms and planted a moist kiss on the base of his neck .
 'Ohhh, Bo,"" she moaned, "you know how much I lust for your tanned and healthy young body," she said . 'Oh, by the way, is customary activity for planters sons. Bo'
 College president Edward Collins returned to Millsaps yesterday for one of his rare visits to the campus . Collins is the president of the Millsaps College of Technology .
 Collins' arrival was interrupted, however, when his personal secretary Mrs. Mrs. Collins arrived . Collins was interrupted by her personal secretary .
 "I thought it was .somebody from Belhaven trying to break into our secret files,"" explained Mrs. Smith . She said she was shocked by the discovery .
 Known as the ""Sam Yorty of the academic world,"" Collins had just come back from four months of extensive fund-raising for Millsaps College .
 His two hours on campus following release from jail consisted of lunch, coffee, a nap, and a brief meeting with fund-raising consultants .
 An attempt to talk with the President was frustrated because his schedule was too tight . An attempt by the Student Advisory Committee was unsuccessful . The President's schedule is too tight to talk to the committee .
 The Committee did manage to arrange an appointment with him in mid-July . The Committee has not been able to meet him again .
 The P&W attained a brief exclusive interview with Collins . Collins is a veteran broadcaster .
 He will engage in three weeks of campaign talks with the Southern Mexico Conference of the Methodist Church International in Acapulco .
 Benefits of the endeavor "grossly outweigh the transient hardships which students may have to bear," says development director . Benefits outweigh transient hardships, he says .
 Perkinson listed, ""Money, money, and more money"" from development of the golf course and toll bridge revenues . Among those advantages, Perkinson said, "money, money and more more money"
 I'm sorry to say that it was with utter disgust that I sat here in my dorm room last week and swam through the muck and filth that is your excuse for a newspaper. I am sorry, I am . Sorry to say, I sat in your dorm room with
 Luke 6:14 on for size sometime when you're sober and see if it sheds any sacred light on your typewriter . Well why don't you try it out? Try it out sometime sometime when sober .
 Verily I say unto you brethren, ""Lips that touch liquor shall never touch mine. Verily, I say, "Lips of liquor shall not touch mine"
 Both are obviously atheists or Pinko's at best, and we sure as heaven don't need their kind around here . Both are clearly atheists or pinko's best, but they're obviously not the best .
 Yours in Christian Love, Martha Sneffie THE HERITAGE Program, continues to inspire and stimulate freshmen students .
 The Millsaps Stylus, the campus literary review, is to be published this year for the first time in recent memory . Campus Literary Mag previewed the first edition of the magazine .
 Harvey Fuddle Sailing, I laught weepingly, Phaedre-like, I delve unto your nostril . Finding a dichotomy of failing effort, I travel the gaze of your voice . Clandestine by Harvey Fuddles Fuddle .
 Damonesque, my world exists, Through a collapsed picturesque, Sacred crest, I missed, Your sanguine whompo wong. I missed. Damonesquesque, My world exists .
 Stephen Foster Revisited by ""Anonymous"" Oh the sun shines bright, on my Old Kentucky Home .
 Golf course picnic will climax six days of Community week ""togetherness"" tomorrow beginning at noon .
 The event will feature a menu of barbeque chicken with trimmings and the now infamous seven kegs of beer . The event is set to be held in New York City .
 Saturday's activities will be capped off with a campus-wide dance in the Student Center at 9.00 pm . The band from Columbus will perform at the dance . Saturday night will be the night of all activities .
 The three sororities are sponsoring an icecream party in the bowl this afternoon . At 2:00 this afternoon, the three sorority sisters will hold a party .
 The beer issue threatened to turn the well-intentioned party into a strong polarization of the administration and the student body . The party was organized to raise awareness of the beer issue .
 Administration has chosen to sit this one out and ignore the possible conflict between this student activity and the Board of Trustees' intended rules for the school . However, the administration has decided to sit out .
 President Collins said he would not make issue over the beer unless students abused this special privilege . He said he wouldn't make issue with beer if students abused it .
 As long as there is no blatant unruliness and students quietly keep to the golf course area, Dr. Dr. John Sutter says .
 Millsaps' attorney Jim Carroll stated that the beer on campus, ""did not violate the letter."" of the Millsaps rules but perhaps violates ""the spirit"" of the Board resolution on alcohol . As far as the Board's legal position in the matter in the . matter, Millsaps
 The only course students can follow now is to wait and see what the Board's reaction is, if any, to public consumption of beer . The Board will meet in May to decide if public consumption is allowed .
 Other community week events have thus far met with limited success . Not, however, due to the fault of any of the planners and executors of the week events .
 The long awaited swimming pool opening on Monday lost much of its pizazz due to damp and chilly weather . The opening of the swimming pool was delayed due to the damp weather .
 Weather also threatened the free carwash sponsored by IFC and Panhellenic on Wednesday . This same weather rained out the scheduled construction of the ""Geodesic Dome"" on Tuesday and Wednesday .
 MILLSAPS STUDENT PAUL WALKER highlighted the opening of the new swimming pool facilities by being the first person off the board .
 Photographer Phillip Maples captured Walkers' graceful display of his diving abilities during Monday's ribbon cutting of the long-awaited pool . Walkers was the first person to dive in the pool to open a new pool .
 Collins Will Recommend Immediate Union Remodeling to Board of Trustees to Board . First expenditure of monies from current fundraising campaign go toward such renovation .
 Collins made the statement to his student advisory committee during their meeting last Monday . It looks like the school has the necessary money from the campaign to do the job, Collins said .
 Students on the committee were also told by the President that there are no specific golf course development plans at present . Students were told that it will be at least six months or maybe longer before any construction begins on the proposed access road .
 Collins had previously told the P&W that the road which will divide the north campus might be begun by April, but that is no longer a possibility . Collins had hoped to start the road by April .
 As for the student union, formulations of remodeling plans began in 1968 under the auspices of a committee chaired by Frances Coker . The student union was remodelled in 1968 .
 The administration gave high priority to the matter and said that one of the first uses of funds from the current campaign would be to undertake the project .
 Over two million dollars pledged to the campaign as of last February's Board meeting, no mention of the renovation was even made by that body . No mention was made by the Board of Trustees .
 Collins thinks the school is ready to begin the project's actual construction now and plans to tell the Board so in May . Collins says the school will be ready for construction in May and will tell the board in May that it's ready .
 He noted that the campaign has now attained approximately $250,000 cash-in-hand . That money should more than cover remodeling costs .
 Students felt that the college was letting slip its promise of high priority for center renovation . This time around comes in the wake of a protest from students .
 Unanimous resolutions recently passed by the Student Senate and all greek organizations on campus called for speedy rehabilitation of the building which, by most standards, is being poorly used .
 The Editor has decided not to re-apply for the position next Fall . Student Senate is now requesting applications for P&W editor and business manager . Reiff , Shive, and Yensen Named Outstanding American Educators .
 Interested persons should turn their name in to Publications Committee Chairperson Donna Doorenbos, Senate president Jim McCaffrey, or Dr. Dr. Donna Doorebos .
 Professors Lee Reiff of Religion, Robert Shive of mathematics, and Eric Yensen of biology have been named Outstanding Educators of America for 1975 .
 They will be featured in a national awards volume on outstanding American educators . The winners will be published in an awards volume .
 Reiff holds the Tatum Chair of Religion and is chairman of that department . Reiff is a native of Newton, Kansas, and holds Tatum chair of Religion .
 He has been at Millsaps since 1960 and holds degrees from S.M.U., Perkins School of Theology, and Yale Divinity S.O. He has worked at Millsap since 1960 .
 Shive is director of the computing center at Millsaps . Shive has also served as a computer consultant for Honeywell, Inc. of Minneapolis on projects relating to nuclear medicine .
 Fred Harris Picked as Commencement Speaker by Millsaps' annual graduation exercises . Democratic Presidential contender Fred Harris will be keynote speaker for the ceremonies .
 Harris is being seriously considered as a strong candidate in 1976 . Harris lost his Oklahoma senatorial seat in 1972 and a weak bid for Democratic presidential nomination in the same year .
 During his two terms in the U.S. Senate, Harris served on the Kerner Commission on urban unrest through appointment by Lyndon Johnson . Harris served in the United States Senate for two terms .
 In 1968 he co-chaired, with Walter Mondale, Hubert Humphrey's Presidential campaign . He later was selected chairman of the Democratic National Committee . In 1968, he was chosen to be the Democratic Party chairman .
 Harris, whose father was an uneducated sharecropper, has molded himself after the old style Populist . Harris is striking out against the evils of utility rate increases, high food prices, tax loopholes, and general neglect of the little man .
 As a Populist, Harris' issues are familiar; he feels too few people have too much money and power . Those who control the economy also control the government, he says . Harris says he feels average citizen gets cheated in countless ways .
 The 44-year-old candidate pretty well outlined what he would do as President in his latest book .
 Harris is not an equivocator; he says what he thinks in strong folksy language . Unlike many serious contenders for public office, Harris says he's not afraid to say anything . Harris is a strong, folksy candidate for the Senate .
 Harris: "The read question is not how to control it, but whether we need it at all" Harris said he would control the CIA at a New Hamshire gathering . Harris said the question is whether the CIA needs to be controlled .
 Harris' liberal leanings, his Southern accent, his appeal to the working class and a strong rapport with Blacks, he will definitely be a candidate to watch and an interesting graduation speaker . Harris will be an interesting speaker .
 The maneuver involved an unplanned immediate retreat of South Vietnamese troops from the Central Highlands area of Vietnam that quickly turned into a chaotic stampede . Three-fourths of the country in Communist hands and leaving the South Vietnamese Government little important territory in its control .
 President Thieu's Royal Palace was bombed by one of his own pilots . During the turmoil, which is still continuing in Saigon, one of the pilots bombed the palace . The palace was bombed during the turmoil .
 American efforts to help the threatened South Vietnamese rom advancing Communists insurgents have centered on vacua tion of war orphans to America . The U.S. has been involved in the fight against the Communists in Vietnam .
 President Ford and retary of State Henry Kissinger used the debacle to shove the lame of defeat on Congress for refusing unrealistic appropriations to Vietnam . Instead of providing the nited States able leadership, instead of leadership, the U.S. used to push Congress for unrealistic appropriations .
 The request seemed ridiculous when t was later announced that South Vietnamese troops had abandoned over one billion dollars in new American military equipment in their retreat .
 Pittsburg Press summed up the situation in the following xcerpt from a recent editorial . The Pittsburg press expressed its disappointment with the situation .
 Henry Kissinger's step by step Middle East egotiations between Egypt and Israel collapsed . Kissinger declared that further legotiations without meaningful compromise from both sides would be impossible . Kissinger flew back to the U.S. after the collapse .
 The United States unemployment rate rose to 8.7% in March,] ] the highest rate since 1940 . The U.S. unemployment rate is now the highest level since 1940.
 The total amount of Americansl I [unemployed now stands at eight million with an additional 1. illion no longer looking for jobs . Americans are now 8 million unemployed .
 Theodore Smith, speaking in the Union yesterday, outlined issues in the upcoming '75 campaign . Smith criticized Mississippi's ""horse and buggy era"" government .
 State Senator and progressive Populist is one of six candidates who will probably compete in the Democratic primaries . The State Senator is a Democrat who has been in office since 2000 .
 Spann Visits Millsaps College the week of April 20 as a visiting Woodrow Wilson Senior Fellow . Spann will be a visiting senior fellow at Millsaps .
 William B Spann Jr. served as chairman of the American Bar Association's House of Delegates from 1970-72 . Spann served as chair of the 294member ABA from 1970 to 1972 .
 The distinguished attorney has been a leader in bar association activities for nearly 40 years . He has served on several ABA standing and special committees .
 He is chairman of the special committee to study federal law enforcement agencies . He is currently serving as chairman of a special committee .
 He is a member of several ABA professional sections . He was charter member of the antitrust and family law sections .
 He is also a member of the judicial administration and labor relations law sections . He holds membership on the Council of the Section of Individual Rights and Responsibilities .
 From 1947 until 1961, he was a faculty member at the Woodrow Wilson College of Law in Atlanta . He continued his law practice in Atlanta, Georgia, while continuing his practice .
 Spann directed the American Judicature Society from 1960-64 . He chaired Fulton County Juvenile Court Advisory Board for nine years . Spann is a past president of the Lawyers Club of Atlanta .
 Student Senate is calling for a constitutional amendment which will allow it to override the President's veto by a two-thirds vote . The amendment would diminish the veto power of the President .
 The President may veto any action of the Student Senate . As it currently stands, the President can veto any of the student senate's actions .
 While at Millsaps, Spann will lecture, participate in seminars and hold informal conferences with faculty and students . In March 18, Senator Chris Wilkerson introduced a While At Millsaps will be Spann .
 He is the second Woodrow Wilson Senior Fellow to come to the college during the current academic session . He's the second to visit the college this academic year .
 His visit is sponsored by the Woodrow Wilson National constitutional change which would abolish the veto altogether . The change would be a national constitutional change .
 Second Vice-President Jigs Dantin moved that the veto be kept and that it be subject to the currently proposed two-thirds override . It passed, but one week later, second vice-president moved that it was kept .
 The measure will go before the student body next week . It will be the first time the senate has passed the measure .
 President Collins has yet to use the veto on Student Senate action . In the four years that he has been here, he has not used the veto .
 He maintains, therefore, that there is really no need for the issue to come up and adds that, if the students pass the amendment, it will make no difference since he must have final authority over all college actions .
 Student Senate President Jim McCafferty has said that Collins should not oppose the new measure if he has not used the veto power in the past and isn't going to use it in the future . The new measure would require Collins to veto veto veto power .
 It may surprise many and please quite a few that there is a growing movement of Fundamentalists on campus . It may be surprising that many will be surprised at the growing movement .
 Like the subterranean Christians of Rome, they are basically unseen and their presence is felt only in subtle ways . The subterranean Christian Christians were basically unseen in Rome .
 Early Christians were shrouded in mystery and misconceptions (many Romans thought they were cannibals) The word ""Fundamentalist"" conjures up visions of sweaty palms and fire-breathing preachers .
 It is impossible to be raised in the South and not feel the effects of fundamentalism . Fundamentalism is a long-standing tradition here and permeates all facets of life, from government to education .
 It is also responsible, at least in part, for the conservative nature of the South . The South has a long history of conservatism .
 It is now a national movement, and its main followers are the young . But it is not a movement in the UK, but it is now an important national movement .
 Royce Garvin, a Millsaps student who calls himself a fundamentalist describes it this way; ""We are getting back to the fundamentals of Christianity," he says .
 While he said thatitwas a campus movement, he explained that, ""it is not a cliqueish thing. It is a movement," he said . The movement was not a 'cliqueish' thing .
 It's not a social group like many of the Youth for Christ organizations at the larger universities . Instead, it's a group of men and women who are involved in youth ministry .
 The reasons why the young would turn to a religion like this on a national scale are only speculative . Garvin attributed it to the fact that people are distressed by the times .
 "Man can lean back on so many temporal pleasures that he can go through life rarely thinking about the Spirit," says the author of the book .
 "As far as activities, discussions and seminars go, they really don't do anything for us," says Drexler . "We're not going to go to seminars," he says of seminars .
 The trial of the notorious ""Hoofer Seven"" began today amidst cries of protest . Defense counsel Oscar T Fornbush turned routine legal proceedings into total chaos .
 Fornbush mixes drinks during District Attorney's opening remarks and passes out during his own . Fornush had the crowd in hysterics and the prosecution up in arms .
 All cries for a retrial were ignored by presiding Judge ""Gulch"" Moonan . Moonan was sentenced to life in prison in 2009 .
 The defendants, all students at tiny Hoofer College here in Bayonne, are charged with criminal conspiracy to subvert small college morals . The defendants are all students .
 The case gained a national spoight when school officials insisted it be tried in criminal court, starting a legal controversy that is still raging . School officials insisted that the case should go to criminal court .
 The rationale for wanting the case tried in criminal court was highlighted by Dean J Harvey Sandbrain in a press conference yesterday . Sandbrain said the case should be tried in a criminal court for the first time .
 Further suspicions of extralegal manuvering were raised when the Hoofer Board of Trustees was selected as the jury . The Hoofer Trustees were selected as a jury .
 Judge Moonan put the seeming inconsistencies in normal judicial procedure in perspective . Moonan: These seeming inconsistencies were put in perspective by the judge . The judge said that the judge's actions should be taken to account for the inconsistencies .
 The trial is being held in the Religious Rotunda, a central building on the Hoofer campus . To accommodate the expected crowds, the trial has been moved to the Rotunda .
 A noisy and sometimes violent crowd pack itself into the aging structure to view the opening of the trial's opening . Today saw a noisy, sometimes violent crowds pack itself inside the aging building .
 One Way Street gang members were members of the militant Christian organization. Equally vociferous were those who were involved in the violent crime .
 Chanting ""One way for Jesus, string up the Commies,"" they made the banter of the attorneys virtually unintelligible . Chanting made the attorneys' banter virtually incoherent .
 Members of Mu Quacka, a Hoofer fraternity, drank beer throughout the opening session . At one point actually attacked members of the SDA, screaming ""Hippie fags die" at one point .
 The behavior on the trial floor was little better, as attorney Fornbush repeatedly insulted witnesses and jury alike between slugs of Jack Daniels . The behavior was little worse .
 Pleading impassionately for the restoration of individual dignity to his clients, he paradoxically called nervous admissions counselor Rudy Pottie a ""carrotheaded twerp"" and Coach Tommy ""The Lone"" Ranger a ""mental bean bag,"" .
 All motions for mistrial, however, fell on the deaf ears of Judge Moonan, a local barroom wit and drinking companion of Fornbush .
 Fornbush intended to call "Slick Eddie" Coolins, President of Hoofer College, as a witness . Coolins was president of the college at the time of the hearing .
 Coolins is rumored to have been instrumental in prosecuting the defendants to the fullest extent . This is a surprising development, for it is rumored .
 Quake noted that Fornbush knew what he was doing . Quake said it was akin to "calling Golda Meir as a defense witness in the trial of Adolf Eichmann" Quake said that Forbush knew he was going to do this . Quake: "It was akin
 The Circle K sponsored pie eating contest got carried eating contest two weeks ago .
 The issue of marijuana legalization has been argued around young people so much that you almost get tired of it . The pie-*ating contest is a contest for young people .
 Arguments are repeated time and again so that you stop listening to them . If you smoke, you just keep smoking when you please and if you don't, you do . Arguments will be repeated over and over again to keep you from listening to each other .
 Three more students arrested this week on charges of marijuana sale in a different matter . This was amplified when three more students were arrested on marijuana sale charges .
 The marijuana laws of Mississippi are used to harass and jeopardize the lives of young people, the author says . "Once again, the marijuana laws ... are used ... to harass young people," the author writes .
 It is the threat that a young persons' college career, indeed his whole life, might be ruined because he is involved with a normally harmless and common drug . The threat is that a person's college career may be ruined by taking a drug .
 It's time that our lawmakers stop feeding us the same old bull about drug laws protecting our youth from the "evil menace" of marijuana . So it is time for our lawmakers to stop telling us the 'evil menace' of marijuana.
 Its time they started talking about protecting our youth from the menace of narcotics agents and arrests and trips to jail and heavy fines .
 This was the first drug arrest to occur on campus in two and a half years . Incidentally this is the first campus drug arrest on campus since 2008 .
 There is no substantial indication, other than occassional rumors, that the narcs are planning any organized campaign on Millsaps .
 Events of the past two weeks might serve as a warning to watch who you are associated with when drugs are around . However, events of the last two weeks should be a warning .
 The administration had nothing at all to do with the bust in Bacot . They didn't know anything about the bust until it had happened .
 The arresting agents had a search warrant, so they did not have to get permission from the college to come on the campus . The arrest agents had to get a warrant to enter the campus and arrest the student .
 They did tell the security guard that they were here and got the campus guards to accompany them to the room in Bacot . The security guard did not know they were in the room at the time .
 Dean Woodward has tried to get the police department to cooperate and let college officials know when they are coming onto campus to make an arrest . Woodward has been trying to get police to cooperate with campus officials .
 Police are under no requirement to do so if they have a warrant, as was the case here . But they are not required to comply with the request, as it was in the case .
 From the Middle East to Southeast Asia, U.S. foreign policy seems to be collapsing . From the Mideast to Asia, it seems that foreign policy is collapsing .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger's peace efforts in the Middle East have broken down . Kissinger has been involved in a series of peace talks with the Arab world since 1973 . Kissinger was secretary of state at the time .
 South Vietnam and Cambodia, two of our most favorite allies, are losing to the Communists, says President Obama . South Vietnam, Cambodia and Cambodia are losing allies, he says . The U.S. is losing allies to Communists in Vietnam .
 Thailand and Philippines are threatening to kick us out of our bases . Thailand and the Philippines threaten to kick the troops out of their bases, says CNN's John Defterios .
 In Europe, the Communists are tightening their grip on Portugal, formerly a staunch ally . Portugal is a former staunch ally of the Communist Party in Europe .
 In South America, the governments are scrambling to get on better terms with Fidel Castro . The governments of the U.S. and Cuba are scrambling for better terms .
 Only the hated military dictatorships continue to embrace the U.S. The United States is one of the world's most hated dictatorships .
 President Ford has ordered a quiet reappraisal of American foreign policy . The events have already led President Ford to order a quiet re-evaluation of U.S. policy .
 Kissinger has asked Kissinger to reevaluate America's international role . Kissinger to consider whether U.S. power is stretched too thin and to determine how the United States can better exert influences on world events .
 President and Secretary of State are making a mighty effort to blame Congress for America's foreign policy failures . Meanwhile, the Obama administration is blaming Congress for failing foreign policy on foreign policy .
 The White House is casting about for a scapegoat, and the lumbering, contentious assembly on Capitol Hil) makes a convenient one, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Because for seven years, the Executive Branch cuddled up to the colonels in Athens, it became identified with them . The Executive Branch became identified as the "axis of power" in Greece .
 In Portugal, a military coup by conservative officers threw Kissinger into a panic . In Cyprus, the military dictatorship inspired a coup on Cyprus, and stood by again when the Turks invaded the island . Washington stood by when the Turkish army invaded Cyprus .
 Our ambassador in Lisbon reported back that Portugal was far from lost . Portugal's ambassador to Lisbon said Portugal was 'far from lost'
 Kissinger privately told Kissinger privately that Lisbon was surely going Communist . But some prominent, retired Americans living in Portugal said it was a mistake . Kissinger: Lisbon was sure going Communist. But some retired Americans live in Portugal .
 While America dawdles, Portugal is tilting more and more leftward . Latin American nations are rapidly tiring of Washington's ""Big Daddy" approach to their affairs .
 The U.S. continues to prop up the bad guys, but it's not the only one . The United States has helped prop up some of the world's worst leaders, including Pinochet .
 The political pros are wondering whether President Ford is serious about seeking re-election . President Ford could be serious about running for president in the 1980s .
 So far, he hasn't lifted a finger to form a campaign organization or to raise campaign funds . He hasn't even raised enough money for a campaign .
 This is strange behavior for a President who hopes to stay in the White House, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think it's a good sign that the President is trying to keep control of the world"
 His predecessors were scarcely settled in the White House before they began making preparations for the re-election campaign . President Barack Obama is the first president to be re-elected in six years .
 It would weaken Ford's authority, if word got out that he intended to be no more than a caretaker President . Ford would weaken his authority, of course, if the word was out .
 We checked our White House sources to find out whether he was bluffing when he announced his intentions to run in 1976 .
 Sources report that the President, in fact, has started laying plans for his 1976 campaign . These sources say he has already begun laying plans .
 He is putting together a braintrust, which will plan strategy, to plan campaign strategy . He is also planning to launch a national campaign in 2016 .
 As fast as the strategy is worked out, the President will select people to implement it, he says . President Obama will select his team to implement the strategy .
 He is looking for a campaign manager who will take full charge of the re-election campaign . He is also looking for an election manager to take over the campaign .
 Morton, recently named Secretary of Commerce, would be in contention for the job if his health will permit it . Morton was recently named secretary of commerce . Morton would be a better candidate for the post if he could be on the job .
 Community Week is the best attempt made in a long time to give Millsaps students something to do on campus . Although the unpredictable weather has dampened things, the activities for Community Week constitute the best .
 Senate vice-president Mark Jones and his social affairs committee deserve thanks for the imagination and work they put into making a good time happen during this week .
 Jones deserves further commendation for his singlehanded efforts in bringing some fine speakers to campus this semester . Jones has brought some of the best speakers to the campus this year .
 Dear Mr Editor: You can call this a ""letter to the editor"" if you like . March 19, 1975: Suj P&W Needs .
 I am always impressed with the quality of your publication, and the way you exercise freedom of speech and freedom of press. I am particularly impressed with how you exercise free speech and free press. You are a great example of freedom of expression, I say .