 The undersigned certify that this thesis meets master’s-level standards of research, argumentation, and expression . Approved for public release: distribution unlimited .
 The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author . RICHARD MULLER is the author of the book .
 His 14-year career on active duty with the Air Force has taken him to a variety of assignments and places, including Colorado, Arizona, Texas, Arkansas, North Carolina, New Jersey, Alabama, Africa, Europe and Asia .
 "Their hospitality during their visit and assistance from afar has been extraordinary. Their hospitality during my visit to the U.S. was extraordinary," says President Barack Obama . "They were extraordinary," he said .
 I would like to thank Lt Col Kristi Lowenthal and Sheila McKitt for their support in reviewing and strengthening my draft . Lt Col. Lowenthal: "I am proud of my draft. It is a strong statement of support for my draft."
 Most importantly, I want to express my sincere appreciation to my family for their love, patience, and understanding during the busy process of writing this paper .
 "To my children, you are always there to make me smile after a long day, thank you," says mother of her children . "To be honest, I love you. To be honest. To my children. You are always a good person," she says .
 "I also want to thank my parents for the lifetime of encouragement and cheerleading," says LZ Granderson . Granderson also wants to thank his parents for their support .
 Thanks to my sister and her husband, thanks for actually reading this and showing so much interest .
 "I am very fortunate for all the support and love I have received during this process," she said . She said she is very grateful for the support she received during the process .
 Behind the scenes other members of Kennedy’s staff facilitated backchannel negotiations with the Soviet Union through Ambassador Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy provided input and recommendations through the Executive Committee .
 Robert Kennedy, as the U.S. Attorney General, filled a role far outside this position’s typical responsibilities . Robert Kennedy filled a position far outside the typical responsibilities of the Attorney General .
 The uniqueness of being the trusted brother to the President combined with his strengths at communicating with a diverse group of people allowed a freedom of thought amongst the President’s advisors and communication between the White House and the Kremlin .
 Robert Kennedy's ability to effectively communicate the stance of the U.S. and negotiate a settlement with the Kremlin through Dobrynin proved essential to avoiding nuclear conflict . Robert Kennedy’s ability to communicate the United States’ stance with Russia proved essential .
 This thesis employs a historical narrative format utilizing archive documents, interviews with key figures, and scholarly analysis . This thesis uses archive documents and interviews to examine key figures .
 These resources provide new information from primary sources previously unavailable to the public . These resources are available to the general public for free .
 The decision-making process during the crisis remains instructive, as the participants managed to stand on the precipice of Armageddon without falling over . The decision was made by the participants, as well as the people who made the decision .
 Key individuals contributed to decisions that ultimately offered an alternative, peaceful solution to total war . The U.S. has been involved in the conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003 .
 Robert Kennedy was in a unique position to play an important role in this process . Robert Kennedy, as the President’s brother, confidante, and Cabinet member, played a key role in the process .
 His personality and drive allowed him to spearhead numerous efforts to guide the eventual resolution of the crisis . His personality helped him spearhead efforts to end the crisis, including efforts to find a solution .
 Bobby Kennedy possessed the latitude and authority to act on behalf of the President . Because of the trust that John Kennedy placed in him, Bobby Kennedy had the power to act . Bobby Kennedy was a trusted confidante of President Kennedy .
 The 1950-60s marked a period of change in the history of the United States . The 1950s was a turbulent period of political turmoil in America .
 This generation of politicians coming to power were shaped by their experiences in the preceding World War . This generation has been shaped by the experience of the war in Britain .
 The Soviet Union had emerged as the United States’ chief rival for international influence . They now dealt with an uncertain post-war world in which one of the principal allies in defeating the Nazis .
 Many Americans now viewed the emergence of the Soviet Union, and its Communist ideology, as a threat on par with that of the recently defeated Nazis . The Soviet Union was seen as an ideological threat to the United States .
 The blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, and advancements from both sides in the making of nuclear weapons increased the tensions of this Cold War .
 Castro’s revolution in Cuba and displacement of the Batista regime was not initially seen as a threat to the U.S. The United States was initially wary of Castro's revolution . Castro's Cuban revolution was not seen as an immediate threat .
 In 1960, Castro openly acknowledged an alliance with the Soviet Union . The United States now viewed Cuba “as a base for Communist subversion in the hemisphere,”1 .
 When China fell to the Communists in 1949, the Republican party gained power . It was partly due to accusations that the Democratic leaders were responsible for the loss of China . The Republican Party gained power partly because of the accusations .
 Eisenhower administration faced same questions from Democrats on Cuba . Eisenhower administration now faced the same questions as Eisenhower administration . The Eisenhower administration had to answer the questions .
 During the campaign for president, Senator Kennedy, in a speech in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, charged that, “Mr Nixon hasn't mentioned Cuba very prominently in this campaign.” Senator Kennedy said that Nixon hasn’t mentioned Cuba .
 This inflexible position would contribute to the failures experienced at the Bay of Pigs early in the Kennedy Presidency . The inflexibility of this position would have contributed to the failure of the Bay, Pigs, in the early 1960s .
 The experience of the Kennedy administration during the Bay of Pigs invasion helped shape the group of advisors, notably Bobby . The team that would confront the missile crisis in 1962 was formed by the experience .
 Primary sources currently available relating to the crisis provide an unparalleled amount of information about the famous thirteen days and beyond . The variety of primary sources are available to provide the most accurate information on the crisis .
 The preponderance of this documentation was preserved and made available to the public . And most importantly, it was preserved, made available .
 President Kennedy’s decision to record many key meetings, his desire to establish a Presidential Library to provide access to his papers, and the willingness of many of the participants to conduct oral history interviews . The various conferences held with these same participants contribute unique insights into the crisis .
 Six presidents are known to have used some form of secret recording devices or systems in the White House . Six presidents have been recorded using secret recording systems .
 Franklin Roosevelt, Harry Truman, and Dwight Eisenhower were limited in their use . John Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, and Richard Nixon used different systems extensively at various points of their administration .
 Kennedy used a device called a Dictaphone, primarily for dictating letters and personal notes . Prior to and during his presidency, Kennedy used the device for letters and notes .
 In mid-1962, President asked Secret Service Agent Robert Bouck to install recording devices in three locations, the Cabinet Room, the Oval Office, and a study in the Executive Mansion .
 Bouck obtained state-of-the-art Tandberg reel-to-reel tape recorders on loan from the U.S. Army Signal Corps . Bouck used the recorders from the Signal Corps on loan .
 Two of these recorders were placed in the West Wing basement room for storing private presidential files . Two of the recorders are placed there in the basement of the White House .
 Each of the West Wing recorders was attached to two different microphones in each location . Each of these microphones were attached to a different microphone each time .
 In Cabinet Room the microphones were installed in place of wall fixtures hidden behind drapes . In the Cabinet Room they were hidden behind walls .
 The system was activated by a switch placed at the President’s seat at the large Cabinet table . The switch was placed at a switch at the president's seat at a large Cabinet .
 In the Oval Office, the two microphones were hidden in the kneehole of the President’s desk and the other was hidden under a coffee table across the room .
 This system was activated by a push button similar to the one in the Cabinet Room . This system is activated by pushing a button in a similar way to the Cabinet room .
 Information on the system installed in the Mansion is lacking, says Bouck . Bouck says Kennedy rarely used that system, likely because he rarely used it .
 Bouck says he, his assistant Agent Chester Miller, and the president’s secretary Evelyn Lincoln were the only individuals aware of the recording system . According to Bouck, he says he and his assistant agent Chester Miller were only individuals .
 Bouck: "From my understanding that from her appointment book she could pretty well tell what was on the tapes" Bouck said, “It was my understanding ... that from my understanding, it was ... she could ... tell what she was doing .
 Following Robert Kennedy’s assassination in 1968, Senator Edward Kennedy took over custody of his son . Robert Kennedy was taken into custody in 1968 after his father's assassination .
 The Kennedy family confirmed the existence of the tapes and committed to turning them over to the National Archives . Volume One, xviii-xix. 6 was brought to light during the Watergate scandal in 1973 .
 A deed of gift was negotiated to deposit all the tapes, aside from those dealing with private family matters, to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library in Boston .
 The Kennedy transcripts contain transcripts and important contextual information spanning Kennedy’s presidency . The transcripts contain important historical information spanning JFK's presidency . This is the first time the transcripts have been published since Kennedy was president .
 The intent of President Kennedy’s decision to install the taping system remains unknown . President Kennedy's intent of installing the system is unknown .
 The most accepted reason is his desire for a record of his presidency to be later used in writing his memoirs . He said he wanted to record a record to be used later in writing of his memoir .
 Volume One, xxii. 7 evidence that he taped only self-flattering moments . Volume One: 7 evidence of taped self-torture . Volume 1, xxII. 7 .
 President Obama has announced his intent to give his papers and memorabilia to the National Archives for this future library .
 Members of the President’s family and close friends met to discuss a fitting memorial to the slain leader .
 The John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, Inc. was chartered December 5th, 1963, to plan and construct the library . The library was dedicated to honor the late President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy’s estate trustees, Jacqueline Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Edward Kennedy, formally deeded his papers and historical items on February 25, 1965 . President Kennedy's estate trustees officially deeded the papers and items .
 On October 1st, 1969, the first portions of Presidential papers were released for research use . The papers were housed in a temporary location .
 The library houses the original papers from the President and his staff . It provides access to some of the most important primary-source materials from the Kennedy Administration .
 This includes insights into the thought processes of the individuals involved and details of those conversations and meetings that occurred away from the recording systems . This includes . conversations and . meetings . away from recording systems. This includes conversations .
 Oral history interviews provide a great deal of insight, but in some cases memories fade and details are lost . In some cases, the interview with oral history interviews can be difficult to remember .
 An alternative to the oral history approach are conferences in which a group of people are brought together .
 At such gatherings, “the memories of the participants can help supply the missing context of the documents,’s author says . “The documents can supply many of the facts which human memories distort or forget," he says .
 The conference brought together academics including Graham Allison and Thomas Schelling, considered experts on the crisis . The conference also brought together veterans of the Kennedy administration who lived the crisis from inside .
 The conference strived to fill the gap in understanding of the Soviet motives and actions identified at Hawk’s Cay .
 Due to the immense western literature and study on the crisis and the closely guarded Soviet history there exists a largely one-sided perception of the crisis .
 The intent of the Cambridge Conference was to assist in breaking down that imbalance . The aim of the conference was to help break down the imbalance of the world's top sportswimmers .
 Many of the participants from the Hawk’s Cay conference were at the event . McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, and Theodore Sorensen were also there .
 The group represented key actors from the Soviet Union, Cuba, and the United States . The group was formed by key actors in the Soviet-Cuban and U.S.
 The American contingent contained many veterans from the first two gatherings . The U.S. contingent was joined by many veterans .
 Georgy Bolshakov acted as a secret courier for messages between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy . Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. and Andrei Gromyko, Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Sergei Khrushche, son of
 These competing perspectives led to a distinct debate and discussion from which a number of revelations emerged . The debate was led by a group of competing perspectives .
 The fourth and fifth conferences were held in Antigua and Havana respectively . The conference was held in both Antigu and Havana .
 The is little written about or documentation from the 1991 conference in Antigua . The conference was held in 1991 .
 The fifth conference took place in Havana, Cuba January 9-12, 1992 .
 The conference was attended by many of the key living U.S., Soviet Union, and Cuba crisis veterans .
 When these documents are viewed together with the oral history interviews, the insight gained is extraordinary. The insight gained from the three conferences, the author says .
 This abundance of available information allows for an extraordinary level of understanding of the crisis . The crisis defined the international environment for decades after .
 Analysis provides a unique view of a tumultuous time in U.S. history by combining many recently released tapes, transcripts, and accounts to provide a focused view of Attorney General’s influence on the crisis .
 President wanted to have someone he knew he could trust explicitly close by in his administration . Bobby was not a popular choice for Attorney General, but the President wanted him to be there .
 Robert Kennedy’s post-Bay of Pigs expanded foreign policy role provided him a position from which to positively impact the EXCOMM and the advice given to the President . Robert Kennedy had a position of influence in the decision-making process of the White House .
 Attorney General was secretly meeting with Soviet contacts facilitating direct communication between his brother and Chairman Khrushchev . The Attorney General's EXCOMM responsibility was also his brother's responsibility .
 The combination of purposes that Robert Kennedy provided to his brother places him as the key to resolving the crisis . Robert Kennedy is key to solving the crisis, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The extensive sources now available provide great insight and perspective on Bobby’s role in this role . Bobby's historical role as an important figure in the world's history .
 Robert Kennedy's nomination and later confirmation of Robert Kennedy as U.S. Attorney General is the first time Kennedy has been confirmed as Attorney General . Kennedy was nominated and later confirmed by the Supreme Court .
 In nominating his brother, the President defied popular opinion and made a decision that would prove integral to his presidency . President Barack Obama nominated his brother for president in 2008 .
 The lessons learned from the Bay of Pigs ensured that necessary changes in personnel and procedures were put in place prior to the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Failure is never a desired outcome .
 After engineering his brother’s victory in the 1960 Presidential election as campaign manager, Robert Kennedy was uncertain of his next career move . Robert Kennedy's brother was elected Attorney General in 1960 .
 17 began an advice-seeking tour on the attorney general decision . The attorney general's decision was made in 1978 .
 Johnny We Hardly Knew Ye was written by O’Donnell and other Kennedy intimates David Powers and Joe McCarthy . They worried about losing their “reliable intermediary in our dealings with his brother’s brother” The book says they were worried that they would lose
 This bond was vital to the President's success and those most intimate friends and colleagues, including John Kennedy himself, understood this . John Kennedy's friendship with President Richard Nixon was a vital part of his success .
 Bobby decided against accepting the attorney general position and called his brother to inform him of the decision . After intense internal debate, Bobby decided not to accept the position .
 "We’re going to have to change the climate in this country. And so I need him," she said . "And so I . need him"
 President Obama says he needs to have someone on whom he can rely on to carry out the things he wants to do . The White House says he will have to rely heavily on his administration .
 He ended by saying to Bobby, “I need you in this government,” John Kennedy then rose from his chair and walked to the kitchen .
 President-elect returned and said, “So that’s it, general.” Smiling, he said, "So that's it."
 The article goes on to laud his ability as campaign manager but questions his legal experience . The article went on to praise his ability but also questioned his legal qualifications .
 Johnson's motives proved to be entirely self-serving . The motives for Johnson's action proved to have been self-interested .
 According to Bobby Baker, the Senate’s Secretary to the Majority Leader, in an interview he conducted for the Senate Historical Office, conservative Senator Richard Russell from Georgia had enough votes to kill the nomination . According to Baker, Russell was a conservative Senator from Georgia .
 Baker says he, took Senator Russell over to the Secretary of the Senate’s office and poured heavy drinks in him . Baker: “I really poured heavy drink in him.” Baker says .
 The Case Against Him for Attorney General,” The New Republic, January 9, 1961, 15, 19, 19 .
 Bobby Kennedy defeated Bobby Kennedy to be Attorney General . Republicans and Southern Democrats had enough votes to defeat Bobby Kennedy . Bobby Kennedy was Attorney General of the South .
 Only a single senator, Gordon Allott, spoke in opposition, and the Senate confirmed Bobby Bobby . Bobby was confirmed by the Senate a week later .
 Robert Kennedy was sworn in as the Attorney General of the United States on January 20th, 1961 . He was the third youngest individual to hold that office . Robert Kennedy is the son of Robert Kennedy Jr.
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy faced many doubters in the press and from the legislature . Robert Kennedy is likely to succeed even more to succeed, says Sen. John McCain .
 Bobby understood that his cabinet position provided him the opportunity to protect and assist his brother . Bobby understood his position was to protect his brother and help him protect him .
 He would become the President's most trusted advisor and confidant, especially during the administration's most contentious moments .
 Eisenhower administration approved a CIA plan for the training and arming of a Cuban exile army of liberation . The plan was approved by the Eisenhower administration in 1960 .
 The CIA decided to increase the size of the guerilla force to a 1,500 man conventional army in Guatemala in the last weeks of the Eisenhower presidency .
 President Kennedy acknowledged the threat posed by the Castro regime so close to the U.S. President Kennedy acknowledges the threat . President Kennedy admitted the threat to the United States .
 After he learned of the CIA-planned invasion scheme the President, with what seemed to be a complete consensus among those advising him, gave approval for the operation . The operation was approved by the President .
 On April 17th, 1961, a group of CIA-trained Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs . The event took place in the Cuban city of San Siroiro .
 Multiple issues occurred from the start and within two days the brigade was defeated . Within two days they were defeated .
 This failure gave additional strength to the Castro regime and embarrassed the U.S. The failure of Castro's regime gave it additional strength, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a low point for the Kennedy administration and the President . President Kennedy was in office at the time of the incident .
 President Kennedy personally authorized the mission, very few in his administration were aware of the operation . The operation was a secret operation .
 Ambassador Stevenson, and Kennedy's press secretary Pierre Salinger, were blindsided by questions from the 26 Sorensen, Kennedy, 295. When word spread among the press, Ambassador Stevenson and his press secretary became blindsided .
 The level of deception in the operation undermined the public’s trust in the government at every level, the government says . ‘Level of deception’ in operation undermined public trust in government, he says .
 President Kennedy summed up his feelings afterwards saying to himself, “All my life I’ve known better than to depend on the experts.” President Kennedy said to himself .
 Robert Kennedy attempted to protect his brother in every situation and this role had the same intent . Unfortunately, unfortunately, unfortunately the effect in this case was a negative one .
 Schlesinger said, “You may be right or you may be wrong, but the President has made his mind up.” Bobby responded, saying, ‘I'm not sure what I think, but you're right or wrong,’
 The study group members included Taylor, Bobby, Arleigh Burke, and Allen Dulles . The group was formed by the President of the United States .
 Robert Kennedy would expertly play this role in many of the Missile Crisis meetings . Not only would Robert Kennedy make this suggestion, he would also make this decision in many other meetings .
 With hindsight it is clear that what in fact he had approved was diplomatically unwise and militarily doomed from the outset . With hindsight, it was clear that the decision to withdraw from Syria was made politically ill-wise .
 What he thought he was approving appeared at the time to have diplomatic acceptability and little chance of outright failure . What appeared to have been approved appeared to be accepted, but there was no evidence of failure .
 That so great a gap between concept and actuality should exist at so high a level on so dangerous a matter reflected a shocking number of errors in the whole decision-making process . "The errors which permitted bureaucratic momentum to govern instead of policy leadership"
 The committee’s findings triggered many changes in personnel and the way in which the administration made decisions .
 Robert Kennedy: "The Bay of Pigs and our investigation led to a reorganization" Robert Kennedy says the investigation into the Bay led to "a reorganization of the military"
 The most valuable result of the Bay of Pigs was the increased role of Robert Kennedy in all important decisions . Robert Kennedy became a key figure in the decision to invade Cuba in Cuba .
 President Kennedy meeting with his Attorney General outside the White House in October 1962 . President Kennedy met with Attorney General Robert Kennedy outside the Oval Office .
 These precursors set the necessary conditions for the peaceful resolution of the 1962 crisis . The pre-1962 crisis was a precursor to a peaceful resolution .
 The personalities involved in advising the President were in place, and had formed relationships with each other because of the lessons learned from the Bay of Pigs disaster . They formed relationships because of those lessons learned after the disaster .
 Robert Kennedy's key personality would prove the most valuable . Robert Kennedy would prove to be the key personality of the Kennedy family .
 Following the failure of the Bay of Pigs, the Kennedy Administration increased efforts to determine future solutions to the Castro problem in Cuba . Douglas Dillon was the president of the Cuban government .
 Efforts of the intelligence community to gather information expanded and these efforts are likely the only reason the Soviet’s transport of missiles to Cuba were discovered .
 The development of the U-2 Dragon Lady took place under Kennedy's predecessor, President Dwight Eisenhower, President Eisenhower .
 Lockheed’s classified production arm Skunk Works builds aircraft capable of photographing areas of interest from 70,000 feet . Lockheed's classified aircraft can distinguish objects only a few feet in length . The aircraft represented the culmination of a twenty-month process by Lockheed's Lockheed .
 This technology provided a dramatic leap forward in reconnaissance and the ability to obtain concrete evidence of adversary actions . The technology was developed in the 1990s and '90s .
 Arthur Lundahl, director of the NPIC, held a meeting with his division chiefs to discuss routine matters when the film arrived at the film .
 Analysis teams scanned the film they noticed what at first appeared to be preparatory work for the building of SA-2 missile sites . They were unable to locate guidance radar and missile launchers associated with this type of weapon system .
 The team discovered six canvas-covered objects measuring over sixty feet long . Upon further investigation, the team found six canvas covered objects measuring more than 60 feet .
 Lundahl: "Our worst fears are coming to pass in Cuba, because it looks like something more than defensive missilery is being deployed" Lundahl identifies himself as the man who identified himself . Lundahl says it's "our worst fears"
 McGeorge Bundy hosted dinner for friends Chip and Avis Bohlen before Chip left to become U.S. ambassador to France . Bundy was the special assistant to the President for national security affairs . Bundy and his wife were hosting the intimate dinner .
 At 8:30 P.M Bundy received a call from Cline informing him of the U-2 photographs showing evidence of nuclear weapons in Cuba . Bundy was told of the photographs by Cline . Bundy received the photographs at 8 p.m. ET . Bundy says the photos show
 He rationalized this decision for two primary reasons; one was a desire to avoid a late-night meeting which might highlight to the press or Soviet agents that something out of the ordinary was occurring . One of the main reasons for the decision was to keep the meeting secret .
 The President ordered Bundy to assemble his foreign policy advisors from the State Department, the Pentagon, and the Central Intelligence Agency in the Cabinet Room at the next opening on his calendar, 11:45 A.M.13 .
 Following his final morning meeting, the President and his advisors gathered in the Cabinet Room .
 Much of the discussion centered on determining the course of action but initially most of the advisors present appeared to assume that military operations were a foregone conclusion . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 The President voiced the available options saying, “we’re certainly going to number one.” President Obama .
 Robert is the first person to acknowledge the likely reprisals from the Soviet Union if air strikes against Cuba took place . “You’re going to kill an awful lot of people, and we're going to take a lot of heat on it’s almost incumbent upon
 When the group reconvened that evening, the discussion focused initially on tactical details regarding missile range, identification, vulnerability and launch timing .
 Robert Kennedy interjected thoughts on the long-term, second, and third-order effects of the contemplated actions . As the meeting continued, Robert Kennedy again interjected his thoughts .
 President Obama understood Cuban missiles in the hands of Castro created a shift in the balance of power in South America . He understood these missiles changed the balance-power in the U.S. He said it affected the future ability of the United States to intervene .
 Robert Kennedy expertly injected these variables into the calculations of the group advising the President . These considerations were integral to the decision-making process, he says .
 Later in the conversation, Bobby referenced the future of Cuba after such a strike is carried out . Bobby referenced Cuba's future in the future .
 McNamara: “Because the consequences of these actions have not been thought through clearly.” McNamara says .
 Concerns over drawing attention to the proceedings and the President’s travel schedule caused the group to delay further large meetings until the 18th . Concerns about drawing attention from the proceedings were delayed .
 Small groups met throughout the night at the State Department and Pentagon . Meanwhile, multiple small groups met at the Pentagon .
 These sides would change and shift as the crisis continued over the coming days, CNN's John Sutter says .
 CIA Director McCone returned to Washington after arranging the funeral for his step-son who perished in an automobile accident . McCone was killed in a car accident in 1996 .
 McCone arrived for his first meeting on the crisis at 9:30 A.M. and expressed disagreement with the President’s current preference for an airstrike .
 McCone, in his memorandum documenting the meeting, states the “President seemed inclined to act promptly if at all, without warning, targetting on MRBM’s and possibly airfields”
 President continued his regularly scheduled events, a National Day of Prayer at St. George's Cathedral . After meeting with the West German Foreign Minister Gerhard Schroeder, the President continued to meet with the Foreign Minister .
 The trip includes a trip to St. Matthews Cathedral, lunch at the Libyan embassy, and finally a political trip to Connecticut .
 Volume Two, 498499. 42 and included a list of the required number of sorties for each option . Volume Two was published in Volume Three, Volume Four, Volume Five, Volume Two. 42 .
 EXCOMM members met throughout the day to consider and discuss the merits of the considered options . Meanwhile, many of the EXCOMm members met to discuss and consider the merits .
 Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen departed to meet the President at the airport upon his return .
 They briefed him on the day of the day's developments and highlighted the still unresolved questions .
 JFK decided not to attend the meetings that night . JFK decided that his presence might impede an honest and open dialogue amongst the group .
 He was content to allow the group to continue without him that evening . Instead, knowing that his closest advisor Bobby would be present, he was contented to allow him to continue .
 Robert Kennedy described the reason, in 1964 to Schlesinger, for his brother’s absence during those first meetings as, “freer conversation, and secondly, he was campaigning, see, don’t forget that.” Robert Kennedy .
 As the meeting ended, the group remained split among the primary options . The group remained divided among the options .
 Bohlen endorsed a strike but only if preceded by an ultimatum to Khrushchev . Bohlen said strike would only be preceded by a strike in order to avoid Khrushchchev's threat of strike .
 Thompson, Martin, and Gilpatric agreed that a declaration of war followed by a complete blockade of the island was the best alternative . Thompson and Martin agreed that declaring war would be the best option for the island .
 The consensus among the President’s advisors shifted substantially from that morning to the end of the meeting towards the option that would ultimately be used . The consensus amongst the President's advisors shifted significantly towards the decision .
 Earlier that morning, intelligence analysts detected new evidence of intermediate-range ballistic missiles with twice the range of the previously identified MRBMs . The missiles were found in North Korea .
 The proof of IRBMs caused some members to change their recommendation away from blockade towards massive strikes against targets in Cuba . Some members of the U.S. changed their recommendation from blockade to massive strikes .
 An ultimatum or other communications with Khrushchev would be the loss of surprise and increased danger to U.S. troops involved in conducting air strikes .
 This was an important exchange, now that the group had talked through the possible reaction by the Soviets to U.S. strikes against Cuba and the likely Soviet casualties, they have arrived at the likelihood of nuclear war between superpowers . This was a major exchange, the group said .
 This frightening reality brings the President back to the subject of the blockade and the legality of enforcement without declaring war . The blockade is illegal under U.S. law, but it's not illegal under the law, the President says .
 Bobby Kennedy argued that that would be our doing the act of the Japanese in attacking Pearl Harbor . As General Taylor related years later, “it was argued very eloquently by Bobby Kennedy that that . would be . that would have been our doing that act,” he said .
 Douglas Dillon: "I finally agreed with Bobby Kennedy that a surprise attack on Cuba at that time was unacceptable because it was too much like the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"
 There are multiple references to “Pearl Harbor” written alone in his notes from these meetings during the crisis illustrating this important theme in his mind .
 Attorney 47 and especially Bobby’s statements, created a noticeable shift among the group towards supporting the blockade option, according to Bobby . Attorney 47's statements, especially Bobby's statements . Attorney . 47's statement created a . noticeable shift towards supporting a blockade option .
 At this stage in the crisis, Robert Kennedy appears to have made up his mind that a surprise attack against Cuba was the wrong decision .
 He makes multiple statements throughout the remainder of the meeting designed to combat some of the pressure on his brother to quickly commit to an invasion or air strike . He makes several statements to combat the pressure .
 The official meeting adjourns with the President asking Secretary Rusk to meet him at 4:30 to prepare for their 5:00 meeting with Gromyko . The meeting ends with the meeting with the Russian Foreign Ministry . The President asks Rusk for a 4:00-5:
 The tape recording system captures the genesis of the eventual option the administration would use to resolve the crisis safely . After the President departs, the tape recording captures the eventual solution to the crisis .
 Thompson, McNamara, and Robert Kennedy answer in the affirmative . To which Thompson and McNamara answer, they say .
 The discussion on the blockade continues amongst the group before many have to depart for previously scheduled engagements .
 McNamara now supports further consideration of independent blockade of Cuba . This change was most apparent in McNamara, who after learning of the MRBM advocated a full invasion of Cuba but was now supporting further consideration .
 The Attorney General never overtly expressed this option during the meeting, but instead used questions and insinuations that led some of the individuals to independently come to the conclusion that the blockade might represent the best alternative .
 The EXCOMM met again at 9:15 P.M. in the Oval Room of the Executive Mansion to avoid being noticed by reporters . After the Kennedy brothers had dinner together, the ExCOMM had dinner with them .
 The consensus was now in favor of the blockade and the President directed a detailed planning effort for its execution . The blockade was now being planned for the first time .
 The President acknowledged the shift in opinion during his midnight recorded summary of the day .
 Before meeting with the President, the Chiefs agreed on a united recommendation of a surprise airstrike against the military targets in Cuba .
 On the question of invasion, there was disagreement, with Taylor opposing this step . However, on the issue of invasion there was also disagreement .
 LeMay: I think that a blockade and political talk would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this . LeMay says a blockade or political talk is a "pretty weak response"
 By the end of this meeting, the President was less sure that the blockade option was the best course of action . The blockade option may be the best way of dealing with the situation in Syria .
 Sorensen: "He was counting on the Attorney General and me to pull the group together quickly" "Otherwise more delays and dissension would plague whatever decision he took," he says . The attorney general is expected to make a decision soon .
 President placed the decision of recalling him entirely in his brother’s hands . Furthermore, the decision was placed in the President's hands .
 The Attorney General gave his theory on why the Soviets had installed the missiles to his press secretary, Edwin Guthman . That afternoon in his Justice Department office, the Justice Department gave his theories to Guthman in his office .
 If we bombed, we would be the aggressors and they could do anything they wished. We would be aggressors, they would be able to do whatever they wished, they said . We would have been the aggressor if we bombed them, they could have done anything they wanted.
 51 understand not only their adversary’s actions but also provide context for the United States’ response . 51 understand the actions of the U.S. and the circumstances surrounding them .
 18 members of the EXCOMM met throughout the day and night of the 19th . Following the departure of the President, 18 members met on the night of December 19 .
 Initially, the group was divided into two camps, those in favor of the air strike option and those preferring a blockade . The air strike strike option was initially favored by the group, but the blockade was preferred .
 Robert Kennedy: The necessity in gaining a positive vote by the OAS was vital to provide the legal authority for a blockade . For those, especially Robert Kennedy, that supported the blockade, that was necessary to gain the vote by OAS .
 Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin gave his opinion that he could immediately secure 14 votes . Martin said he could likely increase these totals to 17, 18, or 19 within 24 hours .
 Robert Kennedy said he too had had a talk with the President, indeed very recently this morning . Robert Kennedy, with a grin, said that “he too had talked with the president, indeed this morning” Robert Kennedy .
 At 4:00 P.M. the group continued their discussion with each side making its case . The group continued to discuss the case at 4:30 p.m. ET .
 The identification of flaws in each plan provided the majority of the effort for the committee . The identification and correction of flaws was the most of the committee's work .
 Two hours spent on the blockade plan with only 30 minutes on the airstrike option . Overall, two hours were spent on a blockade plan . The airstrike option was also considered .
 The next morning, Pierre Salinger announced to the press that the President had a cold and would be returning to the White House to recover . October 20, 1962, President Salinger was hospitalized with a cold . The next day, Salinger said that he would be back in the White
 Marine One landed on the South Lawn of the White House at 1:30 P.M. and met with Sorensen to review the draft speech he had written .
 The accounts and minutes of the meeting provide extensive details of the proceedings . While this location did not have a taping system, the accounts of the meetings are available .
 EXCOMM members have four distinct recommended courses of action . EXCOMm members are advocating for the government to take action against the government .
 The first was the traditional air strike, second was a blockade combined with an ultimatum that could be followed by an air strike if necessary . Third was the blockade intent on halting Soviet action to gain time for negotiation . Fourth, blockade with intent of initiating diplomatic negotiations, ultimately offering a
 The President was likely well aware of the current status following the previous night’s discussion with his brother .
 Robert Kennedy discusses the moral necessity of providing a warning before striking to avoid a Pearl Harbor scenario . Robert Kennedy expresses his recommendation for action .
 The Attorney General said in his opinion a combination of the blockade route and the air strike route was very attractive to him .
 In the event that the Soviets continued to build up the missile capability in Cuba, then we should inform the Russians that we would destroy the missiles, the launchers, and the missile sites . We would destroy missiles, launchers and missile sites, he says .
 He said he favored a short wait during which time the Russians could react to the blockade . The blockade is expected to last for a few days .
 If the Russians did not halt the development of the missile capability, then we would proceed to make an air strike, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin has said Russia is developing a missile capability in Russia .
 The advantage of progressing in this way was that we would get away from the Pearl Harbor surprise attack aspect of the air strike route, he said .
 This option addressed moral arguments against a surprise attack . Furthermore, this option addressed the moral arguments that a terrorist attack could have been avoided .
 The Attorney General synthesized the merits of the options presented into a logical plan . The President had the authority to make the decision, the Attorney General .
 Robert Kennedy articulated that with this option, the decision to strike would not need to be made immediately, suggesting that the President would gain time in which to make a decision . Robert Kennedy later articulated that .
 This option provided the President with the ability to make a decision on immediate action with a blockade, but still avoid a choice on airstrikes that may cause a quick escalation and confrontation between the two global powers .
 The President would not be forced to make an irrevocable decision on airstrikes that could have far-reaching and unknown consequences . Instead, the blockade would provide a less aggressive starting point . Bobby bought his brother time with this option .
 The meeting adjourned after deciding to use the term “quarantine” instead of blockade at the suggestion of Secretary Rusk . The meeting was adjourned .
 Following the meeting, John McCone spoke privately with Robert Kennedy and expressed concerns over aspects of the President’s drafted speech .
 The Attorney General listened to the concerns and agreed to address them with the President at their subsequent meeting .
 McCone says the President stated that “he had made up his mind to pursue the course which I had recommended and he agreed with the views I expressed in the afternoon meeting’s meeting, McCone said .
 President Kennedy, Attorney General Kennedy, General Taylor, General McCone, and Director McCone met for approximately an hour in the Oval Room of the White House to discuss the viability of an aerial strike against missile sites .
 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor briefed the President on the airstrike option planned by the Joint Chiefs . President Obama was briefed on the option by Secretary of State McNamara .
 There is no guarantee of the destruction of all the missiles but nonetheless, indicated a 90 percent probability of success . Once again the military advisors stressed that there was no guarantee .
 Bobby and McCone both ""advised against a surprise attack for the reasons discussed at previous meetings" "Bobby" and "McCone advised against a surprise attack .
 Bobby’s notes show his favor for the blockade option but also acknowledge the perils of this path . Bobby's notes show he favors the blockade but also acknowledges the risks .
 In continuing with attempts to hide the crisis from the press, the afternoon meeting of the EXCOMM took place in the mansion rather than the Cabinet Room .
 The central topic of the discussion was the third draft of the President's speech to the nation which he planned to give the next evening . The group discussed the speech to be given the next night .
 Much of the debate centered around where to place blame for the introduction of the missiles, the Soviets or Castro . Castro was the prime minister of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Bobby suggested that the President’s appeal to the Cuban people was not sufficiently personal . Bobby had been exhaustively working the Cuban problem since becoming Attorney General .
 The President agreed with his brother and asked Sorensen to rewrite those passages . President agreed and asked him to rewrite the passages .
 Admiral Anderson provided the President his first detailed description of the execution of the quarantine . Admiral Anderson said the quarantine was a success .
 Rules of engagement were detailed and debated, debated, discussed, and finally agreed upon . Rules were detailed, debated and discussed, but agreed upon. Rules were then agreed upon by the team .
 The President arrived at the Oval Office around 9:15 A.M. and began making calls . The President is expected to be in the middle of the morning .
 His second call that morning was to President Eisenhower to keep him abreast of the latest developments along with soliciting his thoughts on the situation . President Eisenhower also made a second call to discuss the situation in Washington .
 Both men, although of very different political backgrounds, trusted each other implicitly . Both men were presidents of the United States .
 Eisenhower offered his support of Kennedy’s decision to blockade the Soviet Union . The President explained the plan for the blockade, and possible Soviet responses .
 The conversation focused on a draft address to be read at the U.N. Early in the meeting the attention centered on the wording of Schlesinger's draft .
 Republican Senator Ken Keating charged, back in August, that the Soviet Union was constructing offensive nuclear bases .
 The President asked the CIA for more information on the status of weapons in Cuba but was told that only defensive surface-to-air missiles were revealed by the U-2 imagery .
 Bobby advocated for the blockade he still considered all options as the crisis unfolded . Bobby still considered the blockade as the situation unfolded .
 This flexibility of thought made the Attorney General an excellent asset to the President, says President Obama . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 The President scheduled a television address to announce the crisis for 7:00 P.M. that night . After another meeting with advisors to discuss the impact of the crisis on Berlin the President scheduled the speech .
 The memorandum states that the group ""will meet, until further notice, daily at 10:00m. in the Cabinet Room,"" with the President as the Chairman and regular members . The group includes the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the . Secretary of the Treasury, the
 The first regular meeting of the EXCOMM would occur the following day, Tuesday, October 23rd . According to the memorandum, the first regular regular meeting would be held on October 23 .
 This meeting served as a test run for the upcoming meeting with Congressional leadership for the President . The meeting was held in front of a generally friendly audience .
 The President's final meeting before addressing the American public was with twenty Congressman recalled from around the country for this rapidly arranged discussion . The President will address the nation on Thursday .
 At 7:00 P.M. that evening, President Kennedy addressed the nation, laying out the case against the Soviet Union and describing their deception in Cuba . President Kennedy delivered the speech to the nation that night .
 The U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Foy Kohler, provided the Presidium with a transcript of Kennedy’s speech and a personal letter from the President to Khrushchev . That night about 1:00 A.M. the U.K. Ambassador
 The Soviet Premier was relieved that there was no imminent invasion of Cuba, he spent that night in his office . While the Soviet Premier spent the night in the office .
 Both sides relieved that night ended without military action by either country . Tensions in the crisis were still peaking .
 At 10:00 A.M. October 23, 1962, the EXCOMM met officially for the first time . October 23 was the first meeting of the two nations .
 To the Kennedy brothers, the Republican McCone, who said he had previously suspected the Soviets of placing offensive weapons in Cuba before the discovery, might pose a threat to the administration’s unified narrative .
 The President once again relied on his most trusted ally to test the allegiance of the CIA Director without asking the question himself . The president once again used the CIA to test his loyalty without asking himself .
 The President decided to send him to meet with additional Congressman to explain the rationale for the blockade . Volume Three, 104.87: “70 positive evidence”
 Robert Kennedy continues to address the tough questions that in his mind the group will undoubtedly receive . Robert Kennedy: "Robert Kennedy will continue to speak to the world about his legacy"
 We've taken this action after they’ve got their missiles already there, unopposed. We’re taken this . action after the . missiles already . already had their missiles . Unopposed .
 As the meeting ends, the President tentatively sets 6:00 P.M. for the committee to reconvene after the OAS makes their decision on support of the blockade .
 U.S. resolution passed with only yes votes and two abstentions . That afternoon news arrived that the OAS had passed the resolution . The resolution was the first of a series of resolutions passed by the United States .
 Two abstentions eventually changed to affirmative votes thus giving the U.S. unanimous support for the quarantine .
 Later that evening President Kennedy signed the quarantine proclamation in the Oval Office in front of photographers . The quarantine proclamation was signed by President Kennedy later that evening .
 In the company of only his brother the President was finally able to voice his frustration with the situation and doubts in the decision he made .
 "When they’ve been kicking us in the ass for two years, and they vote unanimously for this," he said . "They vote unanimously, they voted unanimously," he added. "They voted unanimously" for the bill .
 CNN's John Sutter says he's trying to get the reaction from the rest of the allies . "David Ormsby-Gore and everybody else," he says . Sutter: "It's important to see the reaction of the other allies, like David ... like David Or
 The President could only allow himself to appear vulnerable and honest in front of his younger brother . The President was only allowed to be honest and vulnerable to his brother .
 Bobby understood that his brother needed a confidence boost and he provides that by pointing to the victory in the OAS, even though Bobby himself provided the emphasis to gain their support and the support of their allies . Bobby understands that he needed to gain the confidence of his brother .
 The special relationship between the brothers gave the President exactly what he needed during one of the most stressful days of the crisis . The President's special relationship with the brothers helped him cope .
 The next day the EXCOMM met again at the regularly scheduled time of 10:00 A.M. just as the quarantine went into effect . October 24, 1962, was the first time the quarantine was imposed .
 Naval intelligence also reported the belief that a submarine was trailing each of these two ships . Naval intelligence said the two ships were at the time of the attack .
 McNamara continues to detail the procedure to drop depth charges and use sonar signals to warn the submarines to surface . McNamara says the group is waiting for the information .
 This was the moment we had prepared for, which we hoped would never come. This is the moment, we hoped never come, but it did come . This was a moment of our greatest joy, we said .
 His hand went up to his face & covered his mouth and he closed his fist . His hand then went to his mouth & closed the fist . He closed it up and closed it .
 I felt we were on the edge of a precipice and it was as if there were no way off. I felt there was 'no way off' when I wrote this piece of the piece .
 The President emphasized that “we don’t want to have the first thing we attack as a Soviet submarine.” The details on forcing the submarines to surface continue .
 The Attorney General follows with a question, that although it would seem to be common sense, was critical . The attorney general was critical of the question, saying it was common sense .
 This development is far from a resolution to the crisis but a sense of positive progress came across the room . This development was far from resolution to a resolution, but a positive progress was seen .
 According to Bobby Kennedy, “everyone looked like a different person’s” in his life . Kennedy: “Everyone looked different.” The Kennedy family is proud of his legacy .
 Khrushchev says quarantine “is an act of aggression, pushing mankind towards the abyss of a world missile nuclear war.” The quarantine is “pushing mankind to the abyss’s abyss of nuclear war,” he says . The quarantine ‘is an
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. 76 the previous evening . John F. Kennedy Presidential . Museum .
 The letter laid out the sequence of events that led to the U.S. decision to enact the quarantine . The letter was sent to the White House on Monday .
 U.S. naval ships intercepted the Soviet tanker Bucharest in Washington D.C. in the early hours of the morning . Bucharest was the last Soviet tanker to be intercepted by the United States in the Cold War .
 McNamara explained that the ship was carrying petroleum products and was bound for Havana . McNamara said the ship responded that it was carrying the petroleum products . The ship was headed for Havana, Cuba, when it was queried .
 Based on the President’s instructions the tanker was permitted to pass without inspection . The United States destroyer maintained surveillance with the United States maintaining surveillance .
 A discussion followed focused on whether the Bucharest should be searched and if not, would this display weakness to the Soviets and International community .
 Volume Three, 237. 77 strategy to demonstrate that quarantine was successful while also creating more time for the President to analyze the situation before committing to other actions . The quarantine strategy was designed to show that quarantine is successful and give President more time to analyze situation .
 Robert Kennedy points out that things relating to the quarantine haven’t “come to a head” until they actually board one of the ships . Robert Kennedy: The quarantine will be a matter of weeks before they board the ship .
 Bobby sums up the discussion saying, “the point is that we may eventually have to intercept a ship.” Bobby says, ‘the point of the discussion is that . We may eventually intercept a . ship, Bobby says .
 The meeting concluded with the President’s frustrated statement ‘we don’t want to precipitate an incident’ – “We still have then another six of seven hours.”
 The debate continues between the airstrike option and adding POL to the list of restricted cargos . POL has been added to a restricted cargo list in the past .
 The Attorney General was an advocate for the blockade . He never eliminated follow-on airstrikes if the blockade alone did not gain the desired results .
 As the quarantine appeared to be working to stop the flow into Cuba, the attention of the Kennedys had now shifted to the problem of the missiles that were still in Cuba .
 Friday morning the United States finally had an option to inspect ships crossing into the quarantine zone . The U.S. finally had a chance to demonstrate a willingness to board and inspect ships . The United States has been under quarantine since March 21 .
 The Marucla, a Lebanese cargo ship, was Panamanian owned, and operating under a Soviet charter . It provided an answer to the dilemma of selecting the first ship to inspect .
 Robert Kennedy wrote, “He was demonstrating to Khrushchev that we were going to enforce the quarantine . Yet, because it was not a Soviet-owned vessel, it did not represent a direct affront to the Soviets, requiring a response from them.”
 The EXCOMM met again at their regular 10:00 A.M. time and began with a review of the intelligence gathered the previous day .
 CIA report: "Photography of four MRBM sites shows continued rapid construction activity at each site" CIA report prepared at 2:00 A.M. shows continued construction activity .
 President Kennedy’s judgment on the limitations of the quarantine was voiced, “Well, now the quarantine itself won’t remove the weapons.” President Kennedy said .
 Three primary parts of this standstill included the suspension of quarantine, no further construction on the bases, and no more arm shipments .
 Stevenson's proposal was met by incredulity by many of the EXCOMM members in a very tense exchange among the members . Stevenson explained the proposal as explained by Stevenson was met with disbelief .
 Bundy summed up the problem with the proposal stating, “the proposal which is before us from the U.N., it does involve a dropping of the quarantine, without what I would call adequate momentum,” Bundy said . Bundy: “The proposal ... is without ... adequate
 Following this morning meeting, the group broke up with many focusing on plans for an air strike against the Cuban missile sites .
 Director McCone and his top photo analyst Arthur Lundahl met briefly around noon with the President and Attorney General to detail the findings on the increased pace of construction .
 President asked McCone for his conclusion from the evidence . “It appears to me that there’s a very great deal of concern about this thing.” McCone said .
 The other way is, I would think, a combination of an air strike and probably invasion, which means that we would have to carry out both of those with the prospect that they might be fired, says Russian diplomat .
 The situation, however, were about to take a dramatic change once again . The situation was about to get worse .
 The contents of the letter were full of rhetoric, at times emotional, but still generally coherent . It was full of emotion, but generally coherent, the letter was written by the author .
 Khrushchev proposes to declare that ships bound for Cuba will not carry any kind of armaments . In the final section of the letter, he proposes, "We, for our part, will declare that our ships, bound for . Cuba, will not . carry any sort of arm
 Robert Kennedy was with the President when the translated letter from the State Department was received . Then the necessity for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba would disappear .
 The next day would once again bring more uncertainty . However, developments the next day brought more uncertainty.
 EXCOMM met at their normal 10:00 A.M. meeting with the customary intelligence update from McCone . October 27, 1962, was the first time they had been in the U.S.
 According to the CIA report, the mobilization of the Cuban military forces continued to increase . The Cuban soldiers were under orders not to take any independent hostile action without permission from the Soviet Union . The report says the mobilization continued, but the Cuban soldiers did not take independent hostile actions .
 Volume Three, 359. 86 missiles in Turkey wasn’t in the letter from the previous night . The letter was sent to the U.S. Embassy in Turkey .
 President joked that he had a small amount of information on the situation . The President said, "let's just sit tight on it. Let's sit tight"
 Bobby, who aside from attending the EXCOMM meetings, was working a private channel with the Soviet ambassador . Bobby voiced his opinion on the issue of the Turkish missiles . Bobby was a member of the Soviet delegation at the time .
 The first point is that this is a question of Cuba and the bases and must be resolved within the next few days . The first issue is that Cuba and Cuba must be dealt with within a few days, says CNN.com .
 "The negotiations and discussions must get on, and the work that is continuing despite our protests has been going on," she said . She said: "The work that's continuing is going on. It is the work of the negotiations that must be done."
 This action that has been taken is not an action just by the United States but it is an action by all of the Latin American countries plus the U.S. It is not just a U.N. action but a joint effort by all Latin American nations, the president says .
 This has nothing to do with the security of the countries of Europe, which do have their own problems, says the BBC's Simon Tisdall . "It's not a matter of security," he says of the situation .
 We would obviously consider negotiating the giving up of bases in Turkey if we can assure the Turks and the other European countries for whom these bases were emplaced, if there can be some assurances given to them for their own security .
 The U.S. will inspect Cuba and Cuba at the time bases are withdrawn from Cuba, says President Obama . This will entail inspection, as well as some inspection in Cuba and the United States .
 We agree to remove from Cuba those means which you regard as offensive means; we agree to carry this out and make a pledge in the United Nations . Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the U.S. will remove its similar means from Turkey . Robert Kennedy began to
 The conversation consequently shifted to drafting a response to Khrushchev with Bobby leading much of the effort and discussion . Bobby led the effort to draft a response .
 Even the other EXCOMM members begin to defer to Bobby in a way they had not previously . Bobby is the president of the United States' first state-run state of the union .
 Many of the themes and even wording suggested by the Attorney General are apparent in the final version of the letter .
 Bobby continued to push for them to frame their letter as a response to the original letter rather than the second one which referenced a trade of the Turkish missiles . Bobby pushed for the second letter to be framed as a reference to the first letter .
 He’s made an offer and you’re in fact accepting it, he says . He says: ‘He made a offer last night. He made it last night’ He says. ‘I’m going to accept it. You’ll
 "A sense of humor was greatly needed to cut through the tension and stress," says the author . "The Cabinet Room" was filled with humor and laughter .
 Bobby was the only EXCOMM member that seriously considered public opinion and the political ramifications of the administration’s decisions, in this case, the reaction to a public trade of missiles . "Bobby" is the only member of the committee who seriously considered the public opinion of the
 Robert Kennedy was well aware of the adverse effects associated with any such deal and worked to ensure the President attempted to avoid it . However, Robert Kennedy knew of the negative effects of such a deal .
 The group considered a tremendous number of scenarios along with the advantages and disadvantages of each . During the meetings, with and without the President, the group discussed a variety of scenarios .
 The President was provided with executable options along with many of the implications involved with each of the options . The president was given a list of options by the White House to consider .
 Robert Kennedy’s opinion on the strength of EXCOMM was “how well it had functioned, how close the members had become, how open and unpretentious their discussions had been,”138 and ultimately how successful they were .
 Bobby and Sorensen left the room to complete the draft response to Khrushchev . The draft response was the Kennedy's response to the Soviet Union .
 The letter was transmitted to the Soviet Union at 8:00 P.M. coinciding with the time that Robert Kennedy was meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, at the President’s request, to provide a copy of the letter .
 This meeting and the numerous others between the two key figures would prove to be the most important events to resolving the crisis peacefully . This meeting would be one of the key moments to resolve the crisis in Syria .
 Robert Kennedy’s role in shaping the dialogue and narrative in the EXCOMM meetings brilliantly worked in concert with his efforts communicating with the Soviet Union through a secret back-channel with Ambassador Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy's role was to shape the narrative of the meetings in conjunction with
 Robert Kennedy was an integral part of the EXCOMM and the role the group played in advising the President . Anatoly Dobrynin was an ambassador to the United States .
 Many of his fellow advisors knew of his meetings with the Soviet Ambassador . Few if any understood the importance of what they were discussing and the important role this communication channel would have on the peaceful resolution .
 Robert Kennedy-Anatoly Dobrynin channel was crucial during the crisis . Secrecy was crucial in the negotiations that occurred through the channel .
 At stake is the NATO alliance, international prestige, and domestic political reputation . At stake was the NATO NATO alliance and international prestige .
 The direct communication provided by these two men delivered one of the greatest contributions to the crisis resolution, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 For decades, both sides vehemently denied the existence of any such agreement, and information contradicting that stance was protected or eliminated .
 Robert Kennedy is shown to have often centered on a diplomatic solution involving a quid pro quo agreement on missile removal . However, as more information has emerged, the negotiations conducted by Robert Kennedy are shown to be centered on diplomatic solutions . Robert Kennedy's negotiations often centered around a diplomatic agreement involving
 The skillful maneuvering and negotiation conducted by the Attorney General allowed both nations to reach an acceptable solution to the escalating crisis .
 Without Bobby’s developed relationships and communication channels with the Soviets, this private agreement would have been impossible . Bobby's relationship with the Soviet Union was crucial to the success of the deal .
 President Kennedy's predecessor, President Dwight Eisenhower, publicly pledged to extend the nuclear deterrent to NATO allies including the installation of missiles in Turkey . President Eisenhower's predecessor Dwight Eisenhower publicly pledged the installation .
 Eisenhower wanted to create an American-controlled stockpile of nuclear weapons in Europe while simultaneously removing the incentive for other countries to feel a need to develop their own nuclear capability . Eisenhower made an offer to all NATO allies .
 For those agreeing to provide launch sites on their territory, the U.S. would provide the necessary information for the allies to build a nuclear submarine propulsion system . The United States would base Thor and Jupiter missiles with the additional promise that the United States .
 Only the Italians and Turks agreed to accept the missiles . Other allies feared being targeted by the Soviets because of the presence of the weapons and declined .
 The utility of the missiles was questioned even at the time of installation . They were questioned even before they were installed in the country .
 The Kennedy Administration’s back-channel communications through Robert Kennedy originated in spring 1961 . Robert Kennedy was President of the United States in 1961 .
 Holeman formed a friendship with Soviet agent Georgi Bolshakov after meeting at a luncheon hosted by the Soviet embassy in the early 1950s . Holeman had formed a close friendship with the Soviet agent after meeting him at the embassy in 1950s.
 In this role, he was expected to create and foster intelligence sources and report the information back to Moscow . He was tasked with creating and fostering intelligence sources in Russia .
 When Kennedy was elected, Holeman, through his friendship with Robert Kennedy’s press secretary Edwin Guthman, felt that Kennedy might be receptive to a meeting with Bolshakov .
 Bolshakov decided to meet with Kennedy on May 9th regardless of his instructions to the contrary . However, the temptation of meeting with the president’s closest confidant proved too appealing for the president .
 At 8:30 P.M. that night, Holeman escorted Bolshakov to a rendezvous with Kennedy outside the Justice Department gate . Holeman says he was in the middle of the night to meet Kennedy .
 President Obama and Hillary Clinton walked through the National Mall for their first of many meetings . Soon after, they began to walk through the national Mall for the first time .
 The relationship between the two men was viewed suspiciously by most of the intelligence community from both countries . The relationship was seen suspiciously as a result of the relationship between them .
 To the Kennedys, it seemed to be the perfect channel through which to communicate more directly with the Soviet leadership . Nevertheless, to the Kennedy family, it was a perfect channel to communicate with the Soviets .
 Diplomats hope to avoid leaks and misinterpretations often found in the traditional diplomatic methods . The hope is to avoid the common leaks, misinterpretations found in traditional diplomatic channels .
 There was also a lingering mistrust of many of the conventional diplomatic arrangements following the disaster of the Bay of Pigs .
 The was necessary because, according to Kennedy, the Soviet leadership began to feel that the Soviet ambassador at the time, Mikhail Menshikov, was “not delivering the true messages reflecting the true point of view,”11 which in the end gave Khrushchev an 8
 Anatoly Dobrynin arrived on March 15, 1962, to take over the ambassadorship from Menshikov . He was instructed by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko to gradually take over Bolshakov’s connections .
 Dobrynin later wrote he felt part of the desire for this change was Gromyko’s dislike of any communication channels that did not run through him . Dobrynins wrote he later wrote that he felt he felt the desire was part of this desire for change .
 Khrushchev was able to exploit the relationship to sneak missiles into Cuba . This communication and sense of understanding between himself and President Kennedy gave him the ability to sneak the missiles .
 This duplicity also contributed to the Kennedy brothers’ emotional outrage at the secret movement of weapons by the Soviet Union . The Kennedy brothers were outraged by the secret movements of weapons .
 Khrushchev manipulated this back-channel by using Bolshakov to pass a message to the president through Robert Kennedy stressing a Soviet desire to work towards the Kennedy desired nuclear test ban . To avoid any suspicion by the U.S. by using the back-changer, Khrush
 This was an attempt to distract the administration from the missile transport. This was a distraction from the launch of a missile, it is claimed .
 Khrushchev hoped this superficial gesture of goodwill would reassure the Kennedys into a sense of complacency . The Soviet Union hoped this gesture would reassure them into a state of confidence .
 There is no evidence showing that Bolshakov was informed about the nature of the weapons in Cuba . He likely was unaware until informed by his U.S. contacts .
 During the President’s meeting with his advisors on October 22nd, a discussion occurred on the Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 The taperecorded conversation reveals President Kennedy’s desire to remove the 14 Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of a Gamble, 197. The conversation was recorded by President Kennedy in 1963 . The tape recorded conversation reveals the president's desire for the removal of the Furs
 In Thirteen Days, Bobby describes a meeting he attended with his brother, Ted Sorensen, and Kenny O’Donnell in the oval office . Bobby describes the meeting with Ted and Kenny in the Oval Office in 1962 .
 President Kennedy related the current escalating situation in Cuba to a book written by Barbara Tuchman, The Guns of August, which described the miscalculations made by the European powers that led to total world war . President Kennedy said the situation was similar to that of the 1930s and
 The President went on to query his brother for information coming through the Bolshakov backchannel . The President said the information was coming from his brother's back channel .
 Robert informs him about his request for Charlie Bartlett to meet with Bolshakov . Robert tells him about the request for the meeting . Robert also tells him that he has been contacted by the Russian government to discuss the situation .
 Robert Kennedy had asked Frank Holeman and Frank Barlett to meet with Bolshakov earlier that day . In fact, Robert Kennedy asked both Holeman, Barlett and Holeman to meet Bolshakakov .
 President Kennedy seems to sidestep acknowledging his use of Holeman and shifts the discussion to Bartlett . However, after President Kennedy remarks that Holeman is “not with us in this,”21 his brother seems to ignore acknowledging that .
 Holeman, at the request of the attorney general’s office, called Bolshakov to arrange a meeting to feel out the Kremlin on possible diplomatic options to resolving the conflict . Holeman: "We are looking at the possibility of a diplomatic solution"
 Bartlett met twice that afternoon with Bolshakov also at Bobby’s request . Later, based on an interview with Bartlett, he met twice with the Russian leader . Bartlett says he met Bolshkov twice that day .
 Kennedy said, “I sent Charlie Bartlett, who was friendly with him , to see him,”23 and the two met in Bartlett’s National Press Club office . Kennedy and Bartlett were friendly with each other, Kennedy said .
 Bartlett expressed to Bolshakov that the administration did not desire to invade Cuba and was only concerned with eliminating the offensive missiles . Bartlett said he did not want to invade the country and only wanted to eliminate the offensive missile .
 Kennedy responded by asking Bartlett to meet a 19 Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 49, 49 . The result of this meeting seems to be insignificant, Kennedy responded .
 Bolshakov provided Bartlett with photos of missile sites taken from U-2 reconnaissance missions to shock him into a more useful response . This time he provided photographs of the missile sites .
 Kennedy was unsatisfied with the lack of response elicited from the Bolshakov channel, Kennedy decided to try another approach . Kennedy was still dissatisfied with the response of the channel's response .
 Kennedy said Dobrynin, Gromyko, and TASS had misled the president . According to Kennedy's account, he related to the fact that the statements stating there were no offensive weapons in Cuba had misled him .
 Dobrynin: Sometimes when an ambassador is abroad, he is not told everything . He says the ambassador is not always told what he is told when he is abroad .
 This omission seems inconsistent, especially based on the three meetings earlier in the day with Bolshakov that discussed the possibility of a trade . The omission seems consistent, especially after the meetings earlier this morning . The Russian president is expected to make a move to the United States .
 The GRU station that received the reports from Bolshakov chose not to transmit the information to Moscow immediately . Strangely, the information was not immediately relayed to Moscow .
 This failure to act broke from the standard protocol up to that point of passing all information on meetings with Robert Kennedy to Moscow . The failure to report the meetings to Moscow broke from standard protocol .
 This change likely stemmed from Bolshakov’s declining position in the eyes of Moscow, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . This change was likely due to Bolshavsky's declining position as a diplomat .
 Dobrynin said Robert Kennedy did not discuss bases until the 27th when he discussed missiles with Robert Kennedy referenced later . Robert Kennedy would not discuss the bases, he said, until the 26th .
 Khrushchev did not have thoughts of an exchange for Turkish missiles, ambassador says . Aleksandr Alekseev, the Soviet ambassador to Cuba during the crisis, gave his opinion . The Soviet leader did not want to exchange missiles with Turkey .
 Lippmann argues that the link many in the press were making between Cuba and Berlin was misleading . He argues that it was misleading to make the link between Berlin and Cuba .
 The American base in Berlin did not contain missiles or offensive capabilities . These were very different cases .
 He went on to say that “he two bases could be dismantled” 33 Allyn, Blight, and Welch, Back to the Brink, 80. “He two bases [could] be dismantled," he said .
 The majority of the discussion centered around an agreement that the U.S. would not invade Cuba and that the Soviet Union would withdraw missiles placed there .
 The next day Khrushchev released the infamous public letter referencing a trade of missiles in Turkey . Dobrynin relayed the information on this meeting to Moscow .
 Late on the night of the 27th Dobrynin says he was invited by Bobby to meet at the Justice Department . October 27, 1962 .
 According to Thirteen Days, Bobby telephoned Dobrynin about 7:15 requesting to meet and did so . 39 Allyn, Blight, and Welch, Back to the Brink, 143, were killed .
 The Attorney General expressed his feeling that the crisis was rapidly worsening, especially with the recent news of the shoot down of the United States U-2 reconnaissance aircraft .
 This action created increasing pressure on the president to strike Cuba . President Obama has been criticized for not striking Cuba .
 Bobby explained that the president believed that Khrushchev’s first letter, lacking any mention of a missile trade, provided a reasonable basis upon which the crisis was resolved . Bobby said he believed that the first letter provided the basis for the resolution .
 The most important thing to the U.S. was that all construction was stopped on the missile sites . The United States was pleased with the decision to stop construction of missile sites in North Korea .
 In response, the United States would end the quarantine and guarantee they would not invade Cuba . In response to the quarantine, the U.S. would end it and guarantee it would not invasion Cuba .
 Dobrynin says he questioned the lack of inclusion of the Turkish missile agreement . He says he also questioned the inclusion of a missile agreement with the Turkish government .
 In his description, he again uses ‘quid pro quo’45 underlined for emphasis to explain his response to Dobrynin’s query .
 According to the Soviet Ambassador’s account of the meeting, Kennedy replied that the president was willing to remove the missiles but because of the delicate nature of the NATO alliance could not agree to a public deal . Kennedy replied to the Soviets' account that he would remove missiles but could not
 Dobrynin describes a much more specific agreement between the two regarding the Turkish missiles . Conversely, Dobrynins says the agreement is not about the missiles .
 Ambassador Kennedy said it will probably take four to five months for the U.S. to withdraw its missiles from Turkey . Kennedy: "I believe, that the United States will withdraw its missile launchers from Turkey" The ambassador said it would take four or five months to withdraw missiles .
 "The discussion of the whole Turkish aspect of the problem can be continued through you and myself. The discussion of this can be discussed with you and yourself," he says . The discussion will continue through the next few days .
 Ted Sorensen made a previously unknown revelation during a discussion between many of the key figures of the crisis . Ted Soresen made the revelation in an interview with many key figures .
 The recorded descriptions of the tone and behavior of Kennedy during this crucial meeting vary . Kennedy's behavior in the meeting was described as 'tone and behavior'
 Khrushchev Remembers he describes the Attorney General as “look exhausted” In Chairman Khrushchevich's first memoir he describes him as ‘exhaustive’ He describes the attorney general as looking exhausted .
 'He tried to return to the topic of ‘deception,' but he did so in passing and without any edge to it . True, about twice he tried to . return to . the topic, he said, 'but he did not try to . repeat the . topic of
 Many of the books and analyses of the crisis assume that this meeting resulted in Robert issuing Dobrynin an ultimatum . Many of these books and . analyses of this meeting assume that Robert issued Dobrynanan an ultimeatum . Robert issued a letter to the White House,
 Dobrynin's account of the meeting says Robert Kennedy said his brother hoped that the head of the Soviet government would not misunderstand him and think the U.S. was issuing an ultimatum . However, Robert Kennedy's brother said he hoped that his brother did not misunderstand his brother
 Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 526. The Cold War is published by Stein and Stein . Kennedy's request for a reply from Kennedy is just 52 .
 Different accounts dispute the timing of this message . October 28, 1962, was October 28 .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle and remove missiles from Cuba, essentially agreeing to all aspects of the U.S. proposal . Kennedy's account says he met Dobrynin at 11:00 A.M. on Sunday to learn of the agreement .
 Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, 526. Lebow & Stein, is published by Lebauk and Stein . It was written by Robert Kennedy, who was in touch with Kennedy at once .
 In a memorandum written by the Attorney General to Rusk, he described his meeting with Dobrynin on October 29, 1962 .
 Kennedy stated that he received a phone call at 11:00 A.M. from Dobrynin requesting to meet which . according to the Attorney General's desk diaries, . they did at 7:45 P.m. in the Attorney . Attorney General’s office .
 The description in the memorandum of the meeting that night is brief and only mentions that Dobrynin gave him an unsigned letter from Khrushchev to the President . The description only mentions the letter from the President of Soviet Union .
 This letter, Kennedy felt, ""did not properly set forth my conversation of the previous Saturday night with Ambassador Dobrynin," he said . Kennedy felt that the letter did not set forth his conversation with Dobrynins .
 The message acknowledged the Turkish missiles although it also agreed to avoid public discussion of the matter . It agreed to discuss the subject through the confidential back-channel between the Attorney General and Soviet ambassador .
 The exact contents of the letter have never been revealed and do not seem to exist in the records of the U.S. or the Soviet Union . It is believed to have been written by the Soviets .
 Following this meeting, Kennedy met with Secretary Rusk and Ambassador Thompson to discuss the contents of the message . Kennedy then met with the secretary of state and the ambassador of state .
 Robert Kennedy's handwritten notes written immediately after meeting with the ambassador provide the best insight into the substance of the letter from the United States' perspective . Kennedy's notes were written after he met with the U.S. ambassador to Cuba .
 These notes and his memorandum to Rusk show this was likely a Soviet attempt to gain a written record of the agreed upon deal regarding the Jupiter missiles .
 Dobrynin provided additional information about the contents of the confidential memorandum during the Moscow Conference in 1989 .
 In discussing the topics laid out in the letter, he says that not only were the Jupiter missiles included but also that, “e raised the question of Guantanamo…this question did not meet with understanding from the American side.”
 Kennedy’s memorandum to Rusk and his desk diary set the time for the October 30th meeting as 2:15 P.M. in his Department of Justice office . The meeting took place in the Justice Department's Justice office in his office in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy says he communicated his impression that the Khrushchev letter was misleading . Kennedy says it would require a response from President Kennedy clarifying the terms of agreement . Kennedy: "I communicated my impression that [Khrrushchev] letter [was misleading]
 If missiles were not removed from Cuba, “drastic action was going to be necessary by the United States.” In a memorandum, he describes his emphasis to Dobrynin that if the missiles weren't removed, the U.S. would have to act .
 The dealings with Dobrynin and especially the Turkish missile trade show Robert Kennedy acting with the President’s blessing but also making independent decisions . Robert Kennedy made independent decisions with an understanding of what his brother ultimately wanted, says Kennedy .
 The exact manner in which he conducted parts of these negotiations and the channels he used were likely not approved or endorsed, but because of the intense trust between the two Kennedys he was provided the latitude to negotiate as he saw fit .
 By rejecting any written agreement on the Turkish missiles, Robert Kennedy was controlling the narrative for his brother . Robert Kennedy would control the narrative on the missile issue, he said .
 Bobby protected his brother from political attacks or negative impacts on NATO alliance . By keeping the deal a secret Bobby protected him from political attack or negative impact on NATO .
 At the end of Bobby’s notes from the meeting with Dobrynin, there are two lines that illustrate the manner in which Kennedy protected his brother while understanding what was needed on his part .
 Pres rejected Turkish base deal—Pres accept later Know what Pres means72 71 71 Dobrynin, In Confidence, 90. Pres reject base deal, accept later .
 Unofficially the President was willing to accept a trade that would be executed sometime in the future . However, unofficially, the President said he would accept a deal that was executed .
 Robert understood what his brother wanted, and he knew how to execute those wishes . Robert understood his brother's wishes, and then executed his own .
 He held the confidence to understand he was acting with his brother’s tacit sanction . Furthermore, he held the . confidence to know he was . acting with . his brother's tacit sanction, he said .
 Dobrynin captured the significance of his back-channel communication with Kennedy during the Moscow Conference . He said, “ith regard to the question connected to Robert Kennedy.” Robert Kennedy .
 I should say that in my view the existence of the confidential channel did play a positive role in the course of the crisis, I said . I should be able to say that .
 After all, who if not the brother of the president would know what the president was thinking? After all the president's brother would know .
 Information and agreements from Robert Kennedy were perceived to be sanctioned by the President, and the Soviet leadership treated them as such as such .
 McNamara sent the President a handwritten note that said, “The last Jupiter missiles in Turkey came down yesterday.” McNamara .
 If the agreement had not been known at the time, the ramifications would have been extremely consequential to both the Kennedy administration and the United States . The agreement would have led to significant problems for Kennedy administration .
 74 Handwritten note from Robert McNamara to President Kennedy would have been cancelled . McNamara would have cancelled 74 handwritten note from McNamara .
 The end of the crisis was viewed by most observers as a victory for the Kennedy administration . As it happened, most observers said it was one of the greatest accomplishments of Kennedy's presidency .
 By allowing the crisis to resolve without a public declaration acknowledging the missile trade from President Kennedy, Khrushchev was seen as the loser in the conflict . By allowing to resolve the crisis without public recognition of the missile deal from Kennedy, he was considered a loser .
 The U.S. succeeded in reestablishing the status quo in Cuba while removing missiles from Turkey that were already outdated . The missiles were already slated for replacement by the more capable Polaris submarine missiles . The United States succeeded in .
 McNamara spoke to the House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations on February 7, 1963 . McNamara addressed questions regarding a missile trade with the Soviet Union .
 One of the speculations applies to the alleged withdrawal of our missile bases from Turkey . The speculations are that the withdrawal of the missile bases is part of a plan to withdraw them .
 Since that time I believe it has been the intent or the declared intent of the U.S. to withdraw our missiles from Turkey, he says .
 Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, 88th Cong. 1st sess., 1st . sess. 1963, 57. Hearings . Hearings are before a subcommittee of the . Committee on . Appropriations, the . 88th . Cong. House of Representatives
 There was no deal, as it might be called, between the Soviet Union and the U.S. regarding the removal of the JUPITER weapons from either Italy or Turkey .
 The question was raised by Mr Khrushchev during the negotiations relating to the withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba .
 There was no agreement to withdraw weapons from any allied nation in association with a response to the agreement of the Soviets to withdraw offensive weapons in Cuba . The President refused to discuss it at that time, and no discussion took place .
 The use of Robert Kennedy, the most trusted person in the mind of President Kennedy, and the strict avoidance of documenting the agreement between the two nations allowed McNamara to continue the traditional narrative that no deal was in place .
 This consistent messaging was reinforced by all members of Kennedy’s staff, both those that were aware of the deal and those that weren’t . ‘This consistent messaging’ was reinforced,’ said a spokesman for the president .
 Some went so far as to remove references to the deal from Robert Kennedy’s manuscript . Some, as demonstrated by the previously mentioned Sorensen confession, removed references from the manuscript .
 These impediments would take until late November to overcome and require many sleepless and stressful nights for those working to bring about a peaceful end to the crisis . Those working to end the crisis would be difficult to overcome .
 Bobby Kennedy's memoir and a large-budget Hollywood movie were titled Thirteen Days . Even Bobby Kennedy’s memoir and movie titles were titled ‘Thirteen Days’
 It would take over three weeks after the crisis to truly resolve, it would take three weeks to do so . The crisis would have lasted 13 days .
 Until the 28th of October, the negotiations had largely been only between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The negotiations were largely between the two countries .
 Fidel Castro and his anger over Khrushchev’s handling of the negotiations with the U.S. The following three weeks were largely driven by Fidel Castro . Castro was angered by the handling of his country's negotiations .
 A tentative agreement was brokered through the Robert Kennedy-Anatoly Dobrynin channel . The crisis was far from over, but the crisis was not over .
 The focus for the U.S. and EXCOMM now shifted to the verification process for the removal of missiles and IL-28 bombers from Cuba . The focus now is to remove the missiles and bombers .
 These remaining hurdles created three tense weeks during which the final outcome remained uncertain . The final outcome of the election remained uncertain for three weeks .
 Castro, as the leader of Cuba, was not consulted or informed about Khrushchev’s decision to remove the missiles from Cuba . Castro was not informed about the decision, and was never consulted .
 Castro learned the news on the 28th of October from a phone call from the editor of the Cuban newspaper Revolución . In fact, Castro learned of the news from Carlos Franqui .
 Without a U.S. presence on the ground to observe the dismantling of the offensive weapons, another method was necessary . Without a United States presence, the dismantling was needed .
 The best alternative appeared to be continued U-2 reconnaissance flights . The U.2 is a U.S. Air Force One .
 A sophisticated SA-2 system now blanketed the whole of Cuba and created a threat to any attempts to fly over the island . The system was created by the Cuban government to protect Cuban citizens from flying over the country .
 Rudolf Anderson’s U-2 was shot down on a surveillance mission on October 27th . This capability and risk was demonstrated by the U.S. Air Force . Rudolf was the first U.N. aircraft to be shot down by the Soviet Union in Soviet-
 As U Thant began negotiations with Castro in Cuba, EXCOMM continued to meet, but due to a largely stagnant situation, little was accomplished .
 Alekseev agreed to agree to personally observe and verify the dismantlement of missile sites . U Thant’s request to inspect the sites was granted by Aleksei Aleksoev .
 The Soviet leadership was well aware of the international spotlight on the tense situation in Cuba . They were now making every effort to bolster their image . The Soviet leaders were well aware that the situation was tense .
 Thant publicly characterized his negotiations with Castro as ""fruitful" However, the reality was much different . Thant's negotiations with the Castro were not fruitful .
 Thant met later that night with an American delegation including Stevenson, McCloy, and Charles Yost . Thant later met with the American delegation .
 Two methods of aerial surveillance were available, high-level U-2 flights or low-level Air Force RF-101 and Navy F-8U flights . The U.S. Air Force also used to track the aircraft .
 The risks were higher for the low-level operations, but the greater fidelity and detail captured were substantial . The risk was higher for low level operations but the higher fidelity was greater than for the missions .
 The decision was made by McNamara during the evening EXCOMM meeting on the 29th . Further complicating the decision was the news from McNamara . McNamara said the decision will be made in the near future .
 One of the RF-101s sent to capture photographs of the IL-28 airfield, “appears to have been fired on.” McNamara said .
 The pilot reported about 20 bursts of antiaircraft fire on the side and behind the aircraft . The pilot said he was hit by fire from the side of the plane and behind .
 The President authorized the resumption of reconnaissance flights after Thant’s return .
 President Kennedy approved low-level sorties conducted by six aircraft to photograph the IL-28 airfield and several of the MRBM sites . Six aircraft were involved in the sorties, which were photographed by six planes .
 If a U.S. plane is shot down, no military reprisal will be taken today . The President directed that if one of our planes was hit, we would not announce this fact .
 We would not announce our intention to make low-level flights, but 14 Coleman, The Fourteenth Day, 51, would not have announced it . Coleman: "We're not going to announce that we're going to fly, but we want to fly"
 In sharp contrast to Castro's rhetoric, the Soviet officials in Cuba were extremely forthcoming, the U.N. group observed . Khrushchev's promise to dismantle and remove the missiles was met with great success .
 Alekseev and the military commander of Soviet missile forces in Cuba, Major General Igor Statsenko, both stated that efforts to dismantle the bases commenced within a few hours of receiving the order on October 28th . Aleksiev and Statsenko said that efforts were made within hours of
 The Soviets set the expectation that by November 2nd they would remove the missiles and major equipment and have the sites bulldozed . The Soviets had hoped to remove missiles and equipment and bulldoze the sites .
 Thant also related his impression, although never explicitly addressed, that the Soviets intended to remove their IL-28 bombers as well . Thant said he thought the Soviets wanted to remove the bombers as also .
 On November 1st, Gromyko sent a telegram to the Soviet Ambassador in Havana with a more detailed timeline for the missile removal . On November 4th, the Soviets removed the missile from Cuba .
 The date for the removal of the dismantled special materials from Cuba has been set for 7 or 8 November, but not later than 10 November . The removal of special materials is expected to take place in the next two weeks .
 For removal of these materials it is now possible and advisable to use our usual ships located in Cuban ports or arriving there in the coming days . There is no need to hide such materials in the ship holds .
 Surveillance flights on November 1st analyzed by the NPIC showed the Soviets were in fact dismantling and bulldozing missile sites . The NPIC says evidence from surveillance flights on Nov. 1st showed that the Soviet Union was dismantling the sites .
 The assembly of IL28 bombers appeared to continue and accelerate at the airfields . Less reassuring was evidence that the assembly continued and accelerated at the airports .
 At the November 3rd EXCOMM meeting, John McCone presented an analysis showing continued progress with the assembly of IL-28s at San Julian airfield .
 By November 2nd, there were two fully operational bombers, five nearly complete, and two fuselages ready for assembly . By November 3rd, there had been two operational bombers .
 Intelligence received indicated the Soviets were fulfilling their side of the agreement . Aside from the IL-28 bombers, the intelligence received indicated that the Soviet Union was fulfilling its side of agreement .
 As of October 22nd, 24 missile sites were complete, with 16 still under construction and a total of 42 missiles present .
 Kuznetsov said they were willing to offer the U.S. photographs of the decommissioned sites and provide a detailed schedule of the transportation of equipment and missiles .
 He welcomed the United States to “bring our own vessels along side the Soviet ships which were taking the missiles out in such a way as to enable us to see and count the missiles’s missiles. Additionally, he welcomed the U.S. to bring its own ships along
 Kuznetsov previewed the information that would be contained in a forthcoming letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy . The letter will be sent to Kennedy in the spring of 1962 .
 The Soviet leader objected to the inclusion of the IL-28s on the list of equipment to be removed from Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy that the approach of the U.S. side to this matter has seriously worried him . In his letter to Kennedy, he writes, “I have studied the list and, I must confess, I have studied it and ... worried me"
 President Kennedy would have sacrificed the resolution of the crisis over the bombers . The IL-28 issue had recently emerged as the hot-button item, it was unlikely .
 President viewed the outdated bombers as offensive weapons, but was likely willing to take this argument only so far and never at the expense of achieving a peaceful resolution to the crisis .
 The Crisis Ends On Robert Kennedy’s 37th birthday he rightfully again played a central role in the finale of the crisis . Robert Kennedy's birthday was the 37th anniversary of his birth .
 The Attorney General had a scheduled meeting with Dobrynin at 11:00 A.M. on November 20th . The Kennedys hoped to receive an agreement from Khrushchev regarding the IL-28s .
 Dobrynin smiled and said to Bobby, “I have a birthday present for you,”31, as he handed him a letter .
 Khrushchev's concession to remove IL-28s was the final major obstacle to ending the crisis . The letter contained his signature rambling and disorganized style . It contained his concession to removing IL-27s .
 John F Kennedy spoke to the nation on November 20th at 6:00 p.m. ET . Kennedy addressed the nation for thirty minutes . Kennedy spoke for 30 minutes .
 The United States agreed to remove the naval quarantine and provide assurances against an invasion of Cuba . In return, the U.S. agreed to free Cuba from a naval quarantine . The Cuban government agreed to lift the quarantine and give assurances against invasion .
 In short, the record of recent weeks shows real progress, says minister . "We are hopeful that further progress can be made," he says .
 The achievement of a peaceful solution to the Cuban crisis might well open the door to the solution of other outstanding problems . The completion of the commitment on both sides and the achievement of the solution could help solve other outstanding issues .
 These qualities may be tested many more times in this decade, but we have increased reason to be confident that those qualities will continue to serve the cause of freedom with distinction .
 This crisis remains the closest the world has come to total nuclear conflict . This crisis is the closest to total war in history .
 The United States and the Soviet Union nearly allowed missiles in Cuba to ignite a rapidly escalating war between the two superpowers . The U.S. and Soviet Union almost allowed missiles to be placed in Cuba .
 President Kennedy faced one of the most difficult decisions that any president in history had to make . Kennedy faced a difficult decision in the face of the nation's most powerful president . Kennedy's decision to take action in the wake of 9/11 was a major mistake .
 Without his brother playing such a valuable role during the crisis, the President would have likely followed his initial instinct for airstrikes . President would likely have followed his original instinct, reinforced by many of his advisors pressing for military action .
 Robert Kennedy oversaw the Executive Committee, stopped the air-strike madness in its tracks, wrote the reply to the Khrushchev letter, conducted the secret negotiations with Dobrynin . Without him he would have found it far more difficult to overcome the demand for military action .
 The Bay of Pigs would have been disastrous if Bobby Kennedy hadn’t been able to rely heavily on his brother for foreign policy issues . Bobby Kennedy would have had to rely more heavily on the President to work on foreign policy .
 Many decades have passed since the last Soviet missile left Cuban soil, yet the impact of the crisis endures . The Cuban missile crisis ended in the 1970s, but the impact still remains .
 The public expression of restraint regarding nuclear weapons set a precedent that continued throughout the Cold War and beyond . The public statement of restraint on nuclear weapons sets a precedent for restraint .
 Afterward, both countries understood how close they truly were to nuclear war . Both countries understood that they were close to war after the incident .
 Not merely peace for Americans but peace for all men and women, says President Obama . "Peace for all time" is peace for America, says Obama . Peace for all Americans is peace, not merely peace in our time but peace in all time .
 Total war makes no sense in an age when great powers can maintain large and relatively invulnerable nuclear forces and refuse to surrender without resort to those forces . Total war is no longer possible in an era when it is possible to use nuclear weapons, experts say .
 A single nuclear weapon contains almost ten times the explosive force delivered by all the allied air forces in the Second World War . It makes no sense in an age when a single nuke weapon contains ten times more explosive force than those delivered by allied forces in WWII .
 The deadly poisons produced by a nuclear exchange would be carried by wind and water and soil and seed to the far corners of the globe and to generations yet unborn . It makes no sense in an age when the deadly poisons are carried by winds and water .
 The Cold War was evolving and shifting away from the specter of inevitable nuclear confrontations over Berlin or Cuba . The focus shifted to confronting and containing the spread of rival ideologies .
 This change did not result in peace, but it did significantly reduce the chance of thermonuclear Armageddon . This change was significantly less likely to lead to a nuclear war .
 The thaw had occurred in the Cold War due to the efforts of Kennedy and Khrushchev were brought to a halt when an assassin's bullet struck President Kennedy in Dallas, Texas in 1963 .
 Ambassador Dobrynin: If President Kennedy had lived, relations between the two countries would have continued to improve . President Kennedy would have lived, ambassador says . Ambassador: "If he lived, the relations would continue to improve"
 The assassination came as a shock to Khrushchev and the next day he was reported to have been weeping over Kennedy’s death . The next day, he was reportedly to be weeping over the death .
 William Walton, a journalist and artist who was a close friend of President Kennedy, was sent to the Soviet Union by Robert Kennedy under the guise of visiting with Soviet artists for a future artistic community there .
 According to Walton, Bobby intended to remain Attorney General until the end of 1964, run for governor of Massachusetts to build political capital, and finally to run for president . Walton: "Bobby intended to stay Attorney General . until 1964, then run for Governor of Massachusetts, and then run
 McGeorge Bundy, at the direction of President Johnson, met with Dobrynin over lunch to discuss the new administration .
 He became vulnerable following the Cuban crisis, seen by his rivals as an example of “harebrained scheming” and they began plotting his removal soon afterward .
 Khrushchev was easily removed from power and forced to retire far from the centers of power in Moscow . With Kennedy gone and a changing relationship with the U.S., he was able to take advantage of a weakened Russia .
 Taubman, Khrushchev, 620. The world was a different place after the two leaders who had worked so hard to bring their countries to a peaceful understanding were 14 Taubmen, 620 .
 The conflict in Vietnam escalated, and tensions once again grew between the United States and the Soviet Union . U.S. and Soviet Union were involved in the Vietnam War .
 Many believed the last hope for continuing the progress of the Kennedy administration lay with Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 After a decisive primary win in California on June 5, Bobby took the stage in front of supporters at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles .
 As he departed from his speech through the hotel kitchen, a man stepped out and fired multiple shots from a .22 caliber revolver . The suspect was shot multiple times in the head .
 Robert Kennedy was pronounced dead at 1:44 A.M. on June 6th, 1968 . The wounds were mortal and the wounds were fatal .
 Bobby devoted his personal life to his family and much of his professional life to supporting his brother, later attempting to see his brother’s legacy fulfilled . Bobby devoted himself to his brother and later devoted his life to helping his brother .
 How the world would look today if either or both brothers had survived is impossible to know . How would it look today?
 The idea that JFK, with RFK at his side, would have avoided the quagmire in Vietnam-however appealing--must remain speculative . JFK, RFK and RFK were both assassinated in Vietnam .
 The fact that nuclear weapons have not been used since is a testament to the far-reaching impact of this accomplishment . Nuclear weapons have never been used in nuclear warfare .
 Without Robert Kennedy in EXCOMM and working a communication channel with Dobrynin, the outcome of the crisis would likely have been quite different . Robert Kennedy was in a key role in the crisis in Afghanistan .
 "I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep," he says . But he says he has "miles to keep"
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Kennedy Presidential Museum . JFK Library . Kennedy Library . JFK Presidential Library .