 From his perspective, the Kennedy White House adroitness kept the world from being incinerated . The Kennedy administration's "adroitness" helped keep the world alive in the Kennedy era .
 Frankel reveals that the missiles in Turkey were considered nearly obsolete in 1962 . Frankel: The missiles were considered obsolete in Turkey .
 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev proved to be an adventurous leader trying to rush his people out of a Stalinist hell toward a brighter future . Once he acquired dictatorial power in the mid-1950s, he became a popular leader .
 The idea of sending missiles to Cuba just popped into his head one day in April 1962, while he strolled on the banks of the Black Sea with his minister of defense, Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, a comrade since the great World War II battle of Stalingrad . As
 The marshal was growling again about the American Jupiter missiles aimed at Soviet bases from neighboring Turkey, just across the water . The bulldog-faced marshal said the missiles were aimed at the Soviet bases .
 Americans should finally share the anxiety of living in the thermonuclear shadows that hung over all Europeans . After sitting so long, so smugly behind their ocean moats, Americans should share the anxieties of living with the shadows .
 For this portrait of Khrushchev as risk-taking global conspirator to work, Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution must become incidental to the showdown . For the portrait, it must work, for it to work .
 Cuba becomes an outpost of Soviet expansionism rather than a country with legitimate fears over another Bay of Pigs . Cuba is now an outpost, rather than an outpost for the Soviet Union .
 The best records deal with ""Operation Mongoose,"" a plan hatched by Brigadier General Edward Lansdale . Lansdale was a Kennedy favorite for a time .
 His plan envisioned widespread sabotage and the infiltration of agents and guerrilla fighters to inspire a rebellion that could become the pretext for U.S. military intervention by October 1962 . His plan was outlined in a letter to the Washington Post .
 CIA and Pentagon dragged their feet on the plan to arm Castro with Soviet arms . The plan only stiffened Castro's defenses and buttressed his requests for more Soviet arms. But the plan only produced a few pinpricks .
 In his biography of Fidel Castro titled Fidel, Szulc states that ""things could have not been worse"" for Castro in the spring of 1962 . In the Spring of 1962, Castro was in the midst of a political crisis .
 Armed rightist bands were active in the Oriente and Escambray mountains . Armed rightists were active during the 1960s .
 Cuban casualties in the Escambray alone were nearly three times as great as at the Bay of Pigs . Cuban casualties were three times greater than at the bay of Pigs.
 Economic losses are estimated around $1 billion in ruined crops, burned houses, and blown up rail lines, roads and bridges . Economic losses were calculated around $ 1 billion .
 Frankel tries to give the impression that direct U.S. involvement with the counter-revolution had come to an end after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . But ex-classified documents contradict this .
 CIA reports that 11 teams will have been infiltrated by the end of July . CIA says 19 maritime operations have aborted . CIA: 11 teams have already been infiltrated and 19 have been aborted .
 Of the teams in, the most successful is the one in Pinar del Rio in western Cuba . Its success was helped greatly by a maritime re-supply of arms and equipment . The fact that it is a ""going concern"" and receives help from outside has attracted recruits .
 Its potential is estimated at about 250, which is a sizeable guerrilla force . Its potential has been estimated at around 250 .
 With equally large guerrilla forces in other Cuban provinces, guerrilla warfare could be activated with a good chance of success, if assisted properly . If assisted properly, the Cuban government could activate guerrilla warfare in other provinces .
 Frankel's version of the 1962 happenings depends heavily on foreshortened events . Frankel: "It's not easy to predict what happened in 1962," says Frankel .
 Instead of seeing the missile crisis as the culmination of a year of superpower bullying and threats, it turns into a cold war duel with Cuba, Berlin and Turkey as pawns . The missile crisis turns into the Cold War with Cuba and Berlin .
 The president sheepishly conceded that invading Cuba had been a mistake . President Barack Obama said the invasion of Cuba was a 'mistake'
 He was made to feel young and inexperienced, a weakling who had lacked the courage even to finish off Castro . He had lacked courage even though he had killed Castro .
 Ex-NY Times reporter, Seymour Hersh, sees Kennedy's post-Bay of Pigs stance differently . Hersh: Kennedy's stance on the Bay of Pigs post-Pagagas was a mistake .
 The president lent the prestige of his office to the anti-Cuba effort by flying to Norfolk, Virginia, to watch a huge military exercise . Some 40,000 men conducted amphibious landings at beaches in North Carolina and off Vieques Island, Puerto Rico .
 Kennedy needed to make sure that the Soviets were kept in the dark about his plans to blockade Cuba . Kennedy wanted to keep the Soviets informed of his plans .
 Since the Times participated freely in a cover-up, he might argue that this was still a ""free"" press . He might argue it was a free press .
 John F Kerry sees himself an enlightened foreign policy expert in the mold of the first JFK . The events of 1962 have much more in common with the invasion and occupation of Iraq than liberals would admit .
 Kennedy White House figures have been implicated in lies and cover-ups . Adlai Stevenson, who was the representative to the United Nations, was a prominent liberal icon .
 Stevenson held up photographs to UN Political Committee that proved Cuban air force defectors bombed Castro's soldiers . The photos were taken during the Bay of Pigs operation in Cuba .
 Stevenson continued to deny American involvement in the creation of the forged documents . Even after he discovered that they were CIA forgeries, he denied that the U.S. government was involved .
 Stevenson described the episode to Pierre Salinger as ""the most humiliating experience"" of his career . Stevenson described it as the 'most humiliating experience' after it was revealed to be false .
 If Castro had been defeated at the Bay of Pigs, Stevenson would have felt much differently . One assumes that if Castro had won, Stevenson felt much different .
 Time after time, in places like Cuba, Vietnam, and Iraq, where U.S. foreign policy is frustrated in its aims, there is much soul-searching . The U.N. has been frustrated in many places, including Cuba and Vietnam .
 The proper time for soul-searching is in advance of such adventures rather than when they turn sour . Such efforts seem to be in vain, for the proper time is to prepare for such adventures, he says .
 Feel free to insert a link to this work on your Web site or to disseminate its URL on your favorite lists . Use this article to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Please DO NOT steal, scavenge, or repost this work on the Web or any electronic media . However, please do NOT steal or scavenge the work .
 When/if we publish an opinion we will only include your name, city, state, and country . We are happy to provide an edited version of this article . Please share your opinion with us on Facebook and Twitter .