 Many Americans were caught by surprise when they heard President Kennedy order a military quarantine around Cuba . Join googletag.push { .push; }); Support us on Facebook and Twitter .
 Russia is building missile sites in Cuba, within range of the United States . Russia and America are challenging each other to back down or face war . They were just as surprised to learn that Russia was building the sites .
 The showdown had been coming ever since Fidel Castro and his communist rebels overthrew the government of Cuba . Fidel Castro's government was overthrown by the Castro regime in 1953 .
 The United States had strongly opposed the new regime . The U.S. had backed an invasion of Cuba by anticommunist exiles in 1961 .
 Khrushchev saw this defeat as proof of America’s inherent weakness and was emboldened to build missile bases on the island to keep the U.S. permanently on the defensive .
 Khrushchev built launchpads in Cuba that would enable the Soviets to drop a thermonuclear warhead almost anywhere in the U.S. The United States would not be able to remove the missile sites without risking nuclear attack .
 Khrushchev planned to repeat the operation in Europe to force Americans from their outpost in West Berlin . The operation was part of a plan to force the Americans out of the West Berlin outpost . The U.S. government planned to use the operation to force out the Americans .
 On October 20, President Kennedy took action, announcing the United States would block any Soviet ships from reaching Cuba, beginning at 10:00m., Wednesday, October 24 .
 On that morning, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council began its long watch for the USSR’s response . On that day, the executive committee of the NSC began its .
 Alsop and Bartlett: Reports indicated that some of the Soviet ships appeared to have changed course, and that others had gone dead in the ocean .
 Khrushchev might have hesitated, but he was still determined . A Navy reconnaissance plane shadows a Russian freighter approaching the quarantine line set by the U.S.
 On Friday night, he sent a letter to Kennedy that contained threats but also an appeal to be reasonable . He sent it to Kennedy on Friday night . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not going to apologize"
 The following day, spy planes over Cuba showed launchpad construction proceeding at full speed . The launchpad launchpad was built in Cuba's first known launchpad .
 Khrushchev demanded that the U.S. dismantle its missiles in Turkey, which were pointed at the Soviet Union . In a Moscow broadcast, he said that the United States should dismantle the missiles . The missiles were aimed at the Soviets, but were not aimed at them .
 Later that day, a U.S. spy plane was shot down with a Soviet surface-to-air missile . The missile was the first one fired from Cuba . It was also the first time a missile was fired from the island .
 Khrushchev appeared to be stalling until the missiles were operational . The missiles were launched in the 1960s and '60s, but were never operational .
 It was Robert Kennedy who came up with a way to move beyond the standoff . President Kennedy consulted with Defense Secretary Robert McNamara .
 He suggested that the president publicly interpret Khrushchev’s Friday letter as a proposal to negotiate . The letter was signed by Khrushchchev, a former Soviet leader .
 President Kennedy agreed to end the blockade if the USSR removed its missiles . Kennedy agreed and said the U.S. would take no action against Cuba and end the embargo .
 Kennedy offered to remove U.S. missile bases across the border in Turkey . Alsop doesn't report, and perhaps didn’t know at the time, was Kennedy’s secret offer .
 With the message sent, ExComm’s meeting broke up and everyone went home that Saturday night not knowing whether the following morning would bring peace or—as millions of Americans feared—nuclear attack .
 On Sunday, Khrushchev agreed to the terms of Kennedy’s offer . Kennedy: "On Sunday, to everyone's immense relief, agreed to terms of the offer"
 In a Post article, Stewart Alsop said, “This was, of course, the final, unmistakable blink.” The next month, he said, "This was the final ... blink"
 The entire crisis was covered in depth in the 1962 Post article “In Time of Crisis” by Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett . The entire article was published in 1962 .
 The History of Bias and Power in the Supreme Court Jeff Nilsson explains the history of bias in the courts .
 The Saturday Evening Post is a nonprofit organization funded primarily by its members . Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline .