 This version has been updated and revised beyond what was originally published in this issue of this month's issue .
 The Nation Magazine has long been one of the most perceptive and eloquent voices for skepticism in publishing . The Nation has been a leading voice for skepticism for publishing .
 It is one of the few national media outlets that truly functions as a watchdog in the public interest . Its revelations over the years have established it as a national media outlet .
 It has always been an early voice, often the first, to question official pronouncements &amp;ndash; on Vietnam, Watergate, Iran-Contra, Guatemala, on Guatemala, Haiti, and Chile .
 On JFK's murder, The Nation has inexplicably kept shut the skeptical eye it normally keeps cocked at outfits like FBI, CIA and the military . Nation has so often caught lying, the very groups it has been caught lying .
 The Nation raised nary an eyebrow at the apparent ease with which the FBI was able to prove right FBI boss J Edgar Hoover proved right . Hoover announced on the very night JFK died that Lee Harvey Oswald had done it all by himself .
 It's hard to fathom why The Nation, of all magazines, continues to toe the old line . The public hasn't believed the Warren Commission since the late 60s, and since its verdict was officially reversed in 1978 .
 In recent years, Alexander Cockburn and Max Holland have been in-house experts for the BBC .
 Skeptics like Peter Dale Scott and John Newman, whose credentials far surpass those of Cockburn and Holland in this case, have been restricted to limited responses on the letters-to-the-editor page .
 It was but a fantasy that Kennedy was on the verge of pulling out from Vietnam . Kennedy was not pulling out of Vietnam, but it was a fantasy .
 Early signs are that Holland intends to use the Kennedy case to deliver a sweeping, extraordinary history and civics lesson to the public .
 The Warren Commission was a joke, but that's not the case, Holland says . Holland: It&#039;s become part of our popular culture that the Warren Commission is a joke . He says the commission was never a joke. Holland says it was a serious investigation into
 Holland has written that ignorance and paranoia have conspired to unjustly darken the reputation of the Warren Commission . Holland writes that ignorance, . ignorance, &#039;cunningly manufactured falsehoods, &amp;ndash; but not a suspiciously inadequate investigation .
 In taking down Warren Commission, malicious and stupid skeptics have spawned a corrosive public cynicism . The Warren Commission took down the government&#039;s honest answer to the Crime of the Century in 1964 .
 I must own up to some personal history with Max Holland . I have a history with the Dutchman . Max Holland has a history of bullying .
 On September 13, 1999, I made a formal presentation at The Nation on some of the new JFK medical/autopsy evidence . The Nation published a presentation of the evidence in September .
 The goal of that meeting was to update The Nation on some of the JFK disclosures that had already gotten coverage in outlets like the Washington Post and AP, and to bring some then-unpublished material to the attention of the editors .
 Newman projected documents showing that Oswald had impersonated in taped conversations recorded by the CIA in Mexico City six weeks before JFK&#039;s death . Newman: Documents show that Oswald impersonated Oswald in recordings .
 Newman showed declassified FBI and CIA documents proving that at least one phone recording to the Russian embassy survived after 11/22/63 . Both the CIA and the FBI later claimed that no such tapes had ever survived routine erasure and recycling . CIA and FBI later said no such recordings had
 The CIA says no tapes survived the assassination of George Kennedy . The White House never said anything to refute the CIA's claim no tapes were found .
 Holland scoffed that any tapes had survived; apparently unaware the story had already been publicly confirmed . Holland was apparently unaware of the story, apparently unaware that the tapes had been recorded .
 John Armstrong gave his usual dramatic presentation of documents showing that on numerous occasions there were two different &#039;Oswalds . locations . appearing simultaneously in different locations .
 Milicent Cranor provided strong evidence of what was behind autopsy pathologist James Humes' false testimony concerning Kennedy&#039;s throat incision . Humes gave false testimony about Kennedy's throat wound, Cranor said .
 It&#039;s quite another matter when more than 80% of Americans disbelieve or cannot accept their own history, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Almost any claim or theory, regardless of how bizarre or insupportable, can now be presented in the same sentence as the Warren Report&#039;s conclusions and gain credence . Almost any theory or theory can be presented as a result of the report's conclusions .
 He's vexed at the reception of Oliver Stone&#039;s pro-conspiracy film JFK, and the favor accorded pro-Conspiracy books by authors such as Peter Dale Scott and Gary Cornwell .
 The lead piece actually asserted that &#039;on the complex question of the Kennedy assassination itself, the film holds its own against the Warren Report . The film is about the assassination of the president in 1968 .
 No one truly grasps the unique Cold War circumstances in which both the President&#039;s murder and its investigation transpired . Virtually no one truly understands the unique circumstances of the murder of the President .
 The deranged act of a lonely, pro-Cuban zealot, he maintains, was the unintended consequence of Kennedy&#039;s rabid anti-Castroism . He maintains that Kennedy &#038;s anti- Castro Castro attack was the result of Kennedy
 In essence, Kennedy got from Oswald what he intended to give Castro through the agency of the CIA and Mafia . Kennedy got . what he&#039;d intended to . give Castro . Oswald .
 Kennedy was the target of Kennedy&#039;s malice, Castro, but instead from a delusional, self-appointed pro-Castro avenger . Castro was the victim of Kennedy's malice, but not from Kennedy, but from the target .
 The government&#039;s well-intended decision to protect the public from the seamier aspects of this scenario explains why the public has never understood the whole picture . The government has never fully understood the full picture of the situation .
 The government hid facts about Oswald and about the CIA plots to murder Fidel Castro . So did the government hide facts about the plots to kill Fidel Castro?
 The secrets were kept, Holland argues, not to deny the basic truth of JFK&#039;s death . They were kept to calm an electrified public and protect secret, vital, Cold War operations .
 Holland believes RFK blocked the investigation to protect the Kennedy name, and his own political future . Holland believes that RFK repeatedly blocked the very avenues of investigation . The Warren Commission got it wrong .
 In Holland&#039;s eyes, if the Warren Commission was not entirely successful, the Kennedys deserve no small portion of blame . So, in the eyes of Holland, it's not easy to blame for the failure of the commission .
 Holland maintains RFK prevented JFK&#039;s autopsy doctors from dissecting his back wound . Holland maintains that RFK stopped JFK &#038;s . autopsy doctors dissecting the back wound, and so the proof of an Oswald-implicating trajectory was lost .
 The public lost confidence in the post mortem's conclusions that only two shots, both fired from the rear, hit their mark . Also lost was the public&#039;s confidence in post-mortem conclusions .
 RFK never told the Commission about murderous CIA plots undertaken under his command to have the Mob whack Castro . RFK preserved his option to plausible deny his own role in the plot . Besides that, RFK didn't tell the Commission of the plots .
 Holland says it was that the anti-Castro president inadvertently inspired a communist loser&#039;s vengeful act . Thus, Holland says, it was . that the ferociously anti- Castro president inadvertently . inspired a . communist loser &#038;s
 RFK orchestrated a protective cover-up of his brother&#039;s death, leaving a legacy of public skepticism that continues to undermine faith in honorable institutions to this day . RFK then orchestrated a protective cover up of brother's death, which left a legacy that continues
 Ignorance of the bigger picture is not the only explanation Holland offers for the widely held skepticism . Holland offers the other explanation .
 Schleshinger, Holland tells us, &#039;manipulates history as if he were a lifetime employee of the Kennedy White House . Holland: His eloquence in the writing of history is rivaled only by his skill in dissembling it .
 When myths are divorced from reality as divorced as they are, they become dangerous . But when myths are as divorced of reality as these are, it becomes dangerous .
 Americans encouraged to feel nostalgia for a past that never was, wax dreamily about what might have been, or indulge paranoid fantasies about their own government . Americans are encouraged to be nostalgic for the past, or to feel paranoid about their government .
 Holland concludes that the book Deep Politics is an unreadable compendium of &#039;may haves&#038; and . might haves, and .might haves . Holland: It's a compendium with enough documentation to satisfy any paranoid . Any paranoid person
 In the introduction to an article about Garrison that appeared in the spring 2001 issue of the Wilson Quarterly, Holland hangs virtually all responsibility for America&#039;s loss of faith in public institutions .
 Of all the legacies of the 1960s, none has been more unambiguously negative than the American public&#039;s corrosive cynicism toward the federal government .
 Well before antiwar protests were common, lingering dissatisfaction with the official verdict that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone broadened into a widespread conviction that the federal government was incompetent or suppressing the truth .
 None other than the fiendishly clever chaps in the Russian KGB, whose clever conspiracy only succeeded in seducing the public . Jim Garrison .
 The KGB slipped a bogus story into an Italian newspaper, Paese Sera, that tied Clay Shaw to an a CIA front organization in Italy, Holland says . Holland says that in 1967 the KGB slipped the story into a newspaper in Italy .
 Garrison painted an incredible courtroom sketch of Shaw and Oswald clutched in the CIA&#039;s malefic embrace as they danced toward destiny in Dallas . From there, events followed an inexorable, downward spiral as Garrison painted .
 Had Garrison not gone wobbly on the KGB&#039;s concoction, Holland believes that the Shaw-CIA-Oswald fairy tale would have vanished like a dream . Holland: "Had Garrison had gone wrong, the story would have gone wrong and gone wrong
 Shaw's death was a senseless tragedy for Shaw, and a loss of faith in America . Shaw's family lost their faith in the U.S. after the tragedy .
 Holland, it should be emphasized, does not deny that some cynicism about government is justified . Holland: "Some cynicism is justified. Some cynicism is necessary," Holland says .
 Vietnam, other assassinations, Watergate, exposure of FBI and CIA abuses in the 1970s, and finally Iran-contra scandal, all undermined Americans' trust in their elected government . The Iran-Contra scandal undermined Americans&#039; trust .
 The government does keep secrets, but it doesn&#039;t mean that what they say isn't the truth . For not only on the Kennedy case is it true that, . . A more sophisticated or mature understanding is necessary among the public to realize that, &#0
 The government has already been caught telling myriad, big lies, and it takes only a few small lies to foster an atmosphere of mistrust . But the government&#039;s problem is that, as with any proven liar, it has already told myriad lies .
 The suppression of information about our use of high-tech spy balloons, he says, allowed flying-saucer and conspiracy buffs to have mythic significance .
 Kennedy's assassination and aftermath have never been firmly integrated into their place and time, largely because of Cold War exigencies . And in the Kennedy case, &#039;he assassination and its aftermath never have been fully integrated into the time .
 First, the public didn't know the Roswell incident with paranoid mythic significance because the government told the truth but not the whole truth . Second, the government invited farfetched theorizing by offering three different &#039;factual explanations for what really happened there .
 A more sophisticated understanding of government doesn't lead one to trust the government more, as Holland would have it, but less . A more .#039;sophisticated understanding doesn’t lead to more trust in the government, Holland would like to have it more .
 Vietnam, Watergate, Iran-Contra, and CIA and FBI abuses, don't give the government its due . Confining his gaze to the myriad government conspiracies betokened by the words Vietnam and Watergate, doesn't give it due .
 It doesn&#039;t reflect the changing nature of what properly constitutes paranoia today . And it doesn't reflect the change in the world of paranoia, it does . It doesn't even reflect the need to be paranoid, it says .
 Since Hofstadter delivered his famous lecture in 1963, &#039;paranoia has been beating a steady retreat . Since then, the threat of paranoia has declined to rise .
 Hofstadter might have withheld his sermon on the foolhardiness of paranoia . He might have read in 1963 that in 1962 the Joint Chiefs of Staff had unanimously approved a plan to commit acts of terrorism against U.S. citizens on American soil .
 ABC recently publicized the story that was first disclosed in investigative reporter James Bamford&#039;s book Body of Secrets .
 Operation Northwoods reportedly drafted plans to kill innocent people and commit acts of terrorism in U.S. cities to create public support for a war ... to oust Cuba&#039;s then new leader, Fidel Castro . The operation was codenamed Operation Northwood .
 In the year Hofstadter spoke, it would have been considered pure paranoia to believe that our government was conducting and covering-up ongoing dangerous and secret drug, LSD, radiation and syphilis experiments on unwitting, law-abiding citizens .
 FBI knew for more than 20 years that Boston agents were using hit men and mob leaders as informants and shielding them from prosecution for serious crimes including murder . On July 28, 2002, AP reported, &#039; that FBI headquarters in Washington knew that its Boston agents used hit men
 The moral callousness exhibited in the U.S. response to these disclosures is shocking, it is shocking . The moral hypocrisy in the United States' response to the disclosures was shocking .
 He was encouraging Americans to feel nostalgic for a past that never was, to wax dreamily about what might have been . He encouraged Americans to be nostalgic for the past, but not the past .
 He discouraged &#039;paranoid fantasies about government that were often vastly less . than the suppressed reality . And he discouraged . The government, he said, “that was often vastly more . less than the . suppressed reality.”
 Holland is right that there is a widespread conviction that the federal government has suppressed the truth or covered up its own complicity in myriad, lawless acts . That conviction exists independently of the efforts of Schleshinger, Stone, Scott and Garrison, Holland say .
 In fact, so many deplorable government conspiracies have been proven that Hofstadter would never have dreamed of, most detailed eloquently in The Nation . One can&#039;t help but wonder if conspiracy-exorcist Holland ever reads even the magazine he writes for
 The True History of a Remarkable Investigation is published by Edward Holland . It is the first attempt to redeem the reputation of Earl Warren's most famous accomplishment . Holland's investigation will be published in the U.S.
 In time the Warren Commission will be seen for what it truly was ... a monumental criminal investigation carried to its utmost limits and designed to burn away a fog of speculation . The Warren Commission was designed to be a massive criminal investigation into the Clintons .
 The accuracy of the report&#039;s essential findings, holding up after three decades, is testimony to its integrity . It did not achieve perfection, and in the rush to print the language on pivotal issues, such as the single bullet, was poorly crafted, says the report
 Holland attributes much of the Commission&#039;s success to the wily LBJ, whose conscription of two reluctant appointees was especially inspired . The Wisdom of the Tricky Balancing Act was inspired by LBJ's wily, wily and wily-w
 Chief Justice Earl Warren and Senator Richard Russell, staunch political enemies, were essentially coerced by the Supreme Court . Warren and Russell were staunch opponents of each other . Russell was a staunch political opponent of Warren .
 If Warren, a liberal Republican, could cobble together a consensus conclusion about the tragedy with a well-respected political enemy, the conservative Democrat Russell, there would be no doubting the integrity of the investigation and the nonpartisan nature of the conclusions .
 In about forty-eight hours the intercepts showed beyond a reasonable doubt that both the Soviet and Cuban governments had been as shocked as anyone by the news from Dallas . The intercepts were made in the days following the Dallas shooting .
 The Commission has been criticized for having been too reliant on the intelligence apparatus, rather than on its own independent investigators . And yet the Commission has had to rely heavily on intelligence .
 The FBI interviewed witnesses, deposed witnesses and conducted a first hand evaluation of evidence . "You can say weren&#039;t trained homicide investigators &amp;ndash; that's true, but the FBI didn't also investigate a lot of murders either. I mean they
 Murder was a state problem ... so, number one, the staff of the Warren Commission were investigators . Murder was the state problem, so, the investigators were investigators, the commission said .
 Hoover signed an affidavit saying the Bureau had never recruited or attempted to recruit Oswald . Hoover signed affidavit saying he had never tried to recruit or recruited Oswald . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Holland holds that not only did the investigation greatly benefit from the data federal snoops gathered, the Commission was also satisfactorily able to cross check any important information from them it doubted . Holland: The investigation greatly benefited from the remarkable data federal .
 The Commission was a splendid, if imperfect, national effort to solve JFK&#039;s murder, but it doesn&##39;t get the respect it deserves because of the misunderstandings, lies and paranoia of critics . Critics say the Commission was an imperfect effort to
 It isn't surprising that such a novel defense has never been tried before by anyone, except, perhaps by ex-Commissioners Gerald Ford and David Belin .
 Michael Kurtz, journalist Henry Hurt, Sylvia Meagher, Notre Dame law professor and former HSCA chief counsel, Robert Blakey, Peter Dale Scott, as well as many others . Those critiques bear an eerie similarity to the critiques of skeptics such as historian Michael Kurtz,
 There is no denying that the Commission learned little about Oswald&#039;s associates . Oswald's associates were the associates of the assassin .
 FBI failed to spot Jack Ruby&#039;s suspicious, and atypical, pattern of calls to known Mafiosi in the weeks leading up to the assassination . FBI had Jack Ruby's phone records, but didn't spot his suspicious calls to Mafia associates .
 The Commission learned next to nothing about Ruby, or his calls, or calls . The Commission didn't know enough to triple-check the FBI, or to check themselves .
 The Commission ultimately concluded Ruby was not connected to the mob . Basing its conclusions on FBI-supplied &#039;character references from, among others, two known mob associates .
 In 1977, the HSCA performed the rudimentary task of actually analyzing Ruby&#039;s calls and exposing Lenny Patrick and Dave Yaras' mob ties . Ruby calls were analyzed for the first time in 1977 .
 Ruby's connection to the crime was obvious, but it fit other evidence tying the crime to the Mafia . Ruby was found guilty of the murder of Michael Ruby in 1995 . Ruby is believed to have been involved in the crime .
 The importance of this reversal was entirely lost on Holland, who wrote, &#039; that he corroborated every salient fact developed by the Warren Commission . Holland was the author of the Warren Report, which released the report .
 FBI turned to FBI supervisor Regis Kennedy, who then professed to believe Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans capo to whom Ruby had ties, was a real estate investor . Instead, the Bureau turned to Kennedy to find out who Ruby was to be a real-estate investor
 The Commission did not investigate Hoover or the FBI, and managed to avoid the appearance of doing so . And so, &#039;The Commission didn't investigate Hoover .
 The Commission never heard about the mafia threats against JFK and RFK that had been picked up in FBI wiretaps . RFK and JFK never heard of the threats from the mafia .
 Two years before the HSCA issued its report, the Senate Select Committee reported on its own examination of the process employed by both agencies . Two years earlier, the committee had examined the process .
 Committee has developed evidence which impeaches the process by which intelligence agencies arrived at their own conclusions about the assassination . It reported .
 This evidence indicates that the investigation of the assassination was deficient and that facts which might have substantially affected the course of the investigation were not provided to the Warren Commission or those individuals within the FBI and the CIA .
 The Commission is armed in abundance with the one key capacity the Commission needed but lacked, a staff of experienced and proven criminal investigators . That is, of course, good reasons to incline any reasonable person toward skepticism .
 The list of Commission shortcomings the HSCA assembled is not short . The Warren Report was compiled by the H.SCA Commission of Inquiry into the Human Rights Commission .
 The HSCA found that the Commission did not take advantage of all the legal tools available to it . The Commission's staff was composed primarily of lawyers .
 Commissioners freely admitted they never once found even a single occasion to offer a grant of immunity to pursue their only client . The Commissioners admitted doubting the truthfulness of some of the witnesses, with good reason .
 The HSCA&#039;s chief counsel, Robert Blakey, is an experienced criminal investigator and prosecutor himself . Blakey says he was impressed with neither the Commission &#038;s vigor nor its independence .
 In essence, the HSCA concluded that Hoover had divined the solution to the crime before the investigation . Hoover&#039;s agents proved his epiphany, and the investigation proved it .
 The Commission chose not to get an independent investigative staff to properly investigate certain intelligence tender spots . Despite the Commission&#039;s admission that it would probably need an independent . staff, it chose not get one .
 The HSCA says the Commission did not go much beyond the agencies in investigating the anticipated tender spots . The agency will look at the "tender spots" in the future .
 HSCA deputy chief counsel Gary Cornwell recursurses some of the hoariest clich&amp;eacute;s regarding the Warren Commission . Holland says Cornwell seems disinclined to accept any of the criticisms of the commission . Holland: "HSC
 I had investigated numerous conspiracies, and indicted and tried organized crime members who participated in those conspiracies . The head of the Mafia in Kansas City, and the head of Mafia in Denver, were among those indicted .
 Unlike Tom Wicker, my bias ran toward a belief that conspiracies are a very integral part of &#039;how the world works. Unlike Tom . Wicker's, I believe conspiracy theories are very integral to the world .
 Holland hails for having cracked the Kennedy case . It was still celebrated even today for having revealed prior, gross intelligence failures, lies and abuses committed by the same agencies .
 The Church committee did not &#039;disqualify itself by having disagreed with the Warren Commission's conclusions about Oswald . The committee, moreover, did not disqualify itself from being disqualified by disagreeing with its conclusions .
 It only addressed the manner in which JFK&#039;s murder was investigated . JFK's murder was a murder investigation into the death of JFK .
 The pressure to issue a report that would establish Oswald as the lone assassin is reflected in internal memoranda . Internal Bureau memoranda reflects internal pressure to release a report .
 On 11/24/63, Assistant FBI Director Alan Belmont informed Associate FBI Director Clyde Tolson that he was sending to Headquarters supervisors to Dallas to review &#039; ... so that we can prepare a memorandum to the Attorney General ... out the evidence showing that Oswald is responsible
 Commissioner McCloy &#039;s word &amp;ndash; accounts for nothing with Max Holland . McCloy's word "We are so dependent on for our facts" doesn't seem to work with Holland .
 His retort is that the FBI did work satisfactorily with the Commission, which he says was not overly dependent on the Bureau . He says the Commission did work with the FBI .
 The Commission independently double- or triple-checked any important FBI evidence it doubted . The Commission, you see, independently double-, or triple checked any of the evidence it doubts .
 The Commission and its staff did analyze the material and frequently requested follow-up agency investigations . If evidence on a particular point was not supplied to the Commission, this second step would obviously not be reached . The Commission&#039;s findings would be formulated without the benefit of any
 Internal records show the Warren Commission's bias was to believe what the FBI said was true . Internal records suggest that rather than truth being its only bias, it was to be true .
 Howard Roffman has pointed to a clear inclination on the Commission&#039;s part that existed before it had begun its investigation . From the record, he has pointed out that the Commission has shown an inclination on its part .
 Rankin and Warren drew up the plans for the organization of the work that was to undertake for the Commission .
 It would evaluate the evidence from the perspective of &quot;Oswald as the assassin, and it would search for his . possible motives . Attached to Warren&#039;s . &tot;s &q39;Progress Report was a copy of the
 Section II begins by outlining Lee Harvey Oswald's movements on the day of the assassination . Section II, &quot;Lee Harvey Oswald as the Assassin of President Kennedy, &#039;s movements .
 Even the FBI had refrained from drawing a conclusion as to whether or not Oswald had murdered Officer Tippit .
 At this very early point in its investigation, the Commission was convinced it could muster evidence demonstrating Oswald&#039;s guilt . Another heading under Section II of the outline is &quot;Evidence Identifying Oswald as the Assassin of President Kennedy,&quot ; again a
 Dwight McDonald made an insightful comment in 1965 on how the rest of the chips so easily fell into place . Earl Warren was confident in the FBI&#039;s solution so early in the game .
 He described the young and inexperienced staff counsels who actually did the Warren Commission&#039;s . He described them as, as, &#038;ambitious young chaps who were not going to step out of the lines drawn by their chiefs .
 Alan Dershowitz reported that one-time Commission attorney, Stanford law professor John Hart Ely, acknowledged that the ommission lacked independent investigative resources and thus was compelled to rely on the government&#039;s investigative agencies, namely the FBI, CIA and military intelligence .
 HSCA counsel Robert Blakey said he was not satisfied with the investigation that led to the conclusion . Blakey: "When asked if he was satisfied with it, he said he wasn't"
 A recording released earlier this year by the Lyndon Johnson Presidential Library has brought to light some important new facts concerning the Warren Commission's investigation of the assassination of President John F Kennedy .
 President Lyndon B Johnson and three members of the Warren Commission rejected the single bullet theory, an essential part of the Commission&#039;s single-assassin thesis . As a result of disclosure of the recording it is now evident, more than three decades after the assassination, that
 In Cornwell&#039;s tendentious account , this memo becomes documentary proof of an effort to make the lone, deranged assassin story a convincing one, Cornwell says . Cornwell: "In Cornwell's account, this memo is evidence of an attempt to &
 The public must be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin, Katzenbach writes . The evidence was such that Oswald would have been convicted at trial, she says .
 Cornwell's case that Oswald was prematurely set in motion against Oswald does not rest solely on Katzenbach's memo, Holland intimates . Cornwell: Cornwell &#039;s case that the . government&#040;machinery of government was . prematurely
 Holland ignores several lines of evidence Cornwell outlines, including some sworn statements from Katzenbach . Holland ignores some of those statements, including those from the former mayor .
 Holland, for example, ignores that Katzenbach nowhere recommended that the backstop Presidential Commission actually investigate the murder . Holland: "Katzenbach recommended that it &#039;review and examine the evidence and announce its conclusions"
 Cornwell &#039;s discussion of the early, official bias against Oswald draws from multiple sources, and is perfectly reflected by Katzenbach himself in his own memo . Cornwell: The early bias was clearly reflected in the memo .
 Cornwell's interpretation of the memo is the standard account of it . It is for that reason that Cornwell&#039;s interpretation of it is . Cornwell: "It's for the president to be the president of the world"
 It's no coincidence that this same interpretation was also reached by the Senate Select Committee in 1976,79 by the HSCA in 1978, and others . It's not a coincidence that it was reached in 1976 and 1978 .
 Deputy A G. Holland argued that Katzenbach has acknowledged that his memo may have been worded inartfully . The deputy A G., Holland, argued that, &#039;Katzenbach, had acknowledged that he may have made a mistake .
 In no sense was he arguing for a pre-cooked verdict, and to believe, in any case, that J. Edgar Hoover&#039;s FBI obeyed diktats from lowly deputy attorneys general is absurd . But in no sense, he was arguing for an
 The record Holland ignores is that, rather than Hoover obeying his boss, it was his boss who was obeying from the subordinate . Holland ignores the record .
 The day before Katzenbach wrote his memo, Hoover called presidential adviser Walter Jenkins and said, "The thing I am concerned about" is having something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real assassin . Hoover called Jenkins the day before he wrote the memo .
 CIA chief: "The nation must to a degree take it on faith that we who lead the CIA are honorable men, devoted to the nation&#039;s service" CIA director: "We must take it to faith that the nation must take a faith in us"
 JFK repeatedly made it clear he wanted no American men landing on the beaches during the Cuban invasion . In his book Bay of Pigs &amp;ndash; The Untold Story,90 Peter Wyden .
 Anthony Summers has described how the CIA refused to honor several requests from Richard Nixon to see the internal investigation of the Bay of Pigs . The scathing post mortem critique of the invasion conducted by the CIA&#039;s own Inspector General Lyman Kirkpatrick .
 Agency deception is not the only example of Agency deception undertaken to prevent exposure of its own lapses . Agency deception was not the first example of agency deception undertaken by the agency . Agency has been accused of misleading the public about its own failings .
 In a 1995 National Public Radio story entitled, &#039;CIA Passed Tainted Info to the President in the 80&#038s. The CIA passed the info to the White House in the 1980s .
 The episode provoked Senator Arlan Specter to charge that the CIA disinformation had cost the U.S. &#039;billions of dollars in needless military purchases .
 Holland thus exaggerates a bit when he endorses Dulles, asserting that the CIA was the President&#039;s personal instrument, for good or ill, during the cold war .
 Anyone could look at the record and still believe that the CIA was the President&#039;s personal instrument, for good or ill, during the Cold War . Instead, what may really be inconceivable is that anyone could still think that the . CIA was . The CIA was
 Neither Cockburn nor Holland is expert on the Kennedy assassination . Cockburn and Holland rely on others to look at evidence .
 Alex Cockburn featured in The Nation was a faithful Warren Commission counsel, Weslie Liebeler . Cockburn was a loyal member of the Warren Commission, who both Warren critics and loyalists alike can be forgiven for regarding as less than the most objective .
 Gerald Posner is the controversial author of the anti-conspiracy book Case Closed . Holland is one of Holland&#039;s trusted experts on conspiracy theories .
 According to Holland, Posner has debunked every canard posited to date about the assassination . Posner says he's been "exhaustively and patiently debunked"
 Historian David Wrone says Posner deferentially cites the book he cites . Wrone: Posner's book is one of the stellar instances of irresponsible publishing on this subject .
 JFK Review Board took a whack at Posner in their final report, after Posner stonewalled two requests from the Board for information .
 Holland places too great a reliance on dubious sources and incautious speculation . In the few instances in which he actually discusses specific evidence, Holland does not discuss specific evidence .
 One of his favorite authorities is Gerald Posner, author of the book Case Closed . He says Posner is one of the leading authorities in the world .
 Holland says Posner makes it &#039;exhaustively clear ... that Oswald had no accomplices and there was no conspiracy . Holland: Posner debunks every canard posited to date about the assassination .
 Oswald shot by Zapruder 224, a shot that allows Oswald enough time to reload and shoot again . Such a shot allows Oswald to reload, and then shoot again, in order to avoid being shot . The interpretation of this interpretation favors Oswald&#039;s guilt .
 Zapruder film of the Kennedy assassination shows a little girl in a red dress and white coat running alongside the president and Mrs. Kennedy . The film shows the girl in the motorcade while the president was assassinated .
 Shortly before the president was obviously wounded, this little girl stops abruptly in her tracks . The president is obviously wounded in the attack .
 I believe this loud noise was in fact the first shot, and that it missed the occupants of the limousine entirely . I believe, as many other students of the subject do, that this loud . noise was the first . noise, and it missed . occupants of a limous
 Holland offers as evidence of Oswald&#039;s guilt the misinterpreted motions of this single person . Holland ignores far more credible accounts of numerous other witnesses who place the first shot at circa Z-180-195 .
 Willis' star witness is his father, Phil Willis, who testified in his son's murder trial . Willis' father Phil Willis was the star witness in the case . Willis was convicted of murder in a federal murder trial in 2007 .
 The elder Willis refuted his the Posner/Holland interpretation . Willis: "The elder Willis specifically refuted" his interpretation of the original meaning .
 He also told the Warren Commission that the first shot &#039;caused me to squeeze the camera shutter . He also said he squeezed the shutter when he took the photo .
 Holland remains mute about the senior Willis, if he even knows about him . Holland says he's not sure if he knows about Willis, but Holland is mute on the matter .
 Zapruder film shows that not a single person in the film reacts as early as would be required to allow Oswald to fire again by Z-224 . He is mute about the fact that not one person visible in the movie reacts early to allow the shooting .
 Holland, like Russo, is also not much inclined to take a hard look at sources he likes . Holland and Russo are both writers, but he's also not inclined to look hard at sources .
 Holland writes, "It had to be some silly little Communist" Holland says it was a "silly little Communist"? Holland quotes Jackie Kennedy's quote from the Kennedy speech .
 It can be seen in such minor details as the media&#039;s use of Oswald &#040;s middle name, as if employing it gave him more stature . Oswald's middle name has been used as a symbol of his stature .
 Oswald's defection was published in the San Francisco Chronicle on 11/1/59 . UPI published a UPI report about Oswald's departure from the U.S. Army .
 One might have expected that Holland would have undertaken the few minutes of library work that would have been required to eliminate from the error .
 JFK pathologists likely didn't dissect the back wound because of pressure from the Kennedys, Holland says . Holland has nowhere in print yet explored the mystery of the JFK medical/autopsy evidence .
 William Manchester,116 Gus Russo117 and John Lattimer, MD have advanced this notion,118 the weight of the evidence is against it . In a personal letter I responded that .
 There&#039;s no solid evidence that JFK suffered no abdominal injuries . Perhaps they did request that JFK &#038;s abdominal cavity, which houses the adrenals, be left alone, especially since he was killed .
 Even if the Kennedys had made that seemingly reasonable request, it was ignored . But even if it had been made, it would have been ignored, it wasn't enough .
 Russo recount that one of JFK&#039;s pathologists, Pierre Finck, MD, said that, . the Kennedy family did not want us to examine the abdominal cavity, but the . abdominal cavity was examined . Russo recounting that one . of JFK &#0
 Finck: If Finck was right, so much for the military&#039;s kowtowing to the Kennedys . Finck says if Finck is right, military shouldn't have been too much of a military power player in the world .
 Doctors kept quiet about JFK's adrenal problems, at least until 1992, until 1992 . JFK's family may have won if doctors kept quiet .
 They didn&#039;t win much else, and they didn't interfere with the autopsy . The autopsy was the first of its kind, and the autopsy was conducted by the coroner .
 Military authorities did select the sub par autopsists, military authorities did . They didn&#039;t, for example, select sub-par autopsiers; they did. They didn't select the . sub par . autopsies .
 The nominees requested that nonmilitary forensic consultants be called in . Realizing how over their heads they were, they requested that they called in. Realizing that they were over-the-heads, they asked that they be called to consult nonmilitary consultants .
 Humes apparently confided in a personal friend, Jim Snyder, that he had orders from someone he refused to disclose to not do a complete autopsy . Humes also told a friend he had been ordered not to do a full autopsy .
 RFK left blank the space marked marked &#039;restrictions in the permit he signed authorizing his brother's autopsy . RFK also left blank space marked in permit authorizing brother's autopsy .
 As mentioned, Holland&#039;s latest and perhaps most ambitious theory involves a successful Communist conspiracy . Garrison: "Holland's most ambitious conspiracy theory involves the Communist Party"
 The KGB planted a false story in an Italian paper Paese Sera to fool Jim Garrison into believing Clay Shaw had CIA ties . Garrison&#039;s febririle imagination also bound Shaw to Oswald, and both to Dallas .
 The commie concoction left collateral damage extending far beyond doubts about Dallas . Dallas is a city of contrasts with New York, New Jersey .
 Holland cites testimony from Richard Helms that proves well-documented involvement in dezinformatsiya . As evidence of the KGB&#039;s chicanery, Holland cited testimony from Helms .
 Holland writes that, &#039;Altogether, Helms observed, the episode was an . excellent example of how the Communists use the false news story to stunning effect .
 Paese Sera would go unexamined, unexposed, and unchallenged . Six years later, a grander and more pernicious concoction originating in the same newspaper would go unpunished . The scandal would go on for six years .
 In 1967 Paese Sera series, there was no mention of the Kennedy case . But nowhere in the series was there any mention of that case . The series was set to be retold in the 1960s .
 Shaw had been on the board of directors of an international trade organization headquartered in Rome, Centro Mondiale Comerciale . The organization had been a CIA front, Shaw said . Shaw said he was a member of the CIA .
 Paese Sera&#039;s six articles appeared three days after Shaw's arrest . The first of the six articles had appeared just three days before Shaw was arrested . Shaw was charged with attempted murder in connection with the death of his wife .
 Foreign Affairs contributor Philip Zelikow wrote a favorable commentary on Holland&#039;s web-only piece . The piece was published in Holland and was published on the web .
 They wrote a letter to Foreign Affairs&#039; editor, which the magazine refused to run . The letter was refused to be published by Foreign Affairs .
 Stone and Sklar published their snubbed letter as an advertisement in, of all places, The Nation, where Holland has served as a contributing editor . Ironically, the letter was published in The Nation .
 Holland&#039;s KGB conspiracy theory was based on a single handwritten note of a Russian defector . The note makes no mention of Clay Shaw, of CMC, or of Jim Garrison .
 Holland had published his story without having done as elemental a background check as well as contacting the editors of Paese Sera. They say he should have contacted the editors .
 Editor: Had Holland bothered to do his homework, editors would have said series had nothing to do with the KGB or JFK assassination . Editor: They were astonished to see that Shaw might have any connection to the assassination . Garrison had never heard of Garrison .
 Garrison correctly pointed out Garrison had wrongly claimed in his book that he hadn&#039;t heard of Paese Sera articles before he tried Clay Shaw in 1969 . Garrison wrongly said Garrison hadn't heard of the PaeseSera articles .
 Holland found notes from Life correspondent Richard Billings dated in March and April 1967 . Billings suggested Garrison had gotten wind of Paese Sera&#039;s charges . Holland found the notes from Billings .
 Holland was probably right that Garrison had heard of the charges from Italy in 1967 . It is far from clear that Garrison thought that much about them, that they were the inspiration for his ultimate theory of Agency involvement .
 William W Turner, a close confidant of Garrison in that era, told the author that Paese Sera in no way influenced Garrison&#039;s actions .
 Garrison can&#039;t name a single action Garrison undertook that can't be explained by those articles . Second, you can't name one of Garrison's actions that can be explained, Garrison says .
 Garrison couldn&#039;t cite the stories in court, and since he couldn't afford to send investigators to Italy to prove the charges, they weren't useful legally . Garrison couldn’t afford to pay investigators to investigate the stories, so he couldn‘#0
 On the Trail of the Assassins was first published in 1988, 21 years after Shaw&#039;s arrest . Shaw was arrested in 1992, but was never charged with murder .
 Garrison burned with the rumors from Rome may never be known . Whether Garrison secretly burned with rumors may never know .
 Garrison made scant mention of Billings and probably did forget about them by the time of the trial, two years later . But it is clear that other than perhaps to Billings, Garrison thereafter made scant mentions of them .
 He did not mention Clay Shaw, although perhaps because of the pending legal wrangle . Nor did he mention Shaw, who is embroiled in a legal dispute .
 Shaw had had an eight-year relationship with the CIA . Shaw had sent information to the CIA on 33 separate occasions . The CIA graded Shaw's information as reliable and reliable .
 Holland never thought to question whether Helms&#039;s innocent version of its arrangement with Shaw was fully truthful, or whether the Agency files he has seen had been sanitized . Holland: "Helms' innocent account of Shaw's relationship with Helms was not fully truthful
 William Turner published a letter in the May issue of New Orleans Magazine that offered additional insights on whether Garrison was duped . Turner published the letter .
 I am a former FBI agent and author who assisted Garrison in his JFK assassination probe . I am an author who helped Garrison in the JFK assassination .
 Holland omits that last April he contacted me about my calling Garrison Garrison&#039;s attention to Italian press reports on Shaw's link to CIA-influenced trade organizations . Garrison: Last April, I called Garrison Garrison about Shaw's links to Italian trade groups .
 The DA&#039s office would not use press clippings as evidence, he says . I told him that it should have been up to the FBI, which had the resources and reach to investigate .
 Clay Shaw is a former CIA agent who did some work for the CIA in Italy over a five-year span . Betty Parrott, who was in the same social set as FBI agent Regis Kennedy, informed the DA's office that Clay Shaw was a former agent .
 Shaw was indicted by a grand jury, and a judge ruled that there was probable cause to bring him to trial . Shaw has been charged with murder in connection with the death of a woman in 2008 .
 Garrison proved a conspiracy but did not produce sufficient evidence to plug Shaw into it, jury found . Jury found Garrison proved conspiracy but didn't produce enough evidence to charge Shaw . Garrison was found guilty of conspiracy but not guilty of murder .
 In 1978 the House Select Committee on Assassinations thought Garrison had the right man . Garrison was killed by a plane crash in 1978 .
 Garrison had other reasons to link the CIA to the crime, including Betty Parrott's pre-trial revelation . Garrison: "Weisberg &#039;s book naming the CIA in 1967" Garrison: Weisberg's book named the CIA .
 The Agency was then well known to have been responsible for the botched Bay of Pigs affair . Garrison then knew that numerous Oswald associates had ties to that episode .
 As Philip Melanson has noted, &#039; the shadowy figures who surrounded de Mohrenschildt, Ferrie, Banister, and some of the anti-Castro Cubans were CIA-connected .
 One of the things we learned from the Iran-Contra affair is that in the clandestine world it is difficult to determine who is really working for the government, as opposed to those who pretend they are or think they are .
 Elements of the CIA&#039;s anti-Castro network could easily have conspired to assassinate the president . Oswald as the centerpiece of the operation . Oswald was Oswald's target .
 Holland's evidence for the paper&#039;s KGB pedigree is less than perfect . Holland &#040;s evidence for this article is that the paper has a KGB pedigree, not a perfect match .
 CIA man Richard Helms' 1961 Senate testimony about an April 23, 1961 Paese Sera Sera&#039;s story . Helms was a CIA man and CIA man .
 Helms said the smear had first connected the CIA to the coup against De Gaulle . Helms: The smear grew as it was retold by other media outlets .
 Paese Sera accurately reported the rumors in Italy first . They were accurately reported in Italy before the publication of the story in Italy .
 Tully: CIA operatives let their own politics show and by doing so led the rebels to believe that the U.S. looked with favor on their adventure . Tully added that the evidence indicates there were CIA operatives who let their politics show .
 Holland's involvement in dezinformatsiya during the failed French coup is not exactly well-documented . Holland&#039;s working premise of its working premise is not well-known .
 It is fair to wonder at Holland&#039;s embrace of Helms, a man of no small accomplishment in the art of spreading dezinformatsiya . Helms is a well-known figure in Russia .
 Helms displayed what he characterized as fabricated reports alleging an &#039;American Plot to Overthrow Sukarno . Helms was in a 1961 Senate appearance discussing the very 1961 Senate . appearance discussing Communism Forgeries . Holland cites, Helms cited what he called the reports .
 Foreign dezinformatsiya was closer to the truth than the Senate testimony of a high CIA official . Thus, at least in this instance, the truth was closer .
 In relying on Helms, Holland may be forgiven for not knowing the misleading nature of some of his testimony in 1961 . But he surely could not have forgotten that Helms had lied to the United States Senate .
 Helms told the Senate the CIA had played no role in demolishing Chile&#039;s democracy in 1973 . Helms said the CIA did not play a role in destroying democracy in Chile .
 The first time Holland presented his KGB-duped-Garrison theory was apparently in an article published in the spring 2001 issue of the Wilson Quarterly .
 On 15 October 1999, McAdams started a thread in a newsgroup entitled, &#039;IL PAESE SERA and Communist disinformation . He started the thread in the on-line newsgroup .
 This fable bears all the earmarks of having been invented within the bloc . Although this fable could have been started by supporters of General Challe, it could have all been invented by the French .
 In Western Europe this lie was first printed on the 23rd of April by a Rome daily called Il Paese . It was first published in Italy by the Italian daily IlPaese .
 We believe it to be a crypto-Communist paper but it is not like Unit&amp;agrave;, the large Communist daily in Rome . It is not a large Communist paper in Rome, but it's not a small Communist paper .
 It purports to be an independent newspaper, but obviously it serves Communist ends . The Communist Party newspaper is based in Hong Kong and Beijing .
 This paper and its evening edition, Paese Sera, belong to a small group of journals published in the free world but used as outlets for disguised Soviet propaganda . This paper is used as an outlet for disguised propaganda .
 These newspapers consistently release and replay anti-American, anti-Western, pro-Soviet bloc stories . These stories are distorted or wholly false, they say .
 Mario Malloni, director of both Il Paese and Paese Sera, has been a member of the World Peace Council since 1958 . Malloni is also a director of the Paese-Sera network .
 On the next day Pravda published in Moscow a long article about the generals&#039; revolt . On the night of the revolt, the Russians were outraged by the events .
 This is important context for understanding the PAESE SERA articles that linked Clay Shaw to CMC/Permindex, and connected CMC to support for the OAS attempts against DeGaulle, various fascist and Nazi forces, etc. etc.
 The PAESE SERA stories were quickly picked up and repeated by leftist journals in France, Moscow, and Canada . The stories were picked up by leftist journalists in France and Russia .
 This by no means proves that the CMC/PERMINDEX stuff was a KGB disinformation operation . It's not proof that it was a disinformation operation by the KGB .
 The left-wing journalists at the paper would have been happy to smear what they considered to be the &quot;forces of capitalist imperialism&quot;" without any direct orders from Moscow . They would be happy to smear what they thought to be capitalist imperialism without any orders from
 Helms is only *inferring* that the earlier story about anti-De Gaulle generals was a KGB operation . Helms says he is only inferring that the story about the earlier . de Gaulle . generals was an anti-Glorle generals .
 This episode does put the 1967 articles on Shaw/Permindex into context . But it does put them into context.
 The articles were, in one way or another, motivated by a communist ideological agenda . They were, for example, by some of them, to be motivated by an ideology .
 Holland nowhere credits McAdams with his KGB/Pease Sera-duped-Garrison &#039;find.Garrison . Holland .
 Kennedy was an enthusiastic manifestation of America&#039;s powerful militaristic inclinations . Kennedy was a representative of American elites, the deceitful and arrogant, and always hawkish .
 He in no way represented a change in America&#039;s direction, whether on Vietnam, on Cuba, or on the Cold War, he says . He says he was not a change of America's direction .
 Kennedy &#039;s rabid anti-Castroism provoked an unstable Castroite to take his revenge . Kennedy&#038;s anti- Castroite took his revenge in the wake of Castro's assassination .
 Family hobbled the government&#039;s no-holds-barred investigation to protect the daft myth of Camelot . After that, the family hobbled . The investigation was hobbled by the family to protect Camelot's myth of the daffit myth
 The Warren Commission&#039;s shortcomings, which Holland does not totally deny, were not the product of errors made in bad faith, he says . Holland: Warren Commission's shortcomings were not product of bad faith . Holland says the Warren Commission did not make mistakes, but they
 Kennedy family impediments in conducting as thorough an investigation as was humanly possible . They were instead missteps that resulted from the honorable, if imperfect, efforts of government to protect vital state secrets .
 What is surprising is how broad, divers and mainstream the new consensus is. What is perhaps most surprising is the broad and mainstream, new consensus, is.
 JFK was clearly not &#039;always hawkish. The public record now shows that JFK was not always hawkish . It turns out the public record shows that he was not a hawk.
 He withstood pressure from the CIA and the military to follow-up the foundering Bay of Pigs invasion with a military assault on Cuba . The Cuban invasion failed, but President George W. Bush withstood the pressure .
 He rejected advice to use force in Laos, pushing against the defense establishment to achieve an ultimately successful negotiated settlement .
 He shouldered aside the defense and intelligence establishments to advance a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviets . The treaty was signed by President Nixon in 1953 .
 Kennedy rejected the near unanimous proposals of his advisers to put large numbers of American combat troops in Laos, South Vietnam, or both . Kennedy rejected those proposals .
 A fresh look at the final months of his presidency suggests that a second term might have produced an American withdrawal from Vietnam and rapprochement with Fidel Castro&#039;s Cuba . A second term may have produced not only an American withdraw from Vietnam, but also rappro
 Documents released in response to the public uproar over the pro-Kennedy and pro-conspiracy film that Max Holland so abhors, Oliver Stone, has won again . So it may well be that the greatest irony of all is that in the mountain of documents released in . response
 He did represent change &amp;ndash; right up until the moment the shots rang out in Dealey Plaza . He represented change right up to the moment .
 Wilson Quarterly, Winter, 1994, 88. on pages 82 &amp;ndash; 91. 28 . Government is just now beginning to admit its responsibility for poisoning its own citizens .
 He believed Marcello was not engaged in any organized crime activities or other illegal actions during the period from 1959 until at least 1963 . He said he believed he did not engage in any illegal activities .
 He did not believe Marcello was a significant organized crime figure and does not believe that he is currently involved in criminal enterprises . He also stated that he did not think Marcella was currently involved with criminal activities .
 Kennedy said Marcello worked as a tomato salesman and real estate investor . Kennedy told the committee that he believed he would not be involved in any improper activity .
 Fatal Hour &amp;ndash; The Assassination of President Kennedy by Organized Crime . The assassination of JFK was organized by organized crime in the 1960s and '60s .
 Watergate &amp;ndash; The Corruption of American Politics and the Fall of Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon was president of the United States during the Nixon administration . Watergate and Watergate are the subject of a new book, Watergate .
 In taking this stand he implicitly turned his back on the sentiments of his old friend, Hamilton Fish Armstrong, who wrote Allen that the truth must come out, &#039; no matter who it affects, FBI included . Allen's stand implicitly turns back on his friend's sentiments,
 Report, and also published under the title, &#039;CIA Targets Fidel, was published by Ocean Press in 1996 . Report was also published in 1996 and 1997 . Report .
 National Insecurity &amp;ndash; United States Intelligence After the Cold War, edited by Craig Eisendrath .
 Case Open &amp;ndash; The Omissions, Distortions and Falsifications of Case Closed. Case Open andamp;nash. Case Closed . Case Open .nash . The Omission, Distortion and Felsifications of
 Max Holland published in the Spring of 1999 by the Miller Center of Public Affairs . An article by Max Holland .
 The Kennedy who was really in charge in the tower suite was the Attorney General . Harper &amp; Row, 1967, 419, 419. : &#039;The Kennedy . who was in charge was the attorney general .
 Humes and Boswell requested, and were discouraged from, seeking local, non-military experts . Humes, Boswell, requested that they avoid seeking local experts in the U.S.
 Lattimer writes: Commanders Humes and Boswell inquired as to whether or not any of their consultants from the medical examiner&#039;s office in Washington or Baltimore should be summoned . This action was discouraged .
 Hearing before the Legislation and National Security Subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations House of Representatives, One Hundred Third Congress, First Session, November 17, 1993 . Hearing before a hearing on the legislation and national security .
 Godfrey McHugh, then an Air Force military aide to the President, informed the committee that Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and Kenneth O&#039;Donnell frequently telephoned him during the autopsy from the 17th floor suite .
 McHugh said Kennedy and O&#039;Donnell asked only to speak with him . McHugh: Kennedy andDonnell asked for only to talk with him at all times .
 They inquired about the results, why the autopsy was consuming so much time, and the need for speed and efficiency, while still performing the required examinations . The autopsy was being carried out at the request of the public .
 McHugh said he forwarded this information to pathologists, never stating or implying that doctors should limit autopsy in any manner, but merely reminding them to work as efficiently and quickly as possible . McHugh: "I never stated or implied that the doctors . should limit the autopsy in . any
 On the Trail of the Assassins &amp;ndash; My Investigation and Prosecution of the Murder of President Kennedy. My Investigation . of the . Murder of the President Kennedy . On the trail of the assassins &amp.;ndash. On the . Trail of . the Assassins .
 The Assassination Chronicles &amp;ndash; Inquest, Counterplot, and Legend by Edward J Epstein . Edward J. Epstein. Edward J . Epstein.
 In Western Europe this lie was first printed on the 23d of April by a Rome daily called &#039;Il Paese . The lie was published in Italy by the Italian daily Il Paese on April 23 .
 We believe it to be a crypto-Communist paper but it is not like Unita, the large Communist daily in Rome . The paper is not a large Communist paper in Rome, but it's not like 'Unita'
 It purports to be an independent newspaper, but obviously it servers Communist ends . It has been a Communist newspaper for years .
 We found it interesting that Il Paese was the starting point for a lie that the Soviets spread around the world . The Soviets spread the lie around the globe, starting with the birth of the first World War I .
 Instead of having this originate in Moscow, they planted the story first in Italy and picked it up from Italy . This is the way it actually went out in point of time. The story was planted in Italy, where everybody would pinpoint it .
 Interim Report: Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, the Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities , 20 November 1975, p 4 .
 Death of a Generation &amp;ndash; How the Assassinations of Diem and JFK Prolonged the Vietnam War . How the assassinations of JFK and Diem led to the deaths of a generation of Americans .
 He held to this position even when it became evident that without that support the invasion would fail . The invasion would not have been successful without the support of the US.
 His aides were astonished when told them that, if necessary, he would forfeit his reelection for the sake of the treaty . The treaty was signed in 1877 .
 Historian John Newman was the first to popularize the idea in his book, JFK and Vietnam . Oliver Stone relied upon it for his film .
 To Move A Nation &amp;ndash; The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration of John F Kennedy . John F. Kennedy. The Politics Of Foreign Policy .
 Kennedy in Vietnam: American Vietnam Policy 1960 &amp;ndash; 1963 . Kennedy in the U.S. Vietnam policy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 It is clear beyond any doubt that he had refused, on a number of earlier occasions, to do what Johnson did during those years . He also showed he preferred a neutral government in Laos to American military involvement on behalf of pro-Western forces .
 He also had a wide-ranging diplomatic agenda, explored at length in American Tragedy, which could not be reconciled with war in Asia .
 Robert Dallek's new biographs don&#039;t tell you about JFK and Vietnam . The War Room will air tonight at 9 p.m. ET on CNN.com .
 The Nation Magazine has long been one of the most perceptive and eloquent voices for skepticism in publishing . This version has been updated and revised beyond what was originally published in this issue .
 It has always been an early voice, often the first, to question official pronouncements – on Vietnam, on Watergate, on Iran-Contra, on Guatemala, on Haiti, and Chile . It has also been a voice on Watergate .
 In taking down the Warren Commission, malicious and stupid skeptics have spawned a corrosive public cynicism about the government's honest answer to the Crime of the Century in 1964 . Here I must own up to some personal history .
 Oswald impersonated in taped conversations recorded by the CIA in Mexico City six weeks before JFK's death . Max Holland did not appear pleased at what he heard .
 W David Slawson admitted he had been permitted to hear at least part of one tape during his tenure with the Commission . John Armstrong gave his usual dramatic presentation of documents showing that on numerous occasions there were two different 'Oswalds' appearing simultaneously .
 The government's well-intended decision to protect the public from the seamier aspects of this scenario explains why the public has never understood the whole picture . But not from the target of Kennedy's malice, Castro, but from a delusional, self-appointed pro-Castro avenger
 The bogus story was all the loose cannon in New Orleans needed . Lacking even a valid scintilla with which to move forward against Shaw, the bogus story is all it needs .
 Holland does not deny that some cynicism about government is justified . The final upshot was a senseless catastrophe for Shaw, and a loss of faith in America .
 First, the public didn't 'adorn' the Roswell incident with paranoid mythic significance because the government told the truth but not the whole truth . Second, the government invited farfetched theorizing by offering three different 'factual' explanations for what really happened .
 Since Hofstadter delivered his famous lecture in 1963, 'paranoia' has been beating a steady retreat . And it doesn't reflect the changing nature of what properly constitutes 'paranxiety' today .
 FBI went out in the field, interviewed witnesses, deposed witnesses, conducted a first hand evaluation of evidence . "You can say weren't trained homicide investigators – that's true – but the FBI didn't also investigate a lot of murders either," says FBI chief .
 All FBI agents who ever came into contact with Oswald with Oswald signed affidavits saying they had never attempted to recruit Oswald . Holland adds that the affidavits prove that the FBI never tried to recruit the Oswald .
 Warren Commission has been the rule of skepticism about the Warren Commission . It isn't surprising that such a novel defense has never been tried before by anyone – except perhaps by ex-Commissioners Gerald Ford and David Belin .
 There is no denying that the Commission learned little about Oswald's associates . Those critiques, it should be noted, bear an eerie similarity to the critiques of skeptics such as historian Michael Kurtz .
 The Commission ultimately concluded Ruby was not connected to the mob . The HSCA performed the rudimentary task of actually analyzing Ruby's calls and exposing Lenny Patrick's and Dave Yaras' mob ties .
 Ruby and the Mafia were involved in the murder of Michael Ruby in New York City . Ruby was found guilty of the crime, but the Mafia was not involved in it . Ruby's murder was the first known connection to the Mafia in the case .
 The evidence indicates that Hoover viewed the Warren Commission more as an adversary than a partner in a search for the facts of the assassination,' the HSCA concluded in 1978 .
 Oswald had been an FBI informant, according to the Warren Commission . This had repercussions on possibly the most explosive rumor the Commission ever dealt with – that Oswald was a FBI informant . The Warren Commission investigated Oswald's role in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The record suggests the CIA had been little better than the FBI . Two years before the HSCA issued its report, the Senate Select Committee reported on its own examination of the process .
 Two government bodies that – armed in abundance with the one key capacity the Commission needed but lacked, lacked, a staff of experienced and proven criminal investigators – uncovered good reasons to incline any reasonable person toward skepticism . That is, of course, good reasons for skepticism .
 The HSCA's chief counsel, Robert Blakey, was impressed with neither the Commission's vigor nor its independence . The Commissioners freely admitted they never once found even a single occasion to offer a grant of immunity to pursue their only client .
 Senator Hale Boggs: You have put your finger on it. They have tried the case and reached a verdict on every aspect . They have reached every aspect of the case, he says . Senator says: 'You have put a finger on the issue'
 HSCA deputy chief counsel Gary Cornwell 'recycles some of the hoariest clichés regarding the Warren Commission,' says Holland . Holland seems disinclined to accept any of the HSC's critique of the Commission .
 Hoover, the Justice Department and the White House 'exerted pressure' on senior Bureau officials to issue a factual report supporting the conclusion that Oswald was the lone assassin, Hoover says . Hoover: The FBI, Justice Department, White House "exercised pressure" on senior bureau officials
 Commissioner McCloy's word – 'We are so dependent on for our facts' – accounts for nothing with Max Holland . Holland is not the only person to be suspended from the job .
 Howard Roffman has pointed to a clear inclination on the Commission's part that existed before it had begun its investigation . He has written that Rankin and Warren drew up the plans for the organization of the work that the staff was to undertake for the Commission .
 The Commission did, from the very beginning, plan its work with a distinct bias. Thus, it is painfully apparent that the Commission did . The Commission planned its work from the beginning of the Commission with a different bias.
 This outline reveals the extent of the conclusion of Oswald's guilt was pre-determined . It also shows the extent to the extent that the conclusion had been determined by Oswald's lawyers .
 Section II, ""Lee Harvey Oswald as the Assassin of President Kennedy,"" begins by outlining Oswald's movements on the day of the assassination . Section II begins with a brief account of the day Oswald was assassinated .
 Even the FBI had refrained from drawing a conclusion as to whether or not Oswald had murdered Officer Tippit .
 Warren confident in FBI's solution so early in the game . Warren critic Dwight McDonald made an insightful comment in 1965 on how the rest of the chips so easily fell into place .
 The Athens Observer also noted that Russell has never hidden his dissent . Russell's views have never been hidden in the past .
 Holland sought to salvage the reputation of the Deputy Attorney General in 1963 . Holland Redeems Nicholas Katzenbach in a telling paragraph .
 JFK repeatedly made it clear he wanted no American men landing on the beaches during the Cuban invasion . In his book Bay of Pigs – The Untold Story,90 Peter Wyden reminds us that JFK .
 Anyone could look at the record and still believe that the CIA was the President's personal instrument, for good or ill, during the Cold War . Neither Cockburn nor Holland is expert on the Kennedy assassination, they've relied upon others .
 Holland's favorite conspiracy exorcist has himself been debunked, not only by the skeptics, but also by no less than the legitimate authorities Posner reverently cites in his own book .
 Even the recently disbanded panel of civilian historians hired by the government to declassify millions of once secret records – the JFK Review Board – took a whack at Posner .
 If Holland and Posner are right that the little girl turned in reaction to a missed, first shot, the timing of her turn excuses Oswald . Holland offers as evidence of Oswald's guilt the misinterpreted motions of this single person, while ignoring other witnesses .
 He is silent about the fact the HSCA concluded the first shot was fired circa 190 years ago . He is also silent on the fact that the first shots were fired in 190 years .
 The search for meaning extended outside the immediate Kennedy family circle too . Significantly, the search for a new meaning also extended outside of the immediate family .
 Oswald defected to the UPI on 11/1/59 . Any decent public library would have sufficed with the story .
 Holland had placed himself above academics such as Scott, who he had castigated for unreliability . Holland's error is a rather minor one, but it deserves attention given how he had put himself above Scott . Scott had previously castigated Holland for being unreliable .
 A wild-eyed New Orleans district attorney off on a snipe hunt . But nowhere in the 1967 Paese Sera series was there any mention of the Kennedy case .
 Holland's KGB conspiracy theory is based on a single handwritten note of a Russian defector, the authors say . They say it makes no mention of Clay Shaw, of CMC, or of Jim Garrison . Holland had published his story without having done as elemental a background check .
 They also dismissed Holland's claim that, 'the Paese Sera articles were what led Garrison to believe the CIA was involved in the assassination,' noting that Garrison's book On the Trail of the Assassins describes in detail how his uncovering of various pieces of evidence actually led him to the
 Holland fired right back with gusto, answering Stone and Sklar in the letters pages of the The Nation .
 Holland was probably right that Garrison had heard of the charges from Italy in 1967, but it is far from clear that he thought that much about them . William W Turner, a close confidant of Garrison in that era, told the author that Paese Sera in no way influenced Garrison
 On the Trail of the Assassins was first published in 1988, 21 years after Shaw's arrest . Garrison burned with the rumors from Rome may never be known .
 Holland portrays the Shaw trial as a farce . Kennedy refused to testify on grounds of executive privilege .
 Weisberg's book naming the CIA in 1967 named the CIA . Garrison had other reasons to link the CIA to the crime .
 Holland's working premise of 'Paese Sera's involvement in dezinformatsiya' during the failed French coup is not exactly well-documented . It is fair to wonder at Holland's embrace of Helms, a man of no small accomplishment in the art of spreading dezin
 Helms lied to the United States Senate in 1961, Holland says . Holland may have forgotten that Helms had lied to U.S. Senate, he says .
 The PAESE SERA stories were quickly picked up and repeated by leftist journals in France, Moscow, and Canada . This by no means proves that the CMC/PERMINDEX stuff was a KGB disinformation operation .
 The left-wing journalists at the paper would have been happy to smear what they considered to be the ""forces of capitalist imperialism"" without any direct orders from Moscow .
 Helms is only *inferring* that the earlier story about anti-De Gaulle generals was a KGB operation . But this episode does put the 1967 articles on Shaw/Permindex into context .
 He in no way represented a change in America's direction – whether on Vietnam, on Cuba, or on the Cold War, he said . He said he was not a change of America's policy .
 The family hobbled the government's no-holds-barred investigation to protect the daft myth of Camelot . The Warren Commission's shortcomings were not the product of errors made in bad faith . Holland does not totally deny that .
 To The Establishment, JFK was a threat. But it is close to the one we get from Oliver Stone . The film has been released in response to the public uproar over the film .
 He did represent change – right up until the moment the shots rang out in Dealey Plaza .
 Wilson Quarterly, Winter, 1994, 88. on pages 82 – 91. 28 'fter a half-century of official denial and derision, the government is just now beginning to admit its responsibility for poisoning its own citizens' with wildly immoral and illegal Plutonium injections'
 Fatal Hour – The Assassination of President Kennedy by Organized Crime . Fatal Hour is a look at the assassination of the president by organized crime .
 Watergate – The Corruption of American Politics and the Fall of Richard Nixon . Watergate is the corruption of American politics . Richard Nixon was the president of the United States .
 National Insecurity – United States Intelligence After the Cold War, edited by Craig Eisendrath . U.S. intelligence after Cold War .
 Case Open – The Omissions, Distortions and Falsifications of Case Closed. Case Open . Case Open is the Omissions and Distortionions of the Case Closed . Case Closed is the case that the author of the novel "Case Closed"
 Manchester attributes to RFK had nothing whatsoever to do with autopsy limitations . But the decisions were made by RFK, Manchester City says .
 On the Trail of the Assassins – My Investigation and Prosecution of the Murder of President Kennedy . On the trail of the assassins – My . Investigation and . Prosecution . of the murder of President . Kennedy . on the Trail .
 The Assassination Chronicles – Inquest, Counterplot, and Legend by Edward J Epstein . Edward J. Epstein. The Assassinations Chronicles . Edward Epstein .
 Diem and JFK were assassinated in the Vietnam War . Diem's assassination was the first of a generation to be assassinated in Vietnam . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 To Move A Nation – The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration of John F Kennedy . John F. Kennedy's Administration .
 He also showed – and not at all 'reluctantly' – that he preferred a neutral government in Laos to U.S. military involvement on behalf of pro-Western forces .
 Robert Dallek's new biographs don't tell you about JFK and Vietnam . The War Room is a new look at JFK's Vietnam War legacy .
 Gary L Aguilar, MD, is one of the few physicians outside the government ever permitted to examine the still-restricted photographs and X-rays taken during President Kennedy’s autopsy .
 He has published widely on the medical evidence in professional journals, books and on-line .
 He has lectured before academic medical, academic medico-legal, and non-professional public audiences on the subject . He has also lectured to academic medical and academic public audiences .
 Heading into Overtime: Heading Into Overtime . Back to the page you came from . Please consider supporting our efforts.