 The president’s staff and key leadership in the military and intelligence agencies were all challenged on how to handle this situation . President Obama's staff and military leaders were challenged .
 Reports from the CIA were coming in saying that the Soviet Union was not a threat to America . Throughout the year of 1962, CIA reports said that the U.S. was not at risk to the Soviets .
 The Soviet military was seen as a military aide to Fidel Castro and military weapons were being shipped in to support this aide . The Soviet government was seen to be seen as an aide to Castro .
 Reports of possible missile launch platforms were reported at several construction sites . This added to the list of problems in Cuba this year .
 U.S. used U.2 spy plane program to verify what launch pads could be used for launch pads . Launch pads are used to launch satellites into space .
 The president now had photographic evidence that missiles had been moved to Cuba and launch pads were being built . The president had been briefed on Cuba's missile program .
 President Kennedy felt that the best course of action would be to inform the American people of the activity in Cuba . President Kennedy said the best way of informing the U.S. was to inform them of the situation .
 On October 22nd he announced that a quarantine of Cuba would be required to be put in place to stop the military buildup of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 The quarantine would start on the 24th of October at 10 AM Eastern time and a quarantine line around Cuba would be established . The quarantine line will be established around Cuba .
 The events during this time period challenged our intelligence capabilities and altered the way we operated around the world during the Cold War . The events in the 1950s and '60s challenged intelligence capabilities . The Cold War changed the way the U.S. operated in the world, the author says
 New technologies and new intelligence tactics were developed to insure that such an incident like this would never happen again . New technologies have been developed to ensure the incident never happens again .
 Nikita Khrushchev amplified his support to Fidel Castro’s Cuban rule in 1962 . During the summer of 1962 the leader of the . Soviet Union, Nikita . Khrush.chev .