 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 SEPTEMBER 2017 HISTORY P1 ADDENDUM *HISTE3* This addendum consists of 13 pages .
 JF Kennedy, president of the United States of America, delivered a speech on 16 October 1962 . The speech was part of a speech delivered by Kennedy on October 16, 1962 .
 In this address he talks about the Soviet Union's deployment of missiles to Cuba . He talks about how the U.S. government intended to deal with the crisis .
 The same thing applies in regard to the essences of the missile bases in Cuba . The Cuban missile bases are a key part of the U.S. strategy .
 President Kennedy is ready to come to an agreement with NS Khrushchev, too . Kennedy is also ready to agree on an agreement on the issue with NSKhrushchev too .
 This cartoon by E Valtman appeared in The Hartford Times, on 30 October 1962 . It was published in the Hartford Times .
 This source shows the involvement of foreign countries in the Angola after 1975 . SOURCE 2A This source also shows the role of foreign nations in Angola .
 The crisis in Angola developed into a Cold War battleground as the superpowers and their allies delivered military assistance to their preferred clients . The crisis developed into the Cold War .
 U.S. supplied aid and training for both the FNLA and UNITA . Zaire troops from Zaire assisted Holden Roberto and his fighters .
 Before November 11, the MPLA had negotiated with Castro for Cuban assistance . The MPLA was negotiating with Castro before November 11 .
 UNITA, which enjoyed United States support, approached the Apartheid government in South Africa for military reinforcement . At the same time, UNITa was approached by the government in apartheid-era South Africa .
 Pretoria contributed forces that entered southern Angola in October and made rapid progress toward the capital . Pretoria wants to end the use of Angola as a base for rebels fighting for the independence of Namibia .
 Savimbi developed close relations with influential U.S. conservatives . They saw him as a key ally in the effort to oppose and rollback Soviet-backed, non-democratic governments around the world .
 The conflict quickly escalated , with Washington and Moscow seeing it as a critical strategic conflict in the Cold War . Washington and Russia saw each other see it as an important strategic conflict .
 The Soviet Union gave an additional $1 billion in aid to the MPLA government and Cuba sent an additional 2,000 troops to the 35,000-strong force in Angola to protect Chevron oil platforms in 1986 . Reagan administration and its conservative allies also worked to expand recognition of Savim
 In January 1986, Reagan invited Savimbi to meet with him at the White House . Reagan invited him to meet in January 1986 at the Oval Office .
 Reagan spoke of UNITA winning a victory that ""electrifies the world"" at the White House in January 1986 . Following the meeting, Reagan spoke . Reagan said UNITa's victory would "electrify the world"
 Reagan announced the delivery of Stinger surface-to-air missiles as part of the $25 million in aid UNITA received from the United States government . Two months later, Reagan announced that the missiles were delivered .
 Jeremias Chitunda, UNITA's representative to the U.S. became the Vice President of UNITa in August 1986 at the sixth party congress . He was the party's representative in the United States, and was its representative in Washington DC .
 Battle of Cuito Cuanavale had impact on Southern African region . Source describes impact of the battle on Southern Africa region . History P1 9 SOURCE 2D .
 The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale and the Cuban intervention in Angola is one of the turning points in Southern African history . The battle was a turning point in Southern Africa's history .
 It led to the movement of powerful Cuban armed force, into the west, towards the Namibian border . The movement of Cuban armed forces was led by the government of Cuba .
 Fighting in the south western part of Angola led to the withdrawal of the South African, ANC and Cuban presence in Angola, and to the independence of Namibia . The fighting in the area led to an end to the apartheid regime in Angola .
 The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale is a contentious issue, widely discussed and debated by ordinary people, participants and historians . It is, however, an issue that has been widely debated and debated .
 Cuito Cuanavale is described as a defeat of the South African Defence Force . Depending on where you stand, the SADF's defeat or a tactical withdrawal may be a stalemate . The battle ended in a draw or a defeat .
 The siege of Cuito Cuanavale was fought on the banks of the Lomba River in south-eastern Angola . UNITA and the Angolan army were aided by Cuba, the Soviet Union and to a lesser extent East Germany .
 This source is an extract from Stokely Carmichael and George Hamilton’s book, Black Power . SOURCE 3A This source was taken from the book Black Power, written by Carmichael, Hamilton .
 SNCC believes that blacks must organise in the black community . SNCC (Student Non-violent Co-ordinating Committee) today believes that black community must organise . Any programme to end racism must address itself to that double reality .
 Only black people can convey the revolutionary idea that black people are able to do things themselves, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Only black people have the ability to do something themselves"
 Only they can help create in the community an aroused and continuing black consciousness that will provide the basis for political strength . Only they will help create an aroused black consciousness, says Roland Martin .
 In the past, white allies have furthered white supremacy without the whites involved realising it or wanting it, I think. In the future, it will be easier for white allies to use their allies to push for white supremacy, but not realise it or want it. White allies have
 "Black people are fed up with the dillydallying ... compromising approach that we’ve been using toward getting our freedom," she said . "We’re not going to be able to get our freedom,” she said. “Black people’
 Our people have to be made to see that any time you take your dollar out of your community and spend it in a community where you don’t live, it will get poorer and poorer . The communities where you spend your money will get richer and richer, he says .
 This source explains the philosophy, goals and achievements of the Black Power Movement . P1 11: The Black Power movement was founded in the 1960s and 1970s . HISTORY P1: The history of the movement is explained in this article .
 The Black Power movement instilled a sense of racial pride and self-esteem in blacks . The movement was formed in the 1960s and '60s .
 Black Power advocates encouraged blacks to form or join all-black political parties . All-black parties could provide a formidable power base and offer a foundation for real socio-economic progress .
 For years, the movement's leaders said, blacks had been trying to aspire to white ideals of what they should be . They said they were trying to be more like white ideals .
 "Now it's time for blacks to set their own agenda, putting their needs and aspirations first," says Roland Martin . Martin: Now it is time for black leaders to set own agenda .
 Many whites, and a number of blacks, saw the movement as a black separatist organisation bent on segregating blacks and whites . Many whites and a few blacks saw it as an attempt to undo the important work of the civil rights movement .
 There is no question that Black Power advocates had valid and pressing concerns . There was no question in the 1960s when Black Power was formed .
 Blacks were still victims of racism, whether they were being charged a higher rate for a mortgage, getting paid less than a white co-worker doing the same work, or facing violence at the hands of white racists . Blacks still face being charged higher rates, being paid less, or being
 Bobby Searle is on the left-hand side if the photograph is taken and Huey Newton on the right-hand . Huey is the star of the documentary, "Huey Newton" and "Bobby Searle" Searle will appear in the documentary .