 President Obama won his Nobel Peace Prize in large part because of his stated intentions concerning nuclear non-proliferation .
 The destruction of Libya as a counter-proliferation example for North Korea by the deposition and murder of a WMD-bereft Muammar Qaddafi . The U.S. has not followed through on President Obama’s ambitions to bring Israel into the NPT
 In contrast to most sane Americans, I am not an enthusiast for the NPT-enforced oligopoly of a few nuclear states . I'm not a fan of NPT, but I'm a supporter of the nuclear disarmament .
 Foreign policy is key to the idea of leveraging the United States ‘nuclear umbrella” to establish the U.S. as the indispensable security power everywhere and anywhere . I think it distorts foreign policy .
 The United States commentariat is publicly appalled at Trump’s casual comments about South Korea and Japan going nuclear . The U.S. commentariat has been outraged at the comments .
 The U.S. would not have so big an incentive to militarize and escalate local frictions to create a plausible role for Uncle Sam and his magic nuclear umbrella . And the United States would not be so big a role for militarizing and escalating frictions .
 In a world in which the U.S. continually maintains and improves its nuclear arsenal, maybe the big nuclear danger is trying to keep the nukes out instead of letting them in . Maybe the big nuke danger is not to let in the nuclear first strike .
 Being with a woman all night never hurt no professional baseball player . Baseball star says he's not afraid to be out with women all night . Baseball player says he has a lot of respect for women .
 The one nuclear proliferation crisis everybody likes to cite to illustrate the benefits of anti-proliferation is Cuba 1962 . America’s Best and Brightest under Jack Kennedy stared down Nikita Khrushchev and his attempt to position strategic nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Kennedy understood that standing up to the Soviets over Cuba was more a matter of U.S. credibility than national security . He understood that it was more of United States (and his) credibility and a reflection of U .S. determination .
 The most interesting element of denuclearizing Cuba is that the U.S. didn’t think that the Soviet Union had any operational nuclear weapons capability in Cuba when it decided to go public and issue the ultimatum .
 There were allegedly forty thousand Soviet troops in Cuba, not the few thousand estimated by Marchetti and the CIA . There were shiploads of military equipment under the noses of the CIA, including infantry, anti-aircraft, and other defensive units to protect the core strategic nuclear
 Marchetti is correct in terms of describing U.S. perceptions at the time of the crisis, and as for the readiness of the strategic nuclear forcee.e. the ability to launch a nuclear attack on the United States mainland from Cuba, apparently spot on .
 The part about the strategic missiles not being operational was something of a lucky guess . The part of the story about the missile strike is something of an unclassified guess .
 The warheads for the strategic missiles, it transpires, were in Cuba but had not been deployed to the launch sites yet . It turns out the CIA was if not completely right, it was not completely wrong . The warheads were found in Cuba .
 President Kennedy had the luxury of gaming his Cuba scenarios on the assumption that Cuba didn't have any usable nukes yet, the nuclear confrontation would play out only within the parameters of a potential direct nuclear exchange between the US and Russian homelands . Khrushchev probably wouldn't escalate to
 Tactical Air Command warns that maybe a nuclear-armed missile might survive a massive U.S. strike to hit the United States . The U.N. says a nuclear missile could survive the massive strike, but it could also survive a missile strike .
 While the Soviet Union was out of the proliferation game, the United States went all in on nukes as a geostrategic asset . The U.S. sought to deny new aspirants, allies as well as adversaries, entry to the club through suasion, sanctions, and
 Japan and Republic of Korea are becoming more vocal about their desire to control their own nuclear destinies rather than rely on the United States . In an interesting way, the U.S. is now somewhat recapitulating the Soviet endgame in Cuba, with elements in Japan and the
 The forces advocating for nuclear proliferation are many; the U.S. is perhaps alone in its depth of conviction, interest, and determination . The US is not standing alone as an anti-proliferater .
 This creates challenges for President Obama as he tries to universalize the internationalized NPT legal regime and wean the United States from unilateral anti-proliferation .
 BlueHost is one of the best hosting company with plans for all of your hosting requirements . BlueHost plans to host the most of the world's most popular websites .