 On October 14, 1962, a U.S. reconnaissance mission discovered medium-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba . The mission was part of a United States reconnaissance mission to find the sites .
 The 13 days of brinkmanship that followed have been called the most dangerous episode in recorded history . The 13-day brinkmanship was called the 'most dangerous episode of recorded history'
 The discovery of ballistic missiles in Cuba provoked hawkish proposals such as invading the island and toppling the Castro regime . A selection of articles on the crisis from The Atlantic's archive reminds us of how close we came to disaster as well as how controversial the episode continues to be .
 "ExCom,"" the ad hoc executive committee convened by President Kennedy to address the crisis, decided against striking first . Ultimately ""ExCom" decided not striking first would have been inconsistent with American values .
 Robert Kennedy described a potential first strike as a ""Pearl Harbor in reverse,"" a phrase that became famous . President Kennedy opted for a naval quarantine of Cuba and demanded the removal of the missiles .
 The following day he announced the presence of ""offensive missile sites"" to the American people . He won unanimous support from the Organization of American States to implement his plan .
 The U2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba on October 27 . The quarantine began that afternoon . U2 was the U.S. U2's first plane to fly over Cuba .
 President Kennedy chose restraint by rescinding an earlier ExCom decision authorizing retaliation if a U.S. plane were shot down . Kennedy also chose restraint . ExCom had authority to shoot down a plane if it was shot down by a Soviet jetliner .
 Khrushchev said he would agree to withdraw missiles if Kennedy would guarantee never to invade Cuba . Kennedy accepted the condition, and the missiles were pulled out of Cuba soon .
 Pulitzer prize-winning journalist Water Lippmann gave an address on the missile crisis . "Cuba and the Nuclear Risk" appeared in The Atlantic Monthly .
 Lippmann: It would have been incalculable risk to invade and occupy Cuba at the risk of retaliatory military action against Berlin, action which could have escalated into nuclear war . Kennedy's exemplary restraint and skillful diplomacy, labeling confrontation a national victory .
 The President adopted limited objectives which could be achieved by limited means . The President's 'limited objectives' were achieved by 'limited means', says the President .
 Lippmann boasted that the U.S. had the power to reduce Soviet society to a smoldering ruin . He emphasized that balance of power and maintenance of the status quo were crucial to foreign policy in the nuclear age .
 Lippmann conceded that it was not only diplomacy that had led to the removal of the weapons . Still, he said the United States also had overwhelming land, sea, and air forces which were capable of destroying or capturing the Soviet missiles .
 In 1969, the posthumous publication of Robert Kennedy's memoir Thirteen Days revealed new information about the crisis . The negotiations concerning removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey fueled revisionist accounts of the incident .
 In 1982, Jerome B Wiesner, former special assistant to President Kennedy for science and technology, criticized the way proponents of sustained U.S. nuclear buildup were using the Cuban missile crisis to support their, in his view, flawed reasoning .
 Some analysts feared that unless U.S. weapons development continued to outpace that of the Soviets, the United States could become vulnerable to a first strike . Some analysts fear that unless United States weapons development outpaced that of Soviets, it could be vulnerable to first strikes .
 This faction was using the missile crisis to illustrate the importance of a weapons imbalance for achieving U.S. objectives . The missile crisis was used by this faction to illustrate its importance of weapons imbalance .
 In 1962, the U.S. had many more nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union, many now say . This superiority, they say, forced Nikita Khrushchev to back down on the MX, many say .
 In the early sixties, the Soviet Union had so few deliverable nuclear weapons that its leaders had legitimate reason to fear a first strike might take away their ability to threaten destructive retaliation .
 U.S. superiority in conventional naval forces seems to have weighed more heavily in the Soviets' calculations . The imbalance may have affected Soviet behavior, but it may have influenced its behavior .
 At the comparatively low levels of nuclear weaponry of twenty years ago, a difference in size between the arsenals could have political significance . Much of the impetus in American policy has been to regain the first-strike potential the U.S. enjoyed for many years .
 The weapons that create the threat of annihilation cannot be uninvented, he warned . He warned,The weapons that . create the . threat of annihilating humanity cannot be . unvented .
 The sad fact of this era is that our populations cannot conceivably be protected except through political skill and courage applied to the task of minimizing the chances that nuclear weapons will ever be used . This grave admonition referred to the example of the Cuban missile crisis .
 Politicians and journalists continue to try to draw lessons from the Cuban missile crisis .
 Even seemingly straightforward matters, such as what, exactly, political and military officials said, can become controversial .
 Stern alleged that May and Zelikow's record of conversations about critical issues left readers confused, missed the vital point, or changed the meaning of Kennedy's and the other ExCom members' statements . Stern also alleged that Kennedy's statements were changed or confused .
 Stern made a number of comparisons between what he had heard first-hand on the tapes and May and Zelikow's transcriptions . Stern said the Air Force must be "mad" about the division of responsibility for aerial photography between the Joint Chiefs' photo-reconnaissance office .
 Kennedy wonders if the impending strikes pushed the Russians to withdraw their missiles . No effort was made to conceal the military buildup in southern Florida, Kennedy says .
 The Kennedy Tapes, however, has JFK saying ""We got the signs of life to begin this air strike on Tuesday,"" making his shrewd speculation unintelligible . JFK's example in the Cuban missile crisis should be invoked and interpreted with respect to the crises facing us today .
 Senator Edward Kennedy praised the cool-headed restraint of his brothers . He contrasted it with what he saw as a hasty attack on Iraq .