 The site was launched on October 16, 2012, exactly 50 years after Soviet missiles were discovered in Cuba, sparking a diplomatic showdown . It is the first time the site has been launched since the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Site users are invited to explore an immersive documentary laying out the full story of the Crisis, beginning in 1959 and continuing on until the missiles were removed in October 1962 . Site users will be able to explore a full-screen version of the documentary .
 The site also includes a possible vision of how the world might have been different today had the crisis had escalated into nuclear war .
 The site explores the legacies of Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, and the humanizing things we can take away from the Crisis . The site also explores the legacy of Kennedy and Castro .
 Smartphone users can also link their devices with the film so their mobile dossiers sync with the documentary playback . The documentary will be available on BBC One's iReport.com .
 Clouds Over Cuba exhibits an unprecedented integration of desktop and mobile platforms for the documentary film format . Using seamless HTML5 and innovative UX design, the film will be available on the web and on mobile .
 The film tells the story of four fictional characters who each remember the horrors of nuclear war in their own way . The film is based on the stories of four characters who remember the war .
 Users can import all the secret ExComm meetings with JFK and his advisors, letters between JFK and Khrushchev and other material from the two weeks into their iCal and Google calendars with one click . Users can “attend” the meetings and receive the communication live over 13
 The Clouds Over Cuba project was developed at The Martin Agency, Richmond, by creative team .
 Live action and digital production was produced at Tool of North America by directors Erich Joiner and Ben Tricklebank, director Robert Richardson .
 This week marks the 50th anniversary of the release of the first episode of "This Is Life" on PBS.com's "This is Life" at 10 p.m. ET .
 Margarita Mix is produced by Michelle Millard and Whitney Warren . Sound was mixed by mixer Jeff Levy, assistant engineers Mike Murzyn and Sean Melia .
 A global effort designed to influence, affect and involve creative communities in the development of a world standard for inspiration, particularly in the fields of advertising, design and film .