 Maxwell Taylor, Dean Rusk, Sidney Graybeal, Marshall Carter, Marshall . Carter, McGeorge Bundy, Douglas Dillon, LBJ, others . LBJ. LBJ was LBJ .
 Robert McNamara, Edwin Martin, Maxwell and Taylor, Douglas Dillon, RFK, George Ball, #28A Roswell Gilpatric, U Alexis Johnson, LBJ, Evelyn Lincoln, etc. Item 2 Rusk, Robert .
 All written transcripts are imperfect abstracts of spoken conversation . All written transcriptions are imperfect representations of spoken conversations .
 Variations in sound quality and in the aural acuity of listeners can and do produce wide variations in what is heard . Sound quality and acuity can produce wide differences in what you hear .
 Statements uttered by officials of the U.S. government in the course of their duties are considered to be in the public domain .
 Users of this material are cautioned, however, that not all persons recorded were members of the Kennedy family or government officials . Not all of the people recorded were people who were photographed in this article were government officials or family members .
 A number of the people recorded were, at the time of recording, private citizens . The recording was made by a number of private citizens, including private citizens.
 Those intending to quote from this material beyond the accepted limits of fair use are cautioned to determine the copyright implications of any intended publication . The content of this article is subject to the right to freedom of expression .
 The first time a name is mentioned, the full name is provided whenever it is known . The full name will be provided when the name is first mentioned .
 On site on one of the encampments contains a total of at least fourteen canvascovered missile trailers . The trailers measure 67 feet in length, 9 feet in v. length .
 The overall length of the trailers plus the tovbars is approximately 80 feet . The trailer length is 80 feet long and the overall length is approximately 70 feet .
 The other encampment contains vehicles and tents but vith no missile trailers . Other encampments contain vehicles, tents, tents but no missiles trailers .
 In this instance, the missile trailer is backing up to the launch point . The missile trailer was backed up by a missile trailer .
 The site that you have there contains at least 8 canvascovered missile trailers . Four deployed probable missile erector launches . The site also has at least eight canvasccovered missile trailers.
 In Area II, there are at least 6 missile covered, missile, uh, canvascovered missile trailers, about 75 vehicles, about 18 tents . In Area I, there were at least six missile covered . missiles covered .
 In Area number III, ve have 35 vehicles, 15 large tents, 8 small tents, 7 buildings, and 7 buildings under construction . And in Area Number III, there are 35 vehicles and 15 large tent tents .
 If the nose cone is not *on that missile and it measures 67 feet— the nose . would be U to 5 feet longer, sir; and with this extra length we could have a missile that'd have a range of 1,10D miles, sir . The nose cone would
 The surface has to be hard, then you put a flame deflect-, a deflector plate on there to direct the missile . The surface must be hard enough to withstand a missile strike .
 We can find nothing that would spell "* nuclear warhead" in term of any isolated area or unique security in this particular area . We can't spell "Nuke Warhead"
 The mating of the nuclear warhead to the missile from some of the other short range missiles there would take about, uh, a couple of hours to do this, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The unknown factor here, sir, is the degree to which the equipment has been checked out after it's shipped from the Soviet Union here, he says .
 There is only one missile there, sir, ar;i it's, uh, at the actual, apparently, launching area . The missile was launched at a launch point, but it was not launched at the launch point .
 If everything were checked out, it would still take them in the order of two to three hours before they could get that one missile up and ready to go, sir. It would take them two or three hours to get that missile .
 One of them is in what appears to be the position from which they're"" launched—in the horizontal . Another is in the horizontal position from the position they were launched .
 We haven't any specifics yet on this but here is the way we believe that it could actually be lifted . We're not sure if it will be lifted, but here's the way it could happen .
 This is one of the most important thoughts ve face in properly interpreting the readiness of, of these missiles, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: "This is an important part of our understanding of the situation"
 It's inconceivable to me that the Soviets ■would deploy nuclear warheads on an tuifenced piece of ground . The Soviets would not have been able to use nuclear weapons on such a piece of land, says historian .
 "It should be one of our important objectives to find that storage site. It should be an important part of our mission," says minister .
 They're due to reach us at the National PI** Center around 8 o'clock tonight . They're currently being chemically processed at the Ilaval Center at Suitland, and they're being processed .
 Both missions go from one end of Cuba to the other — one along the north coast and the south — so additional data on activities or these storage sites may be in our grasp if we can find them .
 There would appear to be little need for putting this type of missile in there, however, unless it were associated with jiucltar warheads . The missile is believed to have been deployed by the U.S. military .
 The question is one of readiness of the, to fire and — and this is highly critical in forming our plans — that the time between today today arid and the time when the readiness -to fire capabilitydevelops -is-a very important thing .
 Images of the island are scarce of any photographic coverage of the whole island . There is no up-to-date photographic coverage on the island .
 Consider whether we should not authorize more flights on the basis of COMOB* priorities . Or /words unintelligible/, ... consider whether we . should not . authorize more . flights .
 There's a specific question of whether we want a closer and sharper look at this, this area . There's also a question of if we want to take a closer look at the area, says Dr. David Cameron .
 I think should be looked at in the context of the question whether we wish to give tactical warning, any other possible activities. That, however, should be considered, I think . I think it should be a matter of concern, as well as tactical warnings, for example .
 Lundahl: I recommend, Mr President, that you authorize such flights as are considered necessary to obtain complete coverage of the island . Lundahl or Carter? : Rusk?: McKamara: Mclfemara: Carter? Carter? Mclfamara: Speaker ?: M
 I purposely define it that vay because we 1 re running into cloud cover oa some of these flights, and I vould suggest that we simply repeat the flight if we have cloud cover, and repeat it sufficiently often to, to obtain the coverage ve require .
 Mac-raised the question of low-level flying which. . . . - specif ically excludes the question that Mac -raised of low.level flying . Mac- raised the question: "U-2, sir!"
 Four missiles make up a battalion, Mr. Obama says . The president has eight missiles, including four missiles .
 This one in front of the table is a second separate installation from vhich we can see six missiles . This one is a separate installation of six missiles.
 The third installation has the tents, but there are no missiles identified anywhere in that area . No missiles have been identified in the tent installation .
 "This is the time to e l iminate the Cuban problem by actual eliminating the island," Obama says .
 The QAS could constitute itself an organ of consultation promptly, although maybe, it may take two"" or three days to get instructions from governments and things of that sort .
 The White House is considering a run for the top spot in the political arena . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 The time has now come when he must take the interests of the Cuban people, must now break clearly with the Soviet Union, prevent this missile base from becoming operational . It ought to be said to Castro that this kind of a base is intolerable and not acceptable .
 If we announce, at the time that we announce this development — and I think we do have to announce this - development some time this veeV. — ^Organization of American States .
 "We reject the mission of secrecy in this hemisphere in any matters of this sort," says President Obama . We reject mission to secrecy in the hemisphere, says Obama .
 "vhatever is necessary from the military point of viev to be able to give, to deliver an overwhelming strike at any of these installations, including the SAM sites," says President Obama .
 President Obama has been in Cuba for more than a decade . He wants to shut down all air traffic from free world countries going into Cuba . Obama: "I'll assume that ve can move on this line"
 I think we 1 11 be facing a situation that could well lead to general war; that we have an obligation to do what has to be done but do it in a vay . That gives, uh, everybody a chance to put the /word unintelligible/ down before it
 Mr President, there are a number of unknowns in this situation I vant to comment upon, and 9 in relation to them, I would like to outline very briefly some possible military alternatives and ask General Taylor to expand upon them . Mr Taylor: "There are a . number of
 Two propositions I would suggest that we ought to accept as foundations for our further thinking . But before commenting on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions that we should accept .
 The first is that if we are to conduct an air strike against these installations, or against any part of Cuba, we must agree now that we will schedule that prior to the"" time these missile sites become operational .
 I would submit the proposition that any air strike must be directed not solely against missile sites, but against, the missile sites plus the airfields plus the aircraft which may not be on the airfield but hidden by that time plus potential nuclear storage sites .
 We would be ready for the start of such an air strike within, within a matter of days. Oh, we could carry out an air . -We would carry out such a strike within . days. We would not be surprised if we were able to carry out a strike .
 In any event, we would be prepared, followin g the air strike, for an^a ir, invasion, bothy* by air and by sea . We would also be prepared for an invasion by air or sea .
 'R after the start of V.^ the air strike, that would '""be"" possible if the political environment made it desirable or necessary at that time. Si— ' ; ■ •""^""-""•'^ '""""""■■* '■,
 There might have to be a second phase, and then it would require a declaration of a national emergency . "There might have been a first phase, but then it could require a second stage, and there might be a third phase"
 TJh, practically, I think the, our knowledge of the timing of the readiness is going to be so, so, difficult that we'll never have the, the exact permanent, uh, the perfect timing . TJh: "We'll never be able to say the exact,
 An initial pause of some sort while we get co:qpletely ready and get, get the right posture on the part of the target, so We can do the best job. One, a, an initial pause, some sort of . While we get ready, we get,
 I'd then start this continuous reconnaissance, the list that you had, continue over Cuba . Then, then, then the decision can be made as we, as we're mobilizing, uh, vith the air strike as to whether we .invade or not .
 "I think that's the hardest question militarily in the whole business," says President Obama . "We should look at very closely before we get our feet in that deep mud in Cuba," he says .
 I might say incidently, sir, that you delay -anything else you have to do at this point. I might . I might suggest incidently that you . delay - anything else that you have . to do, please .
 I don't believe, myself, that the critical question is whether you get a particular missile before it goes off because if they shoot those missiles we are in general nuclear var. Secondly, I don’t believe, himself, that . that . I believe that if . they shoot
 In other vords, the Soviet Union has got quite a different decision to make . The decision was made by Soviet dictator Mikhail Gorchkov .
 I suggest that if we're talking about an air attack, I believe we should consider it only on the assumption that we can carry if off before these become operational . This is why I suggest we should be careful not to carry out such an attack before it becomes operational, he says .
 Short range missiles could be used for short range missiles against the United States . The U.S. could use this to bolster its ICBM system .
 If there are nuclear warheads associated with the Punchers, you must assume there will be nuclear warheads . The Punchers are the most powerful aircraft in the world . If there is a nuclear warhead, there will also be a nuclear submarine .
 Even if there are not nuclear warheads associated with aircraft, voa must assume that those aircraft have an explosive potential . voa assumes that those planes have a potential for a nuclear bomb .
 TJhm, for the first time, I'm beginning really to wonder whether maybe maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin . TJhm: "I'm beginning to wonder if maybe maybe ... maybe maybe he's entirely rational"
 "Yeah. Yeah. Gromyko stated that in his press conference the other day, too, 16 Yeah. He said it in a press conference, too," says Gromko .
 "You get all these"" noises again. ... without, uh, the slightest consultation or, or warning or preparation," he says . "Without the slightest warning or warning, you get the noises again."
 "They may announce* within three days they're going to have warheads on 'em," he says . "If we came and attack, they'll go to fire them," he adds .
 "L don't know whether you, you just can't keep high strikes on. Obviously they can get 'em in by submarine and so on," he said . "I don't think you can, you can't," he added .
 I suspect, Mr President, we'd have to take out the surface-to-air missiles in order to get in, to get into, he says . Mr President. Mr President .
 In terms of tightness of our intelligence control, Mr President, I think we are in unusually and fortunately good position, he said . Mr President. Mr President .
 We set up a, uh, new security classification governing precisely the fieia of offensive capability in Cuba just five days ago, four days ago .
 We'd have to ask for relaxation of the ground rules, uh, that, Mac has just enunciated, so that I can give it to the senior commanders who are involved in the plans .
 Mr President, I, I think, to be realistic, we should assume that this will become fairly widely known, if hot in the newspapers, at least by political representatives of both parties within — I would, I'm just picking a figure — I'd say a week .
 "We have taken action already that is raising questions in people's minds. And I say that because we have, we have already raised questions," she says . "We are raising questions already that have raised questions in our minds," she adds .
 The photo interpreters and the, uh, the, and the ... operational officers in these commands, are looking forward to these. And normally, uh- uh-the-photo interpreters ... look forward to this .
 "We have stopped all that, and this, this is going to be going on throughout the department," police chief says . "Lj^c of information" is going on, he says .
 I doubt very much that we can keep this out of the bands of ... members of Congress, for example, for more than a-veek . And I,  I doubt, very much, that we . can keep it out of . uh, of members of . Congress,
 Busk: Well, Senator Keating*-* has already, in effect, announced it on the floor of the Senate . Busk says, "Well, I have already announced it" Busk; well, it's already been announced it, he says .
 I think ve can count on announcing it not later than Thursday or Friday of this week . "Veek" will be announcing its plans for the first time in weeks .
 President Obama should interview Senator Keating and check out his data, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "As a matter of, uh, tactics ve ve ought not* to interview"
 Seem to be done in a routine sort of way by an open officer of the intelligence agency . 'Seem to me that that ought to be ... a bit more of an open intelligence officer,' he said .
 I think that, uh, we're committed at any time we feel that there's a build up that in any way endangers to take whatever action we roust take to assure our security. I think ... security is a priority in the U.S.
 I would think the secretary's evaluation of this thing being around all over the lot is a pretty accurate one, he says . "I would think it'd take a week to do it," he adds .
 I would, uh, like 'to hear what the responsible commanders have to say this afternoon' I would like to hear what they have to do this afternoon .
 "I think the question with the base is whether we take it out or whether we talk about it, and, uh, both, both" either alternative is a very distressing one, but of the two, 'I would take them out'
 I spent the weekend with the ambassedors of the Organization of American States . I was in Washington, DC, for the weekend to meet with OAS .
 "I don't think, I don't rely on 'em much for any strength in anything like this," he says . "I think this organization is fine, but ... I think this is fine," he adds .
 Bundy: "We ought to be living all these years with /words unintelligible/ get your blood pressure up. And, I, the fact that we're talking about our other allies, uh, I take the position that Mr Bundy says, Mr Bundy .
 I take this little State Department Bulletin that you sent out to all the congressmen. I take it out of the State Dept. Bulletin. It's a little State. Department Bulletin . I take the little State . Department Bulletin. That's what the State Department .
 "Any time the build up endangers or threatens our security in any way, we're going to do whatever inust be done immediately to protect our own security," says President Obama . "We're not going to let the build-up endangers our security," he says .
 /l'n7 not mic ^ for circularizing it over the Hill or our allies, even though I realize it's a breach of faith . Uh, I think we have to be prudent and cautious, talk to the commanders and see .
 There are perhaps two or three of our principal allies or heads of government we could communicate on a 2l*-hour notice basis . We could communicate with each other on a short-term notice basis, he says .
 Secretary McKaTnara was talking about the airfields, SAM sites and anything else connected 21 with missiles, she says .
 Third is launching a blockade, vhich requires really the, uh, the third and vhicb is a larger step . Third is doing both of those things and also launching a blockade .
 I Just have to have to Jy or As unintelligible/ and do it. Tell them, though, the night before. And then, as I just have to . tell them, then, they have to do it, though .
 We have the fifth one, really, vhich is the invasion. Probably ought to We have a fifth one. We have to have it, really .
 "You're dropping bombs all over Cuba if you do the second, uh, air, the airports, knocking out their planes, dropping it on all their missiles," he says .
 Veil: It's almost incumbent upon the Russians to say, "Well, we're going to send them in again" Veil: If you do it again, we'll do the same thing to Turkey, or Iran, or Turkey .
 Havana area is Havana, Cuba, Havana area . Havana is Havana's capital, Cuba's capital . Havana has a reputation for being a model for Cuba .
 If you carriea out an air strike, this . might leaa to an -uprising such that in . oraer to prevent the 'Slaughter of, of, uh, of the free Cubans, we wouia have to . invaae to, to
 I would rather think if there were a, a coniplete air strike against all air forces, you might as well do it, do the whole job . The British Prime Minister said the strike would be a 'coniplete strike'
 'If you give less, you, you run the risk of, of giving up surprise. Yeah. -' 23 If you give more, you risk giving up surprises. Yeah, you .
 One is how much time we've got on these particular missiles before they're ready to go. Another is how long we have to wait for them to be ready to launch. The U.S. military says it's not sure how long the missiles will be deployed .
 Carter: "This type of missile, uh, can be launched very quickly with a concealed expedience" Taylor: "It's very difficult to launch very quickly because of the nature of the missile," Carter says .
 Even today, this, this one, uh, area, might be operational. So that ... ... ... intelligence, uh . . . Even today ... even today,this, this ... area, may be operational, the Pentagon says .
 "The very important question is whether there are other areas which conceivably might be even more operational that we have not identified," he said . "I can see that it's, it's highly /words unintelligible/ . . . The question is if there are more operational areas
 "It's been possible to do it quietly. So that kind of movement has already been taking place," he says .
 I think our point of view may change somewhat because of an adjustment here, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I think our view of the world may change because of the adjustment here," says Sutter.
 There is a great danger of, of equipment dispersal of all the, the interesting aircraft. There is also a danger of dispersal, the pilot says . There is always a risk of dispersing of equipment, he says .
 The advantage of taking out these airplanes would be to protect us against a reprisal ... ... by them, he says . The advantage would be protecting us from reprisal by them.
 JFK: Bandy: JFK: JFK . JFK: Bundy: JFK. JFK: BFK: Speaker JFK: Billon: General. Kennedy: JFK was JFK's Speaker .
 We've authorized, Mr President, ve have a decision for additional intelligence reconnaissance, a minor decision that ve'll talk to Keating . Mr President: "We've authorized ... a decision to ... reconnaissance"
 We need to know the, the earliest readiness for the various sizes of air strike and how long they would take to execute . I should think about the readiness of the air strike, he says .
 You've got to tell, it seems to me you're going to have to tell SACEUB*** -. . . . and, uh, and the commandant . You've been told to tell your story, but you're not allowed to tell it .
 "Maybe just have *°° ust ta ^ e them out, and continue our other preparations if we decide to do that. Maybe just have them out," they said . "We're not going to have to wait to see if we want to see them out."
 Allied Commander, Europe. 28: "I, myself, think we ought . . to work out a contingency on that"
 There's going to be a difference between those who know that—this wiU leak out in the next few days— and those who don't know that, there are these bases, until we say or the Pentagon or State won't be harsh. There's a difference .
 I discussed the matter with, uh, Bohlen* of the Soviet bloc and told him he could talk to Thompson . Thompson: "I'm not sure what I really want to do, but I'm sure he'll do it."
 It seems to me that' there's no one else in the State Department that ought to be talked to about it -. . . . The State Department has not been able to find out more about the death of the president .
 "What we're going to do about it really ought to be, you know, the tightest of all," he says . "Otherwise we bitch it up. Maybe a lot of people know about what's there, but what we're doing about it?"
 Mr President, may I suggest that ve come back this afternoon prepared to, answer three questions. McNaraara: JFK: McNamara: JFK? JFK: JFK?: McNamara? Carter? :
 I mean should we state publicly ... that, that you have stated we will, we'll act to take out any offensive weapons? We'll act if we have said we will . We will act, he says . We'll take out 'offensive weapons,' he adds .
 I wouldn't, I would think particularly of ""the contacts with Khrushchev," he said . And I wouldn’t, he said, particularly of the contacts with the Soviet Union, he added .
 Airstrikes must be scheduled in terms of time very carefully in relation to a potential military action, he says . And I would think that if these are to be done, they must be timed very carefully .
 There must be a very, very precise series of contacts with him, and indications of what we'll do following that . There must also be a series of meetings with him and what they'll do with him .
 And, thirdly, we should"" be prepared to answer your questions regarding the, the effect of these strikes and the time required to carry them off. We should."" be prepared for the, . The effect of the strikes will be the same as the time it takes to carry out
 How long before ve get the information about the rest of the island, do you figure, General? 30 could take weeks, Mr President. Could take weeks? Mr President .
 The, one thing to worry about on low level is that that will create a sense of I tactical alert in the island, and I'm not sure we want to do that . The, the one thing I worry about will be that that . will create . a sense . of I
 "We've got to, uh, /word unintelligible/ for this for us to be doing anything quickly and quietly and completely that's what we're doing . All right, well, now, I think we've ... got to ... do this quickly and quiet and completely and
 Several speakers speak at once and none of the words are intelligible . Yeah . Yeah. Yeah.
 "That vould be still better because you're supposed to be out there at eight. That vould still better," he said . "You should be out at eight," he added .
 JFK: RFK: JFK: Kennedy: JFK . JFK: JFK. JFK: Speaker ? Kennedy: "Rusk: Speaker?" JFK: "Speaker. .?" Kennedy: Kennedy. JFK. RFK. "RFK" "Ball: 33/ Words unintelligible
 All right, now, now the other question is on, uh, the /words unintelligible/ Eisenhower . Eisenhower .
 All right, but I've got, I'm working on /words unintelligible/. No, but he's got a, want to see about a speech, that's all. All right . I've been working on a speech .
 What about /words unintelligible? 1'H call hi^ about this thing tomorrow. What about other words? "1'H" call hi-h" tomorrow.
 "Everybody else will sit down at the table /words unintelligible/ and consider what gaps there are there."
 If you had, uh, /iimnediate27/words unintelligible/ that's something else. That's not the same thing you had. If you have, uh- uh, or not, that's not what you mean. If that's the same, that
 Have /words unintelligible/ just sit down and you're right, they're great at that . Have you ever had to sit down? Please sit down. Have you? Sit down and sit down .