 The Grand Alliance was created in 1941 to defeat the Nazia . The Grand Allience was created by the Nazis in 1941 .
 The Grand Allience was a marriage of convenience between communists & capitalists as they were only united in their opposition to Hitler . However, the Grand Alliences were a marriage between communists and capitalists .
 Individual rights, individual freedom, free trade, & democratic elections are individual rights . Individual rights are individual freedom and democratic elections .
 Leaders wanted the others to recognise that there were countries that fell within their 'sphere of influence' & countries that did not . The leaders wanted to recognise the others .
 By the end of the three conferences, it was clear there was broad agreement over who these countries were . The countries of the Middle East and Latin America are divided .
 There would be a line of 'buffer states' between the USSR & the West . There would build a line between the two countries .
 Stalin was annoyed that Britain & the U.S. had delayed opening a second front at war . He was annoyed at the delay of the opening of the second front . Stalin was angered by the delay .
 He was convinced they were waiting for the communist USSR to damage itself fatally in the battle against Nazi Germany before they could intervene . He said they were watching for the Soviet Union to damage themselves fatally .
 Second front agreed to start in June 1944 . Rossevelt supported the second front idea .
 There were points of disagreements, over which Roosevelt often sided with Stalin rather than Churchill . There were disagreements over which he sided with .
 He wanted to stop the Soviet advance in Eastern Europe . While this would help the war effort, he wanted it to help the British cause .
 He favoured the second front as an invasion of the Balkins would have weakened the Allied forces by splitting them up .
 Churchill, Stalin, & Roosevelt met at Yalta . They had agreed on some of the same things they had at Teheran, but with some changes .
 The Nazi party would be banned & war criminals tried in front of an international court . War criminals would be tried in a court of war criminals . Nazi party members would be allowed to be banned in the country .
 A United Nations Organisation would be set up to replace the League of Nations . A UN Organisation would set up the organisation would be called the United Nations .
 The members consisted of all the Allies & those who had agreed to join the UN on Feburary 8 1945 . The members of the UN were made up of the Allies and those who joined the UN in 1945 .
 The USSR would declare war on Japan three months after the defeat of Germany . The USSR declared war on the Japanese after the fall of Germany in 1945 .
 Britain & U.S. had been reluctant to agree to Poland becoming communist . Britain & the United States had agreed to Poland being communist .
 Overall, the conference was a success down to the communication skills between the three . The conference was down to a lack of communication skills .
 Churchill, Stalin, Truman, & Truman met at Potsdam . The conference took place at the end of World War II .
 President Truman had no relationship with Stalin . Truman had been briefed about the eariler conferences so had no . relationship with . Stalin . President Truman .
 Churchill had been replaced by Labour Prime Minister Attlee . The UK election had taken place before the conference . Churchill was replaced by Attlee in the UK election .
 All personal trust & understanding built up in previous meetings had been lost . All personal trust building built up was lost in the meeting, said Cameron .
 Truman delayed the first meeting until the new atomic bomb had been tested . Truman's first meeting was held in 1945, when the atomic bomb was tested .
 Stalin had been told nothing of the bomb until this point to suspicions only grew . Stalin was told nothing until the end of the war .
 Germany had been defeated, so the Big Three were no longer united by a common enemy . The Big Three had been united by the defeat of Germany in the war .
 They agreed to set up a Council of Foreign Ministers to organise the re-building of Europe . It will be set up to organise a re-build of the European Union .
 To ban & prosecute surviving Nazis as war criminals in a court run by the Allies. To ban . prosecute surviving . Nazis as . war criminals. In a court . run by . the Allies . to prosecute . surviving Nazis . in a . court run . by the . Allies .
 To reduce the size of Germany & to divide Germany up into for zones, to be administered by the US, USSR, Britain, & France . The aim was to re-unite it under one government .
 To give the USSR a quarter of the industrial equipment from the other three zones, the USSR had to provide the other zones with raw materials .
 USSR wanted to impose heavy reparations on Germany . America wanted Germany to be rebuilt . USSR wanted heavy reparation on Germany, America wanted reconstruction .
 The Conference agreed a compromise whereby each ally would take reparations from the zones they'd occupied . Each ally would have to take reparation from the zone they occupied .
 Truman had attempted to assert authority during the Potsdam Conference . Truman had tried to assert his authority at the conference . The conference was held in 1945 . Truman was president of the United States .
 He believed that the United States posesssed the ultimate weapon in the atomic bomb & therefore 'bossed the whole meeting' He believed the U.S. had the ultimate bomb - the atomic weapon .
 The bomb gave America the power to destroy entire enemy cities without risking a single American life . The bomb was the first to strike in the U.S.
 Stalins plan was to protect the USSR by creating a 'buffer zone' a communist area in Eastern Europe between the USR & the Capitalist west . Plan was to create a 'zone' between the USSR & the West .
 Trumans arrogance & Stalins determination soured the relationship at the centre of the grand alliance .
 Stalin promised to set up a governement in Poland consisting of both communists & capitalists . Stalin had promised to make it a communist-capitalistic state . Stalin's government was formed by both communists and capitalists .
 By the time of the Potsdam Conference, he had obviously broken his word . He had promised not to break his word, but he did .
 USSR complained to the U.N. & a civil war broke out . The USSR complained & the war was over .
 During 1926 it became increasingly clear that Europe had been divided between capitalism in the west & communism in the east . The war of words was between capitalism and communism in 1926 .
 Stalin representing the east & Churchill, representing the west, responded with a 'war of words' showing that the former allies now viewed each other with tremendous suspicion . Stalin represented the east and Churchill represented the west .
 Churchill gave a speech during his trip to America, & everyone understood that . Everyone understood that president Truman supported what he had said . Truman supported Churchill's speech .
 It was obvious that both sides had began to see one another as opponents rather then allies . Both sides had begun to see each other as opponents instead of allies .
 Truman & Stalin were concerned about the breakdown of the grand alliance & the threat of a new war . Truman and Stalin were worried about the break-up of the great alliance & a new world war .
 Both men asked for secret reports from their embassies to help them understand what their opponents were thinking . Both men were asked to help their governments understand what they were thinking.
 Stain had given a speech calling for the destruction of capitalism, that there could be no peace with the USSR while it was opposed to capitalism . Stain said the USSR was building up its millitary power, & that the USA sould seek to contain communism .
 Following these secret telegrams, both governments believe that they were facing the probability of war .
 The government of the USSR believed that war with the U.S. was inevitable . Indeed, the Soviet government believed that the war with America was inevitable, he says .
 At the Beginning of 1947, Truman adressed the American government, setting out his belief that America must stand against communism . At the beginning of 1947 he gave a speech to the American Government .
 This speech, setting out the 'Truman Doctrine', was seen as an unofficial decleration of the Cold War .
 Truman asked the U.S. military to assess the strength of the USSR's army . The 'long telegram' was sent by the Soviet Union to assess its strength .
 After the Second World War, many countries within Europe were devestated such as Turkey, France, Greece, & the United Kingdom . After the war, many of Europe's nations were devastated by the loss of life .
 In these countries communism was highly appealing because communist beliefs were that the wealth of the richest people should be shared amongst the poor . Communism was highly popular in communist countries such as Cuba .
 Truman set out a policy known as the Truman Doctrine to deal with the threat of nuclear weapons . To address the threat, in 1947 he set out the Truman doctrine .
 It stated that countries had a choice between communist supression or democratic freedom . It said countries had to choose between communism and democratic freedom.
 It also stated that America had a responisibility to fight for liberty wherever it was threatened . The U.S. has a responsibility to defend liberty, it said .
 America would send troops & economic resources to help governments that were threatened by communists. America would also send economic resources . America would help governments threatened by communist threats .
 Truman Doctrine was important because it suggested that America, rahter then the United Nations, had a responisibility to protect the world . The Truman Doctrine & Marshall Plan was important .
 It marked an unofficial end to the Grand Alliance & marked the beginning of the Cold War . It made it clear that there could be no co-operation between East & West . It marked the end of the 'Grand Alliance'
 America had a duel strategy for dealing with communism, Obama said . By this he meant that America had to deal with communism .
 Marshall Plan 1947 committed 13 billion American money to rebuild shattered economies in Europe . The Marshall Plan was the first Marshall Plan of its kind .
 By encouraging prosperity, the Marshall Plan would weaken the attraction of communism . The Marshall Plan is designed to encourage prosperity and discourage communism .
 The promises of sharing resources equally under communism under communism had great appeal . To those suffering economic hardship following the Second World War, the promises of shared resources were great appeal under communism .
 If people were wealthy, the idea of sharing resources had less appeal . If people are wealthy, sharing resources was less appealing .
 In order to qualify for American money, Europian countries had to agree to trade freely with America so that their economy also benfited . Europians had to also agree to accept American money to qualify .
 Europian leaders met at the Paris conference of 1948 to discuss the American offer . The Marshall Plan was created by the United States in 1947 .
 Marshall Aid was the first step in creating a military alliance that would wage war on the Soviet Union . They argued that Marshall Aid would be a first step to creating an alliance .
 Stalin insisted that Eastern Europian countries in the 'Soviet sphere of influence' refuse the help offered by America . Stalin also insisted that eastern European countries refused the help of the US .
 Over 16 countries including Britain welcomed the offer, seeing it as a way to rebuild their economies & defeating communism in their own countries .
 Between 1947-49, the USSR extended its influence over eastern Europe, turning countries such as Czechoslovakia, Hungary, & Poland into satellite states . The USSR turned countries such a small nation into satellites .
 Stalin believed that the Americans were trying to buy influence over Europe, as any country that accepted Marshall Aid would effectivley become an American ally . Stalin believed any country accepting Marshall aid would become an ally of the United States .
 He extended control over Europe, creating a series of satellite states . To prevent this, he extended control of Europe, he created satellite states of Europe .
 This emerged from the 'spheres of influence' discussed at the Tehran, Yalta, & Potsdam conferences . This emerged as a result of the Iran-Yalta and Potsam conferences .
 At Yalta & Potsdam, the USSR agreed to free elections in these countries . The USSR agreed free elections at the end of the Cold War era .
 It hoped that people would naturally choose communism in the free elections . The Communist Party hoped that the election would be a free election .
 The USSR pushed for new 'free elections' that they fixed as much as they could . So they fixed up as much of the problems as possible . So the USSR tried to fix the problems, but they did not fix them up .
 Once in power, they got rid off opposition parties & made each country a single-party state . They got rid of opposition parties and made each party a single party state . Once in office, they removed opposition parties .
 An atmosphere of fear & mistrust was made so that it was difficult for people who wanted to oppose communsm to trust one another enough to work together . An atmosphere was made to make it difficult for opponents to trust each other enough to trust .
 Economies were arranged so that they were dependant on the Soviet for 'rationalising' industries . industries .
 In order to extend his control, Stalin established Cominfrom in 1947 . The Communist Information Bureau was established by Stalin in 1947.
 Eastern European governments refused to accept Marshal Aid . Marshal Aid was created in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Cominform was also used to ensure the loyalty of Eastern European governments . Comin Inform was used to help ensure loyalty of governments in Eastern Europe .
 It did this by investigating government ministers & removing those who were not loyal to Stalin . Stalin removed those who had been loyal to him from the Soviet Union .
 Comecon was Stalin's answer to the Marshall Plan . Stalin's 'two camps' were the 'comecon' camps . The camps were Stalin's idea of a 'Marshal Plan'
 He was aware of how attractive it was to some Eastern European governments . He said he was aware that some governments were interested in it .
 President Eisenhower ordered his satellite states to boycott Marshall Aid . He needed to set up a communist alternative to Marshall aid .
 In the first year, Comecon comprimised the USSR, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, & Romania . Eastern Germany joined in 1950 .
 It also meant that Eastern Europe did not have access to the prosperity of Western Europe . Eastern Europe was not able to access to Western Europe's prosperity, it also meant it had to be poorer .
 This division had hardened the result of Marshall Aid, which brought Western Europe into America's camp, & Cominform and Comecon, which established a Soviet camp in the East .
 This turned these 'spheres of influence' into official economic alliances . This turned them into 'economic alliances'
 Following the Second World War, Russia & America were unable to agree about the future of Germany . Unfinished Business & Bizonia follows the two nations' failure to agree on a future of the country .
 They could not agree on whether a reunited Germany should be part of the Soviet 'sphere of influence' or whether it should be netural . The two sides were unable to agree on the issue .
 They were stuck on whether it should have a capitlist or communist government . They were also stuck on if it should be a communist government or a government .
 Another issue is whether Germany would be able to claim Marshall Aid or not . Another issue was whether Germany could claim Marshall aid or not.
 They were unsure if troops from America & the USSR should be allowed to remain united within Germany . Finally, they were unsure about whether troops should be able to stay together .
 Although Germany's capital, Berlin was deep within the Soviet zone, it was divided up into four sections . Berlin was also divided up in four sections during the Soviet occupation .
 The future of Germany was still in the Subject of intense negotiation between the East & the West . East & West Germany was the subject of intense negotiations between the two sides .
 In 1948 the Western Allies started to develop a policy for western Germany that was at odds with Russia's plans . However, in 1948 the Allies developed a policy that was opposed to Russia's .
 First, Britain, France, & the United States agreed to set up a German assembly to create a German constitution . First, the assembly was set up in Germany to create an assembly .
 Trizonia has introduced a new currency which would become the official currency for the country . The new currency is the first currency to be introduced by the government . The currency will be used to make money for the first time ever .
 Stalin believed that they were the first steps to creating a permanently divided Germany . Stalin had not been consulted about these developments . Stalin believed they were steps towards creating a permanent divided Germany.
 Stalin was reluctant to allow America to have further influence over Germany . Stalin was hesitant to allow the U.S. to influence his country .
 He realised that Germany's most valuable economic resources were in the west & feared that they would be used to wage war on the USSR . He feared that the country's valuable resources could be used as weapons .
 In order to prevent the establishment of a seperate state in Western Germany, Stalin set up a military blockade around West Berlin in June 1948 . The Berlin Blockade was set up by Stalin to prevent West Berlin becoming a separate state .
 His plan was to cut off Western Germany from its capital so that the new government, based in Berlin, could not control its territory in western Germany .
 Stalin hoped that this would prove that a divided Germany would not work in practice . Stalin hoped this would be the first time he had been able to find out how divided Germany actually worked .
 The British authorites maintained a simliar system &, at its height, provided over 170,000 tonnes of supplies during Janurary 1949 .
 In May 1949, Stalin stopped the blockade . Trumans peaceful reaction made Stalin's blockade seem even more violent .
 In September 1949, West Germany was officially made an independent state . West Germany became West Germany in September 1949 .
 East Germany did so too & became a Soviet satellite state . East Germany was in their 'sphere of influence' as it was in the Soviet sphere of influence .
 The Berlin Blockade was the first military confrontation of the Cold War . NATO & The Warsaw Pact was formed from the Warsaw Pact . NATO and Warsaw Pact were allied allies in the 1950s .
 NATO was established in 1949 as an alliance between the USA & many othrt countries in Western Europe . In April 1949, NATO was formed as a military alliance between Western Europe and the USA .
 NATO members agreed that if any NATO country ever came under attack, all members of NATO would come to their defence . NATO countries agreed to defend each other if any member of the organisation was attacked .
 The Marshall Plan had created a trading alliance but NATO went further . NATO was created by the Marshall Plan in 1950s . NATO joined with the European Union in 1958 .
 It was a military alliance with the specific aim of defending the West against communism . The alliance was formed in order to defend the West from communism .
 This included East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovia, & Hungary . 17 of 60 were in East Germany and Poland .
 It included the committment to maintaing a large army, navey, & airforce, & . the development of deadly nuclear weapons . It also included the . committments to the development . of deadly . weapons .
 In 1945, the USA became the first country to develop the use of a nulcear bomb . The bomb was developed in the USA .
 By 1949, the USSR had caught up it had tested & developed its own nuclear war . The USSR had tested and developed nuclear war technology .
 It prompted the Americans to develop hydrogen bombs a second generation of even more powerful weapons . The U.S. developed hydrogen bombs after the discovery of hydrogen bombs .
 U.S. warheads were still more powerful than those developed by the Soviet Union .
 These new bombs required either missiles or modified aircraft in order to attack enemy terretory . The bombs were developed in the 1980s and 1990s . These bombs were designed to carry out attacks on enemy forces .
 By 1955, America had developed the B52 Stratofortress, with the flight capacity to bomb the Soviet Union . The B52 was developed with flight capacity for bombing Soviet Union.
 The Soviet leaders would never order an invasion in fear of nuclear retaliation . However, the Soviet leaders never ordered an invasion . The Soviets would never invade the United States .
 Stalin claimed that Soviet troops had liberated Hungary from the Nazis . Matyas Rakosi was the leader of the Soviet Union in Hungary .
 Hungarian coal, oil, & wheat were shipped to Russia while Hungarian citizens were deprivdd of food . Hungarian coal and oil were sent to Russia .
 Non-communist parties were abolished & Russian officials controlled the government & army . Russian officials now control the government and army .
 Cominform begin a reign of terror, executing popular political leaders & their supporters . Comininform begins a reign in terror, execute popular political . leaders & supporters .
 He developed what was known as 'salami tactics' for dealing with his opponents 'slice by slice' meaning to get rid of opposition by dividing it bit by bit . He developed the idea to deal with opponents by dividing them up to bits of the opposition .
 His oppressive regime imprisioned 387,000 people . He was responible for more then 2,000 deaths . His regime was responsible for more than 2,00 deaths .
 Stalin's style of government, which was known as 'Stalinism', was highly oppressive . Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s .
 It is believed Stalin was responsible for the deaths of around 20 million people during his time in the Soviet Union . Stalin was believed to have been responsible for about 20 million deaths .
 This speech promised an end to Stalinism throughout the entire Soviet sphere of influence . This speech didn't remain secret for very long . The speech was kept secret for a long time .
 Imre Nagy Nagy had fought in the First World War & was captured & imprisoned by the Russians . Nagy fought in WWI & was imprisoned by Russians .
 He escaped from prison & fought for the Bolsheviks in the Russian revolution . He was imprisoned in 1918 but fought for Bolsheviks .
 In 1919, Nagy joined the communist uprising in Hungary led by Bela Kun & funded by the USSR . The takeover was quickly defeated & the new government was anti-communist . Nagy was a member of the Hungarian Communist Party .
 In 1945, he became Minister of Agriculture & set up land reforms to move the country into the direction of collectivisation . In 1945 he was Minister of Food and Agriculture .
 After he made a public announcement of his support for the USSR, Nagy was allowed back into the government . Nagy made public an announcement that he supported the USSR in the 1980s .
 Rakosi became Prime Minister as well as Secretary once again . Rakosi becomes Prime Minister once again. Rakosi is now Prime Minister .
 Khrushchev's 'secret speech' created hopes of reform in Hungary, but nothing happened . Nagy's Programme of Reform was created by Nagy in 1953 .
 Rakosi was forced out of power in July 1956, but still nothing happened . Rakosi died in prison in August 1956 . He was forced to step down from power .
 Bad harvests, & fuel & bread shortages, led riots in Budapst on 23 October 1956 . The riots were sparked by a bad harvest and shortages of bread and fuel .
 Students demonstrated in Parliament square against the government . Called for a 16-point list of reforms . Students demonstrate in Parliament Square .
 This rapidly developed into a conflict that pulled in workers & members of the army . The conflict spread from Budapest across the country, spreading from Budapest to Budapest .
 To calm the situation, Khrushchev agreed to make Nagy Prime Minister & to withdraw the Ref Army from Hungary .
 On 31 October 1956, Nagy announced his proposed reforms, which included Hungary's leaving the Warsaw pact & holding free elections . Nagy's proposed reforms included leaving the pact and holding elections free in Hungary .
 Reformers made thse bold moves as they hoped that it would gain them more support from the west . Reformers hoped that the move would help them gain more support in the West .
 This would mean that any Soivet army entering Hungary would be breaking the rules of the UN, so that the UN could send in troops to remove them . This would be the first time the UN has sent troops into Hungary to remove the army .
 The USA spent a lot of time encouraging Eastern European countries to get rid of their communist governments . The U.S. spent most of the 1950s and '60s of Eastern Europe .
 US-sponsered Radio urged people to take a stand against communism . The promise of aid from the USA never came due to the fear of a nuclear war .
 Khrushchev believed that if Hungary was allowed to leave the Warsaw Pact, then other Eastern European countries would soon follow . The reforms were unacceptable & that if they were allowed to go, other countries would follow .
 Khrushchev had access to secret intelligence reports which indicated that discontent with communism was widespread across Eastern Europe . The Soviet Union was overthrown in 1968 .
 These reports reinforced his view that allowing greater freedom to these discontent countries would mean the end of dominance in Eastern Europe .
 They marched on Budapest, where they fought with supporters of Nagy's government, through two weeks of bitter fighting . They marched into Budapest and fought for two weeks in Budapest .
 About 2,5000 people were likked by the soviet troops & 20,000 more were wounded . Over 200,000 fled to the West to escape the Soviet Union .
 The trouble rumbled on into 1957, iwth various strikes throughout the country & outbursts of fighting, but the revolution was really over in November .
 Nagy sought protection in the Yugoslavian embassy . Nagy's execution and Soviet control of the Soviet Union were Soviet-controlled . The executioner was executed by Soviet forces .
 The Yugoslavian ambassador agreed with Khrushchev that Nagy was free to leave Hungary . Nagy left Hungary in 1960s .
 Soviet troops arrested Nagy after he left the embassy in Moscow . Nagy was arrested by Soviet troops after leaving the embassy . He was later taken into custody by Soviet forces .
 Nagy was accused of treason &, in a trial overseen by Khrushchev, was found guilty . Nagy found guilty of treason in trial over the death of the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Eisenhower praised the bravery of Hungarian people & encouraged them to fight on . Eisenhower also praised the courage of the Hungarian people . Eisenhower said he was proud of his country's bravery .
 Following the Soviet invasion, Khrushchev appointed Janos Kadar as the new Hungarian leader . Following the invasion of Hungary, Kadar became the leader of Hungary .
 Kadar published his new programme setting out the new government's direction . Kadar's new programme is set out to set out new government policies .
 This included re-establishing communist control of Hungary, using Hungarian troops to stop attacks on Soviet forces, & remaining in the Warsaw pact, & negotiating the withdrawal of Soviet troops once the crisis was over .
 The US's faliure to support Nagy's new government left them with no choice . 23 of 60 voters in Ukraine voted for Nagy to join the new government .
 Germany had been divided but the USSR refused to recognise West Germany & America refused to acknowlage East West Germany . Consequently, Germany had to be divided . The USSR and the USA refused to acknowledge West Germany as East Germany .
 The city of Berlin caused problems as it was partly controlled vy the Americans . It was located within the Eastern bloc those countries who belonged to the Warsaw pact . The city was located in the eastern part of the country .
 The East German government was extremely unpopular & therefore the East Germans fled to the West . The East Germans were extremely unpopular and therefore therefore the West was extremely popular .
 West German was highly attractive as its citizens enjoyed greater freedom & wealth then those of East Germany . West German citizens enjoyed more freedom and wealth than East Germany's citizens .
 Between 1949 & 1961, 2. million East German refugees, many of whom were highly skilled, escaped to West Germany . Between 1949 and 1961, the majority of East Germans escaped to the West .
 Berlin was the centre of East Germany's refugee issue . East Germans could easily get from their own section to West Berlin, and from there, West Germany .
 The refugee problem was a propaganda disaster for Khrushchev because it proved that many people preferred the capitalist West to the communist East . The refugee crisis was a huge embarrassment for the Soviet Union .
 In November 1958, Khrushchev declared that the whole city of Berlin officially belonged to East Germany . For this reason, the whole Berlin was declared to belong to the East .
 He also issued an ultimatum, giving U.S. troops 6 months to withdraw . He also gave United States troops six months to pull out .
 Khrushchev wanted to prevent East Germans from fleeing & to humiliate the USA . Khrushchevsvs wanted to stop East Germans fleeing & humiliate USA .
 In November 1958, Khrushchev demanded that the Western powers remove their troops from West Berlin within 6 months . The Geneva Summit, Camp David, & Paris Summit were held at the end of November 1958 .
 Eisenhower did not want to lose West Berlin, but neither did he want to start a war . Eisenhower wanted to keep West Berlin but didn't want to get involved in the war .
 He agreed to hold an international meeting in order to discuss Berlin's future . Berlin has agreed to meet to discuss the future of the city .
 Khrushchev's visit laid down the groundwork for his visit to the U.S. and talks with Eisenhower . However, it did lay down the . groundwork for the visit and the talks laid the groundwork .
 In September 1959, Khrushchev & Eisenhower met at a second summit meeting at Camp David, the U.S. country retreat . The summit meeting was the second meeting between the two leaders .
 A further summit meeting will be held between the two leaders . Despite not agreeing on a solution to the problem, it was decided that a further summit would be held .
 The USSR had shot down an American spy plane over Russia . Just before the conference the USSR had captured its pilot . The plane was shot down by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev walked out of the meeting in protest when Eisenhower refused to apologise for his actions . Eisenhower's refusal to apologise led to the meeting being called off .
 When Kennedy became president in Janurary 1961, a further summit was arranged to discuss Berlin . The Vienna Conference & Preparation for War was held in 1961 .
 At the Vienna conference of June 1961, neither side seemed willing to back down over the U.S. presence in Berlin .
 Khrushchev saw Kennedy's inexperience as a weakness to be exploited . However, he saw Kennedy as an opportunity to exploit his inexperience . Kennedy was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Khrushchev gave the USA a 6 month ultimatum to remove troops from Berlin . Confident that Kennedy would back down if pushed, he gave the U.S. 6 months to remove the troops .
 He started to prepare America for war, committing the U.S. government to an additional $3.3 billion of defence spending . He committed the United States government to a further $3 billion in defence spending.
 More worrying still was Kennedy's decision to spend an extra $207 million on building nuclear fallout shelters .
 Khrushchev knew that the USSR could not win a nuclear war . Building the Berlin Wall was the ultimate test for the strength of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy's refusal to retreat called Khrushchev's bluff, forcing the Russian leader to back down . Kennedy refused to retreat, forcing Khrushchev's bluff . Kennedy was forced to withdraw from the White House .
 Khrushchev could not force the Americans to leave West Berlin, but he still had to solve the refugee issue . The U.S. left West Berlin in 1960s, but the West Berliners had to leave .
 His solution was to build a wall seperating East & West Berlin, making it impossible for East Germans to flee to the West . The wall was built in order to prevent East Germans fleeing to the west .
 East German troops secretly erected a barbed wire fence around the whole of West Berlin . The fence was erected on August 12 1961 .
 In the coming months the fence was reinforced & eventually became a heavily guarded wall . In the months it was reinforced and became heavily guarded .
 Soviet tanks were deployed to block further western access to the East, causing a day-long stand-off with United States tanks on October 27 . Soviet tanks deployed in the wake of a U.S. invasion of the Soviet Union in October .
 Khrushchev avoided war with America whilst still looking strong . Became a powerful symbol in the division of Germany & Europe . Not only didit stop the refugee crisis, but also allowed it to avoid war with U.S.
 In 1963, Kennedy toured West Berlin expressing his sympathy with the people . He toured the city in a bid to show his sympathy .
 Arms Race America was a clear winner of the arms race in the 1940s & 1950s . America was one of the world's most successful arms race nations .
 America had an early lead & dropped the first nuclear bomb on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima & Nagasaki in August 1945 . America dropped the bomb on August 1, 1945 .
 The arms race to develop & stockpilenuclear weapons was a big part of the Cold War . It was a major arms race .
 If the Cold War became an actual war, both governments expected that nuclear weapons would be used . Both governments expected the use of nuclear weapons if the war broke out .
 In the USA, schools had regualr 'duck and cover' rehersals to prepare for what to do in the actual event of a nuclear attack .
 By 1960, France & Britain had nuclear weapons too & China was running a nuclear weapon development programme . China was also running a programme to develop nuclear weapons .
 In theory, it would soon be far too destructive for either side to use their nuclear weapons, but neither side trusted one another enough to stop the race .
 Both sides produced 'statistics' about their nuclear capacity, mich of which was designed to frighten the other side, rather than reflect the real situation . Both side produced 'stats' about the nuclear capacity .
 Statistics would also be confused the number of weapons was not th only consideration; there was also the size of their warheads & the accuracy which they were aimed . 28 of 60 weapons were used in the Cold War era .
 The USA's biggest concern was the rate at which the USSR was building nuclear weapons and the size of those weapons . The U.S. worried about the size and speed of the weapons .
 The 'Tsar Bomba', detonated in 1961, was the most powerful, and therefore most destructive, bomb ever . It was detonated by the Soviet Union in 1961 in Moscow .
 In 1958, the United States arranged to have nuclear missiles at their UK bases . The U.S. arranged for the missiles to be placed at their bases in Britain .
 The USSR could fire missiles at the US, but the missiles had to travel further, which meant they could not be targeted anywhere near as accurately . The USSR was able to fire missiles but they had to go further .
 America had specially equipped B52 Bombers that were capable of dropping nuclear weapons on the Soviet Union . America also had B52 bombers that were able to drop nuclear bombs on Soviet Russia .
 USSR had relativley few missiles & no way of dropping them on U.S. soil . The USSR had no way to drop them on American soil .
 The United States government was extremely worried about the Soviet Union's Nuclear capabilities . Nonetheless, the U.S. government was very worried about nuclear capabilities .
 In 1957, Russian scientists launched 'Sputnik 1' the worlds first man-made satellite . Spatnik 1 was launched in 1957 by Russian scientists .
 By 1960, the Russians had even landed a robotic spacecraft on the moon, demonstrating the sophistication of Soviet technology . The Russians had landed a robot spacecraft in 1960 .
 Many Americans believed that the rockets used to put satellites in space could be used to launch missiles at America . The rockets were believed to be capable of launching missiles into America .
 The USSR was not wealthy enough to mass-produce missiles . However, the USSR did not have enough money to produce missiles .
 The United States ran 90% of phones & electric supply, 50% of railways, 40% of sugar production, & owed all oil refineries . According to a report by the United States Department of Trade in 1956, the U.S. ran most of the country's electrical supply
 Castro's new government took over American property located in Cuba . As part of this policy, Castro's government took control of American property .
 President Obama agreed to offer economic aid to Cuba in order to help his new ally industrilise .
 Americans did not want a communist country on their doorstep; especially not one that had the USSR as an ally . Americans didn't want to see a communist nation on the doorstep of their country .
 The CIA pursuaded Kennedy to launch an invasion on Cuba to dislodge Castro's government & put Batista back in charge . The CIA pursued Kennedy to attack Castro's Cuba government . The invasion would dislodge the Castro government, but put him back in control .
 CIA thought that they could make their invasion look like a Cuban revolt, not a United States invasion, as they had been training Cuban exiles . They could disguise old U.S. planes to look like Cuban ones for bombing .
 They assumed that Castro's hold on the country was weak, & that most Cubans would join against Castro once the invasion began . The invasion began in 1953, when Castro was overthrown .
 Kennedy agrred to the plan, but the result of the invasion was a disaster . Kennedy said it was a good idea to invade the Philippines .
 First strike by disguised planes missed most of its targets, including Castro's airbase . The first strike by the disguised planes, on 15 April, missed most targets .
 The planes were photographed & U.S. involvement was made public . United States involvement in the plane crash was revealed .
 Kennedy sent in planes, but it was too late, they had to surrender . The war was over for the U.S. President of the Soviet Union .
 The Bay of Pigs ended any chance of the USA & Cuba negotiating a friendly relationship . Cuba was ruled out of the U.S.-Cuba relations .
 In spite of his victory, Castro felt very vulnerable & feared another American attack . Castro feared another attack on the United States .
 In August 1961, he decided to station Russian nuclear weapons on Cuban soil . He decided to do so in August 1961 to station them on Cuba .
 He claimed that this would deter America from attempting another invasion . He claimed this would also deter another invasion of America .
 It would also place Russian nuclear missiles within striking range of America, balancing the U.S. presence in Turkey . The move would also put Russia's nuclear missiles in striking range .
 This meant that Khrushchev could attack America without spending large amounts of money developing inter-continential ballistic missiles . 32 of 60 missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Kennedy is informed of Khrushchev's plans to place nuclear missiles on Cuba . Kennedy was informed of the plans in October . The Thirteen Days 16 October 1962 .
 Khrushchev issues a statement that the USSR is prepared to launch nuclear weapons if U.S. goes to war . The statement was made in response to the threat of an American invasion of Vietnam .
 Kennedy writes to Khrushchev asking him to withdraw missiles from Cuba . Kennedy also writes to ask him to pull missiles out of Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy approaches the Russian ambassador accepting Khrushchev's deal . Kennedy wanted the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey to be kept secret .
 The ships carried a secret cargo, including nuclear warheads & long-range missiles, that would be used to construct nuclear bases on Cuba . The ships were used to carry nuclear warheads and missiles .
 By mid-October American spy planes had discovered what was going on . The U.S. government says it is investigating the situation in Syria .
 On October 22 Kennedy addressed the American people & told them of the Soviet plans to build nuclear missile bases on their doorstep . Kennedy said the bases would be built on the American doorstep .
 Many Americans panicked & started building nuclear shelters in preperation for a nuclear war . Many Americans panicized and built nuclear shelters to prepare for war .
 Some American generals believed that a nuclear war between the USA & USSR was inevitable & therefore Kennedy should go to war because America had a good chance of winning . For example, some American generals thought that a . nuclear war . was inevitable . Therefore Kennedy should war because of that . America had
 The 'doves', on the other hand, adised caution, recommending diplomatic strategies, which they felt offered the best chance of peace . The 'doctors' advised caution, saying diplomatic strategies offered best chance for peace .
 Because of the removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey remained secret, it seemed to many that he backed down & betrayed allies in Cuba . The removal of American missiles from Turkish remained secret .
 In June 1963, a direct communications link was set up between the American president in Washington & the Russian Premier in Moscow . The 'hotline' was established between Washington and Moscow .
 In August 1963, the USSR & USA agreed to ban the testing of all nuclear weapons in space, in the sea, & above ground . The Limited Test Ban Treaty was signed by the USSR and USA .
 The Test Ban Treaty was the first step taken to control the use of nuclear weapons . The test ban treaty was first step to control nuclear weapons in the 1950s .
 Once there was agreement on this, the way was open to discuss limiting weapon production & cutting down stockpiles . The U.S. will also discuss cutting down weapon production and cutting stockpiles, the author says .
 Moves to detente were slow, but detente became a key feature of superpower relations during the 1970's .
 By 1956, the USA & USSR were on equal footing in terms of their nuclear capability . The U.S. and the USSR had nuclear capability equalized .
 This created further stability in the relationship between the two superpowers . The two countries' relationship has been described as 'strategic stability'
 American & Russian leaders realised that any nuclear war was bound to destroy both countries . U.S. & Russia would have to be prepared for each other to survive nuclear war .
 The doctrine of Muturally Assured Destruction gave both superpowers an exellent reason for avoiding war . This idea, known as the doctrine, was known as 'mutually assured destruction' Both superpowers avoided war .
 In the event of a nuclear war between America & Russia, the members of NATO would be obliged to fight alongside America . NATO members of the U.S. and Russia would fight alongside each other in nuclear war .
 The leader of france was appalled at the thought that France could be destroyed this way .
 In 1966, France ended its military alliance with America & began to develop its own nuclear missiles .
 Czechoslovakia Opposition to Soviet Control 12 years later . Hungary and Czechoslovakia opposed to Soviet control in 1956 . Hungary was one of the last bastions of independence from the Soviet Union .
 In the mid-1960s, Czechoslovakia was still run by the secret police, which brutally crushed all political opposition . The secret police were brutally brutalized by the government, crushing political dissent .
 Majority of Czech people suffered a declining standard of living during the 1960s . Czechs suffered a decline in standards of living in the Czech Republic .
 Dubcek wanted to get rid of to most repressive aspects of communist rule, to reform the economy, and to allow more cultural freedom . Dubceka wanted to reform economy, reform the Soviet Union, and allow culture to be more free .
 'Prague Spring' is a phrse used to describe the liberal changes brought about by Dubcek from April 1968 . The Prague Spring is the name of the Prague Spring, which was brought about in 1968 . It is also used to refer to the liberal liberal changes made by Dub
 Prague Spring reforms included relaxation of press censorship, legalisation of political opposition groups, toleration of political criticism, more power given to the Czech parliament, & 'market socialism' the reintroduction of capitalist elements into the Czech economy . The Prague Spring included a relaxation of Press censorship, the
 Artists took advantage of the reforms by writing books, plays, & essays critical of Soviet-style communism . Artists wrote about the reforms in a series of plays, books, essays and essays .
 Older Czechoslovakian communists were shocked by the 'Prague Spring' & their horror was shared with Brezhnev & his allies across Eastern Europe .
 The 'Prague Spring' made life very hard for Soviet leader Brezhnev . The Prague Spring was a major blow to the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Dubcek had made no attempt to leave the Warsaw Pact or to cause the USSR any damage . On one hand, he regarded Dubkek as a friend, and on one hand he regarded him as a good friend . On the other hand, the Soviet Union did not want to
 Dubcek's reforms would leave to the weakening of Soviet support over Czechoslovakia, and in the long run, the break-up of the Eastern Bloc .
 From April through July, Brezhnev was in constant contact with Dubcek & attempted to persuade him that the reforms had gone too far . From April to July, he was trying to convince him that his reforms were too extreme . The reforms went too far, and Dubce
 Dubcek failed to take the hint & took little action to control political opposition in Czechoslovakia . Dubceka failed to control the opposition in the country .
 By late August, Brezhnev had had enough & ordered a full-scale invasion of Czechoslovakia in order to overthrow Dubcek . The invasion was ordered by the Soviet Union in August 1968 .
 The doctrine meant the USSR has the right to invade any country in Eastern Europe whose actions threaten the security of the whole Eastern Bloc . The doctrine was meant to mean the USSR invaded any country whose actions were threatening the security .
 Breznev argued that Dubcek's actions had threatened to undermine the Warsaw pact . Dubceks' actions threatened to destabilise the pact, he said . The Kremlin says Dubceck's actions threaten to undermine Warsaw Pact .
 Soviet tanks rolled into Czechoslovakia on the evening of 20 August 1968 . The Soviet invasion was the first invasion of the country since 1968 .
 For example, many students stood in the way of tanks holding anti-invasion banners . Many students stood against tanks holding pro-democracy banners .
 Dubcek was arrested & taken to Moscow where Brezhnev tearfully told him that he had betrayed socialism . Dubkek was taken into custody in Moscow where he was taken to a tearful visit to the Soviet Union . Dubcec was arrested and taken to the Kremlin
 Dubcek was forced to sign the Moscow protocol, which comitted the Czech government to 'protect socialism' by reintroducing censorship & removing political opposition . Dubkek signed the 'protocol' which was signed by Moscow to protect 'socialist socialism'
 Brezhnev believed that U.S. would do nothing to help the Czechoslovakian people . The invasion of Czechoslovakia was the first invasion of the Soviet Union .
 America was already fighting a bloody war against communism in Vietnam . Vietnam was already a bloody battle against communism . The war in Vietnam was a bloody one .
 Brezhnev was confident that America wanted to avoid a further military entanglement . The Soviet Union was determined to avoid further entanglements .
 America publically condemned the invasion but offered no military support against it . Therefore, whilst America . condemned the . invasion, it offered no . military support .
 Western Europe condemned the invasion but provided no military help . Western European governments followed America's lead but did not provide military help to the invasion .
 Communist parties in Italy & France, for example, were outraged by the Soviet invasion . Communists in Italy, France & Italy were outraged .
 This was very important as it showed the extent of which Soviet communism had lost authority & support in result of the invasion . This was shown to show extent of the extent to which Soviet Communism had lost .
 Yugoslavian & Romanian government condemned the invasion & distanced themselves from the Soviet Union . The Yugoslavian and Romanian government both condemned the Soviet invasion . The Soviet Union invaded Yugoslavia in 1968 .
 East German & Polish governments welcomed the Soviet response as they were concerned of Czechoslovakia becoming too liberal . However, the East German and Polish governments welcome the response .
 During the late 1960s & 1970s, Soviet & American leaders tried to ease the tensions in their relationship . During the '60s & 70s, the Soviet & U.S. leaders attempted to ease tensions between them .
 Russia & America signed two important treaties at the end of the 1960s that are good examples of a detente relationship . Russia and the U.S. signed two treaties in the late 1960s . The treaties were signed by both countries .
 The treaties were important as they limited the possibility of further conflict between superpowers . They were important for the future of superpowers such as Russia and China .
 The 1967 Outer Space Treaty stopped the arms race spreading to outer space . It pledged that no nuclear weapons would be placed in space by either superpower .
 The 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty agreed that neither superpower would supply nuclear weapons to other states or help other states to develop nuclear weapons . The treaty was signed in 1968 .
 The highest points of detente were reached in the mid-1970s with three important statements of the new understanding between the two superpowers .
 If one side achieved this first, it would give them a dangerous edge in the arms race . It would effectivley give them an advantage in arms race.
 It was the first agreement between the superpowers that successfully limited the number of nuclear weapons they had . It was significant because it was first agreement to limit nuclear weapons .
 Detente has created an environment in which the two sides could co-operate on important issues . It showed that detente had created a environment where it was possible to work together . 43 of 60 votes cast in favour of detente between the two countries .
 SALT 1 was intended to be a temporary agreement leading to a more comprehensive treaty . SALT 2 & the Apollo-Soyuz Mission were intended to lead to the Apollo mission to SALT .
 The West german government was worried that further arms reductions would leave their territory undefended . Negotiations were more difficult as the West germans were worried that the reduction of arms would leave the country undefending .
 Right-wing Congressmen thought that detente had gone too far & were reluctant to agree with further compromises with the Sovet Union . Right wing Congressmen believed detente was too far .
 SALT 2 was eventually signed by President Carter & Soviet Premier Brezhnev in June 1979 . It was signed by the Soviet Union & signed by Carter .
 In 1975 a joint space mission was launched in which an American Pollo spacecraft & a Russian Soyuz spacecraft docked high above the Earth . In 1975 an American and a Russian spacecraft were docked in space above Earth .
 The 1960s had been dominated by an extremely competitive race to the moon . But this marked the beginning of superpower co-operation in space .
 The Helsinki conference had representitives from 35 countries . The Helsinki Agreements were signed by representatives from 35 nations .
 The terms of agreements applied to everyone. They came from all of Europe as well as representitives from the USSR, USA, & China .
 All disputes were to be settled equally, not by the use of threat nor force . All disputes should be settled without resorting to force, not using threat or using force .
 "No country would interfere with the internal affairs of another country," says President Obama . No country would intervene in the country's internal affairs, he says .
 Countries would inform each other about any big military manoeuvres . Would accept representatives from other countries to observe them . Would also accept representatives of other countries observing them .
 They wanted industrial co-operation through setting same standards & running joint industrial projects . They wanted to set same standards and run joint industrial . projects .
 The agreements stabilised the situation in Europe by agreeing greater co-operation between the superpowers & their European allies in term of trade & fighting international terrorism . 45 of 60 agreements were reached by superpowers .
 Even the detente could not stop the superpower competition over the developing world . The Kabul Revolution was the result of the Kabul Revolution .
 Brezhnev saw the communit revolution in Afghanistan as an oppotunity to extend his power in the oil-rich Middle-East . The Soviet leader saw the revolution as an opportunity to extend power .
 The Kabul Revolution of April 1978 witnessed the overthrow of the government . The Kabul government was overthrown by the government in 1978 .
 The new government, based in the Afghan captial, was determined to 'build socialism' within Afghanistan . The government is determined to build socialism within Afghanistan, according to the Taliban .
 The revolutionary government of Afghanistan was for from stable. However, the revolutionary government was not stable. It was for stable.
 Muslim leaders across the country were angered by the socialist reforms the government introduced . Moreover, many Muslim leaders have expressed their anger at the government .
 By 1979, this anger had caused a civil war to break out across the country between the government & Islamic fighters . This anger caused the government and Islamic fighters to fight for the government .
 President Taraki was forced to accept Amin, the head of the army, as Prime Minister . Amin was the only Prime Minister in the country . Amin became President Amin's first Prime Minister after the coup d'Ain .
 In October 1979, Amin supporters assassinated Taraki & Amin claimed presidency of the country . Amin supporters killed Taraki and Amin claimed the presidency .
 Following Amin's seizure of power, Brezhnev ordered the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . The Soviet invasion was the first of its kind .
 Brezhnev feared that Musilm groups were planning to take control of the country . He was also unpopular with a large number of Muslims in the country & feared that he was being targeted by Musilmen .
 The USSR was concerned that, as a result of the civil war, Afghanistan would become an Islamic state & influence nearby Soviet republics to do the same . The USSR feared that, in the wake of the war, the country would become a state of Islamic Islam .
 Islamic states were not communist & therefore any countries that became Islamic would have no reasons to make alliances with Russia . The Islamic states would not have any reasons to ally with Russia, the author says .
 Karmal argued that he had enough popular support to form a new government but needed Soviet help to help defeat Amin's army . Amin's forces were defeated by the Soviet-backed Afghan army .
 Brezhnev believed that America would tolerate the invasion, as it had done in Czechoslovakia following the 'Prague Spring' to avoid war . America had done the same thing in the Czech Republic following the Prague Spring .
 Soviet troops killed Amin along with many of his supporters, and Karmal was declared president . Amin's supporters were killed by Soviet troops .
 Around 15,000 Russian soldiers died during the 10-year war in Afghanistan . Around 1.million died, including almost 15,500 Soviet soldiers .
 The Carter Doctrine & the End of Detente & SALT 2 Brezhnev's invasion of Afghanistan was a huge miscalculation . The Carter doctrine and the end of the Cold War were the result of the Carter Doctrine and the SALT doctrine .
 The American president, Jimmy Carter, was appauled at the Soviet agression . Jimmy Carter was appalled at the Russian aggression .
 Carter made a statement that became known as the Carter Doctrine . The Carter Doctrine is known as 'Carter Doctrine'
 He argued that the USA would not allow the USSR to gain control of territory in the oil-rich Middle East . The U.S. would not let the USSR take control of the region .
 He also took a number of steps to try to remove Soviet troops from Afghanistan .
 He formed an alliance with China & Israel to support Afghan rebels, who opposed the Soviet invasion & the Afghan communist government . He formed a coalition with China and Israel to back Afghan rebels .
 The CIA provided weapons and funds for the Islamic organisation which were fighting to free Afghanistan from Soviet control . The Taliban were fighting for the country from the Soviet-held country .
 Carter imposed economic sanctions stopping virtually all trade with the Soviet Union . The sanctions were imposed in response to the Soviet trade embargo in the 1980s .
 Carters action's did not force the Soviet troops to withdraw from Afghanistan . The action's was not enough to force the Soviets to withdraw .
 In response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan the U.S. refused to ratify the treaty . The treaty never became a law . It was never ratified by the United States .
 He ordered the U.S. military to come up with plans for surviving a nuclear war with the Soviet Union . He also ordered the United States military to prepare for a war .
 The Olympic Boycott Carter led a boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympic Games . Carter led the boycott of Russia in the 1980s .
 Around 60 countries followed the American lead & refused to attend the games in protest at the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . Around 60 nations followed the U.S. lead in protest of the invasion .
 The American government set up an alternative Olympics, called the Olympic boycott games, which was held in America . The games were held in the U.S. instead of the Olympic Games .
 The American press ridiculed the official Olympic games & nicknamed Misha Bear, Russia's Olympic mascot, Glulag Bear a reference to Soviet prison camps . Misha bear was Russia's official mascot, a reference .
 In retaliation for the 1980 boycott, the USSR & 14 communist countries refused to attend the Olympic Games . The USSR and 14 other communist countries were boycotting the Games in retaliation .
 The USSR organised the Friendship Games as a communist alternative to detente . by 1980 detente was dead . The games were held in the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 The 'Second World War' is a phrase used to describe the period between 1979 & 1985 . The 'Cold War' marked a new low for superpower relations . President Regan was the leader of the Cold War .
 As in the late 1950s & early 1960s, the public was extrememly concerned about the possibility of a nuclear war . The public was extremely concerned about a possible nuclear war.
 Ronald Regan, who became the new President in 1981, had no intention of putting it back together . Regan became President of the United States in 1981 .
 The American media were not convinced that Regan was suitable to be President . Regan would have been a successful President of the United States .
 Regan was potrayed as a modern-day cowboy, who knew nothing of the world affairs & was totally unqualified to be the American President . Regan knew nothing about world affairs, says President Obama .
 He thought that the policy had made the USA look weak whilst allowing the USSR to grow strong . He thought it made the U.S. look weak and allowed it to grow stronger .
 Regan rejected the idea of a peaceful co-existence with the USSR, believing that it was America's destiny to fight for individual freedom in the Cold War . Regan: "America's destiny was to fight against individual freedom"
 Regan made his view on the Soviet Union clear in his famous 'Evil Empire' speech in March 1983 . Regan's speech was a speech he made about the 'evil Empire' of Soviet Russia .
 Regan argued that the Cold War was a fight between good & evil, & that America fought with Gods blessing . Regan was a committed Christian & argued that God's blessing .
 SDI 'Star Wars' Regan's plan for winning the Cold War meant taking the arms race to a new level . Regan: 'I'm not going to let it go, I'm going to do it'
 He proposed a 'nuclear umbrella', which would stop the Soviet bombs from reaching USA soil . The umbrella would stop Soviet bombs reaching US soil .
 Regan's plan was to launch an army of satellites equipped with powerful lasers, which would intercept Soviet missiles in space & destroy them before they could do America any harm . Regan: 'I'm not going to let them go. I'm going to do it. I want to
 Regan believed that his new technology was make Soviet nuclear missiles useless & therefore force the USSR to disarm . Regan's technology was believed to make Soviet missiles useless .
 SDI was a complete break from the detente policy, & broke the terms from the Outer Space Treaty of 1967 which was signed during detente & had committed the superpowers to use space technology for peace alone . SDI breaks the terms of the treaty, signed in 1967 .
 Sviet leaders knew that they could not compete with Regans 'Star Wars' plan . Sviet leader: "I'm not going to be able to compete with that plan"
 America had won the race to the moon in 1969, & by the eary 1980's it had developed a space shuttle . The shuttle was developed in the early 1980s .
 The Soviet economy was not producing enough weath to develop their space technology . The space technology was developed in the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
 Soviet leaders were suspicious that they would be used to undermine communism . However, they were highly suspicious that the Soviet leaders would use them .
 Gorbachev was the last leader of the Soviet union from 1985 until it collapsed in 1991 . He was the leader of Soviet Union from 1985 to 1991 . The former leader was known for his 'New Thinking'
 He saw the end of the Cold War, & the fall of the Berlin Wall, & ending Communism in Russia . He also saw the Fall of Communism in the Soviet Union .
 Gorbachev had very little forgein policy experience prior to becoming the leader of Russia . Gorbachachev had been in charge of the Soviet Union since 1986 .
 At first, he viewed the relationship with Russia in quite simplistic terms. At first he viewed it as a matter of simple terms. Now, he views it differently.
 Regan is not just a class enemy, he is 'extremely primitive', he said in 1985 .
 Gorbachev's relationship with the West was tested over the Chernobyl crisis . The crisis was the result of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1986 .
 In April 1986, the nuclear reactor in the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Ukraine exploded . The reactor in Chernobyl exploded in April 1986 .
 Gorbachev authorised a cover story that denied there ever being a release of dangerous radiation . The cover story was authorised by the then-Soviet leader .
 The Western media were unconvinced by the Soviet cover story . Western governments put pressure in Gorbachev to tell the truth about the disaster .
 Americans in the 1980s enjoyed a great standard of living in Russia . Everyday life in Russia was dominated by shortages .
 Gobachev's plan for reviving communism involved a radical programme of reform . Gobachev wanted to revive the Soviet Union by reviving the country .
 This involved Perestrokia making the economy more efficient & Glasnost relaxed censorship . 52 of 60 were made more efficient and relaxed censorship. This involved the economy making it more efficient .
 The first meeting between President Reagan & Premier occured at the Geneva summit in November 1989 . President Reagan and Iceland's Prime Minister met at the summit .
 Reagan's aim for the conference was to pursuade Gorbachev that he sincerely desired peace between the two superpowers . Reagan: "I sincerely desire peace between Russia and the West"
 Gorbachev was keen to establish a working relationship with the U.S. President . He was also keen to set up a relationship with Vladimir Putin .
 Prior to the meeting, he saked his long-serving forgein minister & appointed a new one . The new minister was appointed by the President of Nigeria .
 This signalled an end to the agressive foreign policy that had been persued by the previous minister . The previous minister had pursued an aggressive foreign policy . This is the first time a foreign policy has been allowed to be relaxed .
 The Geneva meeting was significant because the two leaders were able to talk face-to-face & develop a personal relationship . No formal agreement on arms control was reached .
 Gorbachev, however, was unwilling to agree to these proposals because Reagan refused to drop the SDI project . Reagan was reluctant to drop SDI because of the project .
 There had been large-scale demonstrations across Western Europe against the sitting of U.S. milliles there .
 He got on with Gorbache & seems to have believed that Gorbachev wanted reforms in the USSR & an end to the Cold War . Seems to have thought Gorbaches wanted reforms .
 Once Reagan decided to try for detente, he mada sure he got the publicity right . Reagan had decided to make the most of the publicity surrounding his detente .
 When he & Gorbachev met, he made sure that they, and their wives, looked like they got on .
 The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty was signed in Washington in December 1987 . Following the Reykjavik meeting, American & Soviet diplomats continued to draft an arms-reduction treaty .
 The INF Treaty was significant because it was the first treaty to reduce the number of nuclear missiles that the superpowers posessed . The treaty was significant for the first time in history .
 SALT 1 limited the growth of Russian & American nuclear stockpiles . It therefore went much further than Salt 1, which limited the size of the stockpiles of nuclear weapons . SALT went further and went further .
 During the next 4 years, the two sides destroyed hundreds of missiles & strict procedures were put in place to task inspectors & to ensure that the treaty was followed .
 Gobachev did so because he came to see that nuclear weapons were highly expensive but added nothing to Soviet security . Gobachev decided not to arm the Soviet Union with nuclear weapons because he wanted to protect himself .
 Gobachev realised that the Soviet economy would never recover as long as it was spending so much money on the nuclear weapons . Gobachev also realised that he would have to spend so much on nuclear weapons that the economy would not recover .
 Gobachev knew disarmament would win him popularity in the West & would be able to make more trade . 55 of 60 of 60 were made by the West, including the West .
 In 1988, Reagan went to Moscow for the first time for a summit conference . Reagan's first summit conference was in Moscow in 1988 .
 The summit fixed no targets, but it eased the tensions created by Afghanistan . It eased no targets but eased no tension created by the conflict .
 The Malta Summit was a meeting between U.S. President Bush & Gorbachev . The Malta summit was the first meeting between the two leaders . The summit was held in 1989 .
 The meeting began to work on the agreements that were to CFE & START 1, below . CFE and START 1 will work on an agreement between the two parties .
 The CFE Agreement, signed by Bush & Gorbachev, set limits to the non-nuclear forces that the Warsaw Pact & NATO could have in Europe . The agreement was signed in 1990 . It set limits on non-military forces in Europe, including NATO .
 Negotiations for this began in 1989 but the process was made difficult because the USSR was beginning to break up . The negotiations were made difficult due to the break-up of the USSR .
 Hungary was part of the Warsaw pact when the negotiations began, but had left by the time the Treaty was ready to be signed . This meant that, for example, Hungary had left the pact before it was signed . Hungary was one of the last few countries to leave the treaty .
 Signed by Bush & Gorbachev, with pens made from scrapped nuclear missiles, this set limits on the numbers of nuclear weapons . START 1, 1991 signed by Bush with pens from scrapped missiles .
 Both sides agreed to reduce their holdings of nuclear warheads by 1/3 by destroying them . The deal was agreed to cut the number of warheads held by each side .
 It did not agree on all types of nuclear weapons, but covered most of them . The U.N. Security Council agreed on the issue, but disagreed on all nuclear weapons .
 In December 1988, Gorbachev announced that ideaology should play a smaller part in Soviet foregin affairs . Eastern Europe & the Break-up of the Eastern Bloc was the focus of the 1980s .
 In practise, this meant that the USSR would no longer favour trade with communist states over trade with capitalist countries . The USSR no longer favoured trade between communist states and the West .
 Gobachev withdrew Soviet troops from Eastern European bases in order to save money . Gobachev withdraws Soviet troops to Eastern Europe to save the Soviets money .
 Gorbachev had never intended to weaken communist control of Eastern Europe . He had intended to strengthen the Soviet Union's grip on Eastern Europe in the 1980s .
 Once reform had started in the Eastern Bloc, he was unable to contain it . However, once reform began, he couldn't contain it, he said .
 The Eastern Bloc previously relied on the Soviet army to prop up their pro-Moscow regimes . The Soviet army was used to back pro-Russian regimes .
 There would not be another invasion of Hungary or Czechoslovakia, so the Eastern European governments were weakened . 57 of 60 58.
 The Fall of the Berlin Wall has come to symbolise the end of the Cold War . The fall of the Wall has become a symbol of the fall of communism .
 It would be wrong to confuse the fall of the wall with the end of the war, says David Cameron . However, it's wrong to forget that the wall came down, he says .
 The fall of the Berlin Wall is an exellent case study of the effects of reform in Eastern Europe . Berlin Wall was a case study in the wake of the fall of Communism in the West .
 The communist government was unable to contain citizen's desire for freedom once the neighbouring states had abandoned communism . However, the communist government failed to contain citizens' desire to freedom .
 As soon as the democratic elections were announced in Hungary there was a mass movement of East German citizens through Hungary to West Germany . East Germans were able to leave Hungary to join West Germany after the election .
 The East German government was forced to announce much greater freedom of travel for the East Germans citizens . As a result, East German citizens were forced to travel more freely .
 East German government announced East Germans would be allowed to cross the border with West Berlin on November 9 . East Germans are allowed to leave the country to cross into West Berlin .
 On hearing this news, thousands to East Berliners flooded the checkpoints in the wall, demanding access to West Berlin . Thousands of people flooded the gates in West Berlin on hearing of the news .
 Many people reunited with friends & relatives they had been seperated from since the Berlin Wall had been built 30 years ago .
 As the Eastern Bloc disintergrated, it became obvious that the Warsaw Pact could not survive . The Warsaw Pact failed to survive after the Berlin Wall came down .
 The Pact was an alliance that united the communist states of Eastern Europe against the capitalist states in the West . It was an aliance that united Eastern European states against capitalist states .
 As first Poland, then Hungary, & finally East Germany all rejected communism, the Pact no longer served any purpose .
 He was widely respected for his willingness to reform . His policies had led to the break-up of the Eastern Bloc .
 On 19 August 1991 a group of senior communist government officials known as the 'gang of eight' organised a coup which removed Gorbachev from power . The coup took place in the Soviet Union in August 1991 .
 Initially, the coup was successful as Gobachev was prevented from returning from Moscow . The coup was initially a success, but it was only a success when Gobachev returned to Moscow .
 The new government declared a state of emergancy, overtuned the freedoms gained during Perestrokia & Glastnost . New government overtuned freedoms gained from the freedoms of the past .
 The government's goal was to restire the power of the Soviet Union & secure the future of the communist government . The goal of the government was to protect the future .
 On 21 August, Gobachev returned to Moscow & resumed his position as leader of Russia . The Fall of Soviet Union & Ending of Cold War marked the end of the Cold War .
 Following his return, Gobachev announced that it was still his intension to save Soviet communism . Immediatley following his return he announced that he was still interested in saving the Soviet Union .
 The coup had damadged Gobachev's authority, while it had made Yeltsin a popular hero . However, the coup had also made Gobachev a hero, and made him unpopular .
 The new constitution was designed to give the Soviet republic much greater independence . The leaders of these countries, however, wanted full independence, and for this reason the constituation was never accepted .
 As a result, Gobachev officially announced the dissolution of the Soviet Union & his resignation as president on 25 December 1991 . Gobachev's resignation was officially announced as a result .
 President Bush had delcared that the Cold War had ended at the Malta Summit of 1989 . President Bush said the war had ended in Malta in 1989 .
 The coup of August 1991 raised the prospect of another standoff between the East & West . However, communism was still undefeated & the coup was in August 1991 .
 The Baltic states declared themselves independent in 1990 & was accepted by the USSR a year later . The USSR accepted the independence of the Baltic states in 1990 and accepted it in 1991 .
 There are several historical mistakes within this resource but overall it was helpful .
 I actually got 3 grades higher for the actual gcse cold war paper than my mock with these flash cards . My mock paper was actually better than my cold war mock paper .