 With the blockbuster film ""Thirteen Days"" the story now ignores the Soviet Union as well . With the film's success, the story no longer focuses on Soviet Union . The film now focuses on the events in Soviet Russia .
 The film turns history on its head and drums into our heads exactly the wrong lessons of the crisis . The film is set to be released in cinemas on Friday at 8.30pm on BBC2 .
 Yes, the United States as victim, an old theme that justifies massive military build-ups . The United States is a victim, a defense expert says . The U.S. has been accused of being a victim in Syria .
 In October 1962, the U.S. was waging a war against Cuba that involved several assassination attempts against the Cuban leader, terrorist acts against Cuban civilians, and sabotage of Cuban factories .
 The endgame of this low intensity conflict envisioned a U.S. invasion . Endgame of the war envisioned a United States invasion .
 The Kennedy Administration convinced the Soviet military that the United States was planning a first strike against its superpower adversary by rapidly building up United States strategic forces .
 In 1962, the Soviet had fewer than fifty bombers and missiles that could hit the U.S. The Soviet Union had less than fifty planes and missiles capable of hitting the United States .
 The missile gap Kennedy exploited in his 1960 campaign was real, except that it was in the U.S. favor, not the Soviets . Kennedy exploited the gap in the 1960s campaign .
 Nikita Khrushchev sought to placate his generals by placing intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The Soviet leader placed the missiles in the Cuban territory . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviets in 1959 .
 It was a cheaper way to provide some deterrent against a feared U.S. attack than to build many new intercontinental ballistic missiles that could be launched from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union did not want to launch many new ballistic missiles .
 "We lose the broader context for the drama when the time frame is narrowed. But we not only lose a broader context, but we also lose the context of the drama," the author says .
 We learn the wrong lessons from the history of this moment when the world came closer to nuclear destruction than at any other time, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Documents obtained by the National Security Archive show Soviet and Cuban leaders were expecting a U.S. invasion of Cuba . The documents were obtained through the Freedom of Information Act .
 Former Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara acknowledged at an historic 1989 meeting with former Soviet and Cuban officials that if I had been a Cuban leader, I think I might have expected a United States invasion .
 President Kennedy ordered the largest expansion of peacetime U.S. military power . At the same time, President Kennedy had ordered the biggest expansion in peacetime United States military power in history .
 One of the five approved strategic plans at the time, which were based on the United States build-up, called for a nuclear first-strike against the Soviet Union . We now know that .
 Soviet national security advisers tend to worry about worst-case scenarios . U.S. actions made them very nervous, military analysts say . The United States made them nervous .
 The Soviet placement nuclear missiles ninety miles from the United States may have been an absurdly risky and dangerous way to discourage both U.S. aggression against Cuba and a first-strike against the Soviet Union . It is an understandable reaction to the circumstances surrounding the situation, author says .
 The U.S. should be more prudent in trying to overthrow or threaten other governments, author says . Therefore, the United States should not try to overthrow, threaten governments, he says .
 The lesson we learn from the film, by taking the crisis out of its broader context, is that crazy foreigners will always threaten the U.S. and so we must always be vigilant . Instead, we learn that crazy foreign threats will always be present in the United States .
 The second traditional lesson that the film reinforces is that the crisis was resolved because the United States forced the Soviet Union to back down. The film reinforces that the U.S. forced the Soviets back down, the film says .
 We came "eyeball to eyeball" with the Soviets, Dean Rusk said, and they blinked . The Soviets blinked . Rusk: We came ""eyebal to . eyeball to eyeball"" with the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev, like Kennedy, perceived the crisis was spiraling out of control . Kennedy, like JFK, saw the crisis spiraling into control .
 You would not know from ""Thirteen Days" that the Soviet leader had given orders not to shoot down any U-2 surveillance planes . The film was based on the book, which was released in March .
 Soviet officials seem to have understood this could have brought retaliatory strikes and perhaps even a U.S. invasion . Soviet officials seemed to have known this would have led to a United States invasion .
 Kennedy did not know that the Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear missiles to Cuba . Khrushchev knew, and contrary to the film's depiction, Kennedy didn't know that .
 These battlefield weapons, intended for use against an invading army, had warheads nearly size the size of the Hiroshima bomb . They were intended to be used against invading armies .
 Had a local Soviet commander fired one of these, it would have been the start of a general nuclear war . It would have led to a general war in Russia .
 It is not the kind of fear one experiences in a game of chicken, where the fear is for your own personal safety . It's not the same kind of of fear you experience in chicken . The fear is not for personal safety, it is for the safety of the player .
 Toughness and rigidity in such a situation makes it more likely that the other side will feel compelled to act equally macho . Toughness is more likely to be more likely than to act macho. Toughness will be necessary in such situations, says Simon Tisdall .
 Kennedy found a way to trade missiles in Turkey for missiles in Cuba . Khrushchev's willingness to risk humiliation helped bring the confrontation to a peaceful conclusion .
 The filmmakers do achieve a laudable sense of the tension some of the key United States players felt at the time . The film is a look at the tension the players felt during the World Cup .
 President Kennedy reached a peaceful resolution of the crisis . Most important, they depict the lack of precision with which he reached a solution .
 The Kennedy technique of assembling the best and brightest is repeated . Hopefully, the scenes depicting human frailty will destroy one of the oft-invoked lessons of the confrontation .
 In fact, we were lucky to have survived, because such situations cannot be micro-managed with precision with precision . Such situations can't be micro managed with precision, he says . We are lucky to survive, he writes .
 Donaldson and Self get it right in understanding that the Kennedy brothers manipulated the consensus of the ExComm toward a decision they wanted . The Kennedy brothers did not wait passively for agreement to emerge from the group that tended to favor an aggressive act .
 President George Bush should learn from this what Governor Bush did not understand, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Bush: "A leader cannot simply turn to advisers for solutions for solutions" President Bush should "learn from this," says Sutter.
 Political aide Kenny O'Donnell did not have a serious role during the crisis, reviewers have noted . The big one has been noted is the role of a political aide who did not play a major role .
 O'Donnell's character provides a useful dramatic vantage point from which to watch the crisis . The actor's character is a useful vantage point for viewers to watch .
 The filmmakers also make a big error in portraying U.S. officials as having knowledge that there were armed tactical nuclear missiles on the island . The film also makes a big mistake in portraying United States officials knowing about the missiles .
 In fact they did not know, and their ignorance almost brought us to the brink . In fact, their ignorance is what almost brought the country to an end .
 Cuban anti-aircraft gunners did not fire on low-level U.S. reconnaissance planes until October 27, when they almost brought one down . The Cuban government has not fired on the planes since then .
 Only two or three people--not the bulk of the ExComm--knew about Robert Kennedy's secret October 27 meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 The film's artistic retretions do not depart substantially enough from what really happened to discredit the film . But these artistic discretions leave substantially enough to discredit film, it says .
 Far more significant is the film's one-sided presentation of the events in 1962 . The film is one of the most important moments of American history in the world .
 Most of the film's reviewers also are to blame in not alerting us to the serious distortion . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September .
 U.S. attacks on Cuba and missile build-up missed inconvenient facts about attacks . Obama administration has been accused of attacking Cuba and building up missiles .
 Without Soviet restraint during the crisis it could have been far different . The Soviet Union was responsible for the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Variety's anonymous reviewer tried to offer readers some of the relevant background, but unfortunately repeated myths about Khrushchev's low regard for Kennedy were debunked more than a decade ago .
 The missile crisis brought us closer to nuclear holocaust than any other confrontation . And teachers will use it unless warned, because the missile crisis did bring us closer than any others .
 Other producers will shy away from the subject for a while now that it has been done to such acclaim . The film will be released later this year on Blu-Ray .
 USA Today advised parents and teachers that "younger audiences ought to see this movie" Reviewers should have raised a ruckus .
 This movie feeds the worst American jingoism, they should have warned us, they said . This movie fed the worst of the worst U.S. Jingoism. It should have been warned, they warned us .
 The confrontation between the superpowers took place on the high seas and for the Soviets that is where the crisis occurred . The Soviets were involved in the conflict with the U.S.
 In Cuba, it is called the Crisis of October, to distinguish it from the many other confrontations Cuba has experienced with the U.S. The crisis is called "Crisis of October" in Cuba . Cuba's relationship with the United States has been strained for years .
 To do that we need to see it from the viewpoint of all the countries involved . To see the situation in the U.S. need to look at it from a different perspective . The United States is the only nation not to be involved in the crisis in Syria .