 Scholars have concentrated on the pitfalls of individual perception and cognition while paying little attention to organizational weaknesses in intelligence . This article is an excerpt from the book, "Essential of Decision"
 Analysts have overlooked silent but deadly organizational weaknesses that led analysts to make the wrong call . And they have overlooked the silent, but deadly, organizational weaknesses . Analysts made the wrong decision to make a decision in the wrong way .
 In part one, I make the empirical case for calling the crisis an intelligence failure by examining all of the pre-crisis national intelligence estimates of 1962 . Part one, part one: In part two: Exhaustive analysis of pre-intelligence estimates . Part three: Examine the
 In part two, I discuss why the success narrative has stuck and why it matters . In the second part of this week's blog, we discuss why it's important to keep the story alive .
 To date, answers have focused on mirror imaging and other aspects of misjudgment . "Miracle imaging" is a key part of the problem .
 Organization deficiencies also played a pivotal role in finding signals to be found and then lost in the bureaucracy . The Cuba estimates process was driven toward a false consistency over time .
 This paper argues that we have learned the wrong intelligence lessons from the most studied event of the nuclear age . It argues that the lessons have been learned from the events of nuclear war .
 Lebow finds that the Cuban missile crisis is filled with ‘dogmas’ that have only tenuous connections to reality . Lebow: The Cuban missiles crisis was filled with 'dogmas' that have tenuous ties to reality.
 Organizations often forget what they should remember and remember what they need to remember . Organizations frequently forget what to remember and what to forget . Organizations should always remember what to do and what should they forget .
 Improving any organization's performance over time requires unlearning erroneous lessons as much as retaining the indispensable ones . The realities mean that improving any organization’s performance must be unlearned over time .
 U.S. missiles constituted a stunning American intelligence success . The missile strike was a 'stunning intelligence success' for the CIA .
 The paper seeks to fill the gap, shining a light on the organizational deficiencies that lurked in the background and led analysts to make the wrong call . It seeks to shine the light on those deficiencies .
 The September 11 terrorist attacks and faulty estimates of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction suggest that organizational impediments to analysis are still alive today . September 11 terrorism and Iraq's WMD are still very much alive today.
 U2 pilots snapped photos of Soviet nuclear missile sites near San Cristobal on October 14, 1962 . U.S. intelligence estimates were produced before the U.2 pilots took photographs of Soviet missile sites .
 Every estimate, including one issued just 25 2 DRAFT 9/21/10. As we shall see, every estimate, has been issued .
 Days before the missiles were discovered, concluded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would not place nuclear weapons or any other offensive capabilities in Cuba .
 Sherman Kent, who chaired the Central Intelligence Agency estimates office, later reflected, “There is no blinking the fact that we came down on the wrong side.” Kent said . Kent: ‘There was no blinking in the eyes of the world’
 Scholars and practitioners have either excused the warning failure as an occupational hazard –arguing that intelligence is not omniscience - or glossed over it .
 Next, I turn to this historical narrative, exploring how the intelligence success story has gained so much traction over time while the intelligence warning failure has not . I also explore how intelligence success stories have gained traction in the U.S. over time .
 For each question, I show how conventional explanations, which attribute failure to analytic constraints, fall short . I also show how organizational forces played a powerful and unseen role in failure .
 The Four Pre-Crisis Intelligence Estimates of 1962 . The empirical record of U.S. intelligence assessments leading up to crisis is rich .
 Between January and October 1962, when Soviet nuclear missile sites were ultimately discovered, the CIA’s estimates office produced four National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence estimates about Castro's communist regime, its relationship with the Soviet Bloc .
 National Intelligence Estimates were –and still are -the gold standard of intelligence products, the most authoritative, pooled judgments of intelligence professionals from agencies across the U.S. government . National Intelligence estimates are still the gold standard .
 The four pre-crisis estimates of 1962 reveal that U.S. intelligence officials were gravely worried about the political fallout of a hostile communist regime so close to American shores and the possibility of communist dominoes in Latin America .
 The first estimate, released January 17, 1962, was a big think piece that assessed threats to the U.S. from the broader Caribbean region over the next twenty years . The estimate was published in 1962 .
 The estimate discounts heavily the possibility that the Soviet 5 DRAFT 9/21/10 . The estimate is based on the fact that the Soviets may have been in contact with the Soviets .
 Union would defend Cuba or establish offensive military capabilities there . Union would not have to defend Cuba, establish offensive capabilities .
 The third estimate was disseminated on August 1, 1962, just a couple of weeks after intelligence began indicating a major Soviet arms buildup in Cuba .
 The fourth and crucial estimate before the crisis was released September 19, 1962 .
 It turns out, however, that larger numbers of Soviet military forces actually were in Cuba at the time . We just did not know it, but we just did .
 CIA estimators assumed this key indicator of a Soviet strategic missile base would be easy to see . CIA estimator assumed this would be an easy-to-see sign of Soviet missile base . CIA says it would have been easy to spot .
 Scholars and practitioners have been reluctant to call the 1962 intelligence estimates of 1962 a strategic warning failure . For decades, scholars have remained skeptical about the intelligence estimates .
 One argues that intelligence warning succeeded, the other admits that no accurate warning was possible . U.S. intelligence estimators did the best that anyone could .
 The first success narrative conflates causes and outcomes, says author . "Success stories conflate causes, outcomes," says author. "Success narratives conflare to blame for outcomes"
 The crisis ended without nuclear confrontation and gave Khrushchev a major political defeat . The U.S. intelligence warning worked well, says historian John Avlon . The crisis was the first to end without a nuclear confrontation, he says .
 For most of 1962, there were no nuclear missiles in Cuba to be found .
 None of the intelligence estimates sounded the alarm to be on the lookout for such a possibility . Nor did Khrushchev give any indications that something was afoot, the report says .
 The Soviets could be up to something more. The Soviets may be up for something more than that . The Soviet Union could be hiding something more .
 President Bush and his National Security Advisor, Condoleezza Rice, told the 9/11 Commission that the large number of FBI field investigations gave them the impression that the FBI had the threat covered .
 As many have noted, false alarms look like warning failures when they are really warning successes, compelling policymakers to take steps that prevent the anticipated bad outcome from occurring in the first place . False alarms often look like warnings when they look like failures, so policymakers must take action .
 Each passing decade brings new and frightening evidence of how Kennedy’s ‘seizing the initiative’ after seeing those U2 photographs nearly led to nuclear disaster, not American victory . DO NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION. Cuban missile crisis .
 In 2002, scholars unearthed terrifying new evidence that one Soviet submarine captain actually did order preparations to launch of a nuclear-tipped torpedo off the American coast .
 On October 27th, Soviet Captain gave the order to prepare a nuclear weapon for firing . U.S. Navy depth charges and running out of air, the Soviet Captain ran out of fuel .
 In short, the mounting evidence of narrow misses during the crisis suggests that 12 DRAFT 9/21/10 .
 luck played a pivotal role in the outcome, and that the outcome could easily have taken a tragic turn . Luck played a crucial role, with the outcome likely to have been tragic .
 One wonders whether observers would feel quite the same about the performance of U.S. intelligence agencies if Soviet SS-4 nuclear missiles landed in south Florida . One wonders if observers would have felt the same .
 The second variant of the success narrative maintains that U.S. intelligence estimators may have been wrong, but they did the best that any human could . As Betts and Jervis note, intelligence failures are inevitable, they are inevitable .
 With a few exceptions, examinations of the Cuban missile have picked up this theme . With few exceptions to this, the missile has not been found to be a missile .
 Intelligence agencies did the best possible job against a highly irrational enemy, writes Peter Bergen . He argues that intelligence agencies did a good job against an irrational enemy .
 For a different view questioning Khrushchev’s rationality, see Lebow 1983 . Raymond Garthoff's 5 For a . different view of Khrushchevitch's rationality see Lebows 1983 .
 Khrushchev erred by acting in such an aberrant, risky fashion, says historian . He says he was the one who erred in such a risky fashion . "Krushchev was not the only person to have erred"
 Renshon examines the role of “mirroring risk” in U.S. intelligence estimating errors of the crisis . More recently, he examined role of "mirror" risk’s role in ‘mirror’ risk in estimating errors .
 Blaming the adversary for his unpredicted behavior is an odd argument, to say the least . Blame the opponent for his behavior is a strange argument, says CNN's John Sutter .
 By this measure, the Cuban missile crisis seems a textbook case of anomaly 14 DRAFT 9/2110 .
 The Benefits of Calling a Failure a Failure is not simply an exercise in semantics . Calling something a success or failure is not just an exercise of semantics, it's important to call it a success .
 Intelligence research on the crisis has focused on cognitive psychology and the pitfalls inherent in human cognition . Intelligence research has focused primarily on cognitive psychologists .
 Peter Sagan’s excellent work examines organizational weaknesses that nearly led to accidents . But more recent analyses of the September 11 terrorist attacks and faulty estimates of Iraq's 8-year-old nation .
 Organized weaknesses in intelligence can have devastating effects on intelligence, experts say . Organization weaknesses can lead to devastating effects of intelligence failures, they say .
 The intelligence warning failure of the Cuban missile crisis raises three lingering questions from the historical record . It also offers some initial organizational explanations .
 Despite the rich literature on the Cuban missile crisis, much more conceptual work remains to be done, says author . Organization theory provides analytic traction for a deeper understanding of the challenges that have hindered intelligence warning for the past fifty years .
 Signals and noise have been a major part of every intelligence postmortem since Pearl Harbor . Signals, noise are a major factor in intelligence post-Pearl Harbor analysis .
 Intelligence warning requires analysts to separate “signals” from “noise” that point to an adversary’s future action . Intelligence indicators turn out to be irrelevant, confusing, or just plain wrong . Roberta Wohlstetter, who coined the terms,
 Detecting the right signals before disaster strikes, however, is another matter entirely . Detecting right signals is one of the most difficult things to do in the world .
 Wohlstetter’s important insight warns against the perils of hindsight bias .
 We have missed the crucial role of organizations. Fixating on numbers and individual cognition, we have missed a crucial role, says John Defterios .
 Immediately after the Cuban missile crisis, intelligence noise was tremendous while signals were scarce . Intelligence noise was much greater during the Cuban crisis .
 Intelligence officials working in the weeks and months before the September 11 terrorist attacks would gladly have traded signals-to-noise ratios with their Cuban missile crisis counterparts .
 Although processing technology had improved dramatically, it was nowhere near enough. It was not enough to use in the world's first time .
 As the comparison suggests, quantifying signals and noise tells part of the warning story, but not the most important part . As well as quantifying noise, noise is not the only important part of a warning story .
 His memo generated no interest at FBI headquarters, was sent to just one FBI field office, and was never forwarded to the CIA or any other intelligence agency .
 Khalid al-Mihdhar and Nawaf al-Hazmi are suspected al Qaeda operatives who hijacked and crashed American Airlines flight #77 into the Pentagon . Al-Qaeda operatives al-Hayden and al-Zazmi were wanted by the U.S. government .
 The CIA and the rest of the U.S. Intelligence Community never seized these or other FBI leads in time, either . And because a gaping divide separated domestic and foreign intelligence agencies, the CIA and other agencies never seized the leads .
 Intelligence officials struggled to piece together what they knew based on what they could get . And smart intelligence officials struggled alone to come up with their findings .
 Moussaoui’s belongings sat unopened for weeks as agents desperately tried to obtain a search warrant . They were unaware of the Phoenix memo or the existence of another terrorist in FBI custody who could have identified Moussoui from al Qaeda's training camps .
 The Moussaoui investigation was known by a handful of headquarters officials and some agents in the bureau’s Oklahoma City field office . Some agents had been dispatched to Airman Flight School, which Moussoui had attended .
 In these cases, and twenty others, someone somewhere in the intelligence bureaucracy noticed something important . In the past, someone has been involved in the deaths of some of the world's most important people .
 A string of Jihadist flight school students in Arizona, suspicious extremist at a Minnesota flight school, two suspected al Qaeda operatives with U.S. visas in their passports - these and other signals were not drowned out by the noise .
 FBI signals were never put together before 9/11 because the Bureau’s field office structure was designed to keep them apart . FBI signals never worked together before the September 11 attacks .
 FBI field offices were supposed to work independently, carefully and slowly investigating past crimes, case by case, in discrete jurisdictions . FBI field office was supposed to be independent, carefully investigating past cases .
 They were never designed to track broad terrorist plots that spanned the country and required fast action to forestall catastrophe . The U.S. has been hit hard by a series of terrorist plots since 2001 .
 CIA Director George Tenet believed the system was “blinking red,’s Central intelligence Agency was not, in fact, centralizing intelligence across agency lines . In addition, the CIA was not centralizing its intelligence across intelligence lines .
 By law, the U.S. intelligence system was splintered into a dozen different agencies . CIA Director had little more than ‘whining rights’ over budgets, personnel, and activities .
 Structural fragmentation appears to have played a similar role in isolating and isolating missiles . Even a cursory look at the Cuban missile crisis suggests that structural fragmentation played similar role then .
 weakening signals rather than concentrating and amplifying them . weakening signals is a better way to concentrate and amplify them. weakening signals leads to lessening them .
 CIA was hobbled from birth by existing intelligence agencies in the State, Justice, War and Navy departments . The CIA was created just fifteen years earlier, but had been crippled by existing agencies .
 The CIA, in fact, did not control the intelligence budgets or activities of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, or any of the military intelligence services, all of whom reported to the secretary of defense . The CIA didn't control the budgets of the defense intelligence agencies .
 Intelligence reporting and analysis of the Cuban situation was handled by half a dozen different agencies with different missions, different specialties, different incentives, different levels of security clearances, different access to information . There was no common boss to knock bureaucratic heads together short of the president .
 The U.S. State Department handled diplomatic dispatches . The State Dept. handled the dispatches.
 At first the CIA, and then the Strategic Air Command, manned U2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba . The CIA and SAC were involved in the U2 mission .
 In 1962, as in 2001, there were many bureaucratic players and no one firmly in charge of them all . In 1962 and 2001, in both cases, there was no single person in charge .
 A more thorough analysis of how every signal was processed through the bureaucracy lies beyond the scope of this paper . Initial evidence does suggest that organizational fragmentation existed, and that it had the effect of delaying action and hindering signal consolidation .
 The daily intelligence checklist is the most important current intelligence product . Do not CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION: Use this information to help people understand our intelligence .
 At the time, it was given only ‘routine’ precedence because the CIA analyst who saw it was 25 DRAFT 9/21/10 . At the . time, however, it . was given . only “routinely” precedence because . the CIA
 Preliminary evidence suggests that the same organizational barriers operating on 9/11 were also at work during the missile crisis . In short, preliminary evidence suggests .
 Given the long and sordid history of intelligence coordination problems, it seems unlikely that Cuban intelligence reporting constituted a shining exception where intelligence warning signals were collected, assessed, and disseminated by a well-worked coordination machine .
 In both cases, bureaucratic jurisdictions and standard operating procedures created invisible fault lines within and across intelligence agencies that kept signals from converging . Instead of converging, the fault lines were created in both cases .
 Structural fragmentation made it likely that signals would get lost, even after they had been found, researchers say .
 For original document with “routine” precedence marking, see McAuliffe 1992, 105. 11 . Or more precisely, why did that final September 19th special estimate 11?
 The estimate clearly indicated conditions on the ground had changed since the previous estimate, which was published on August 1, 1962 . Recall that the estimate indicated conditions had changed . The estimate was published in 1962, and the estimate was accurate .
 Organization pressures were also driving strongly toward conformity and consistency across the four Cuba estimates . Mirror imaging was not the only problem hindering the estimates process .
 These reports are not the product of a single mind, a single view, or even a single agency . These reports were not the result of a . single mind or a single . view .
 Every intelligence agency involved in the estimating process had to be re-evaluated . That meant overcoming immense bureaucratic inertia -convincing every intelligence agency .
 Not just take more work inside each agency, it will take more time to get the job done . Do NOT CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION not just take work inside agencies .
 In short, organizational dynamics naturally gave consistency the upper hand . In the past, consistency was a key factor in consistency .
 Any new estimate that revises earlier judgments can be seized as proof that earlier estimates were wrong . Instead, estimating has always involved a political ‘catch 22’:” any new estimate revises .
 National Intelligence Council dramatically changed its estimate of Iran’s nuclear weapons program in 2007 . We saw these politics play out in living color in 2007, when the N.I.C. changed its estimates of Iran's nuclear weapons .
 2007 estimate considered new evidence and concluded that Tehran had probably frozen its nuclear weapons program back in 2003 . Earlier estimates had judged Tehran to be developing a vigorous nuclear weaponization program .
 The new estimate was seized by Republicans and Democrats alike as evidence of an earlier estimating failure . Nevertheless, the new and improved Iran estimate is seized by both parties as evidence .
 The political atmosphere surrounding the Cuba estimates was no less intense than in the 1960s and '60s .
 The CIA had already caused Kennedy a devastating defeat in the Bay of Pigs invasion just eighteen months earlier . The Cold War stakes had never been higher and the CIA had caused Kennedy's defeat .
 At that precise moment, on that particular topic, consistency was a safe and prudent course . consistency carried substantial risks, both for the Intelligence Community and the president . consistency was the safe course for the president and the intelligence community .
 The usual explanation is that no strong dissenting opinions existed in the U.S. is that there were no strong dissenters . Do not CITE WITHOUT PERMISSION. DO NOT CITE .
 CIA Director John McCone suspected Soviet missiles from the start of the Cold War . CIA Director McCone was CIA Director in the 1950s and '60s . McCone said he suspected Soviet missile technology .
 Historians show Kennedy forcefully advocated his hypothesis about Soviet missiles with senior Kennedy advisors on several occasions, starting in August 1962 . In fact, the historical record shows that he forcefully .
 Garthoff and Wirtz argue that McCone refrained from foisting his opinions or judgments on the estimates process . They conclude that this was a good thing for McCone to avoid foisting opinions on the process .
 Dividing labor into subunits enables experts to tackle specialized tasks in specialized ways . On the one hand, dividing labor in subunits can be helpful for experts, experts say .
 Organizations are filled with these kinds of standard formats and operating procedures . Organizations are often filled with such formats and procedures . Do you know someone? Email us at iReport@mailonline.com .
 The trouble is that the more that things get done the same way each time each time, the harder it is to do things differently, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The entire system becomes a well-oiled machine that, by its very existence, keeps alternative ideas or ways of operating from getting through . The system is designed to keep alternative ideas and ways of operation out of the system .
 The estimates process in the Cuban missile crisis seemed ripe for structural secrecy problems . The estimate process was ripe for problems .
 Cuba intelligence was highly specialized, with multiple units, offices, and agencies collecting and analyzing different pieces of the Cuba intelligence puzzle . The Cuban intelligence community was extremely specialized .
 The photographer requested additional photographic reconnaissance to get the proof he needed . Instead, he worked within the estimating machine .
 Nearly fifty years after the Cuban missile crisis, intelligence warning is still plagued by many of the same challenges . Intelligence warning still has many challenges, including the threat of missile attacks .
 Some of the most powerful barriers to effective intelligence warning remain relatively unexplored . And yet, some of the biggest barriers to effectiveness are still unexplored, say experts .
 Final Report of the national Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, authorized edition. Final Report . Final Report by the national commission on terror attacks Upon the U.S. Upon the . United States .
 Item #112 in President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Chronology of Specific Events Relating to the Military Buildup in Cuba . Item: Timeline of events related to the military build-up in the country .
 In President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Chronology of Specific Events Relating to the Military Buildup in Cuba . The board's chronology of events relates to the military build-up in the country .
 Joint Inquiry into Intelligence Community Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001 . Joint Inquiry looked at intelligence community activities before and after 9/11 attacks .
 Report of the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the United States. House Permanent Select Committee . on Intelligence . 107th Cong., 2nd sess., December. Report of Senate Select committee on Intelligence. Report .
 7th Cong. 2d sess., September 24, 2004, as supplemented October 17, 2002 . House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and Senate Select Committee . Joint Inquiry Staff Statement. 7th . Cong., 2d . 2d, 2004 . House and Senate Intelligence Committee.
 In appendix 2, “Phoenix EC,” the United States Department of Justice, Office of Inspector General. In appendix 1, ‘Phoenix EC’ refers to Phoenix EC . The Phoenix EC is the name of a federal agency that investigates Phoenix EC.
 A Review of the FBI’s Handling of Intelligence Information Related to the September 11 Attacks . A review of FBI's handling of intelligence information related to 9/11 attacks .
 Commission on Intelligence Capabilities of the U.S. Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction . Commission on the Intelligence . of the United States regarding Weapons of . Mass Destruction.