 The Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963 . The treaty was signed after eight years of negotiations between the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union . The United States and World History after World War II .
 The treaty was limited in scope, but paved the way for later arms agreements . Although this treaty was very limited, it led to the creation of arms treaties .
 Students consider the threat of nuclear weapons in the early 1960s and the challenges in negotiating an arms control agreement . Students will learn about the opportunities and challenges of negotiating arms control .
 Students will analyze a political cartoon and interpret the language of an international treaty . Students will also assess the opportunities and difficulties for the United States in negotiating and signing a nuclear test ban treaty in the early 1960s .
 The destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by atomic bombs marked the end of World War II and the beginning of the nuclear age . This is the first time a nuclear bomb has been used in nuclear weapons .
 Scientists in the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union conducted tests and developed more powerful and efficient nuclear weapons . As tensions between East and West settled into a Cold War, scientists conducted tests .
 As scientists and the public became aware of the dangers of radioactive fallout, they began to raise their voices against nuclear testing .
 In 1959, radioactive deposits were found in wheat and milk in the northern U.S. The deposits were discovered in milk and wheat and wheat .
 Leaders and diplomats of several countries sought to address the issue . Backed by growing public sentiment against nuclear testing, leaders and diplomats sought to .
 In May of 1955, under the auspices of the United Nations Disarmament Commission, the U.S., the United Kingdom, Canada, France, France and the Soviet Union began negotiations to end nuclear weapons testing . The United States, the UK, Canada and France were among the
 Diplomats disagreed on whether to link a ban on testing to general arms control . Diplomats disagree on whether the ban should be linked to a general ban on general arms controls .
 Conflict over inspections to verify underground testing impeded later talks . Soviet Union feared on-site inspections could lead to spying that might expose the fact that Khrushchev had vastly exaggerated the number of deliverable Soviet nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union and the United States suspended nuclear tests in 1958 . The moratorium lasted from November 1958 to September 1961 . The U.S. and the Soviet Union tested nuclear weapons in 1961 .
 John F Kennedy had supported a ban on nuclear weapons testing since 1956 . He had supported the ban on testing since then . Kennedy supported a nuclear test ban in 1956 .
 He took a strong stand on the issue in the 1960 presidential campaign . Believing a ban would prevent other countries from obtaining nuclear weapons .
 President Kennedy pledged not to resume testing in the air . Kennedy promised to pursue all diplomatic efforts for a test ban treaty before resuming underground testing .
 President Kennedy met with Soviet Premier Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961 . It was just five weeks after the humiliating defeat of the United States Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . The meeting took place in Vienna, Austria, five weeks later .
 He announced his intention of cutting off Western access to Berlin; and threatened war if the U.S. or its allies tried to stop him . He also threatened to go to Berlin if the United States or its . allies .
 Many U.S. diplomats felt that Kennedy had not stood up to the Soviet Premier at the summit, therefore, giving Khrushchev the impression that he was a weak leader . Many United States diplomats thought that Kennedy did not stand up to Soviet Premier .
 Fearing secret underground testing by the Soviet Union and gains in Soviet nuclear technology, political and military advisors pressured Kennedy to resume testing . Fearing Soviet Union's gains in nuclear technology and gains from underground testing .
 The public approved testing by a margin of two-to-one in 1961, according to a Gallup poll . A July 1961 Gallup poll showed the public approval of testing by two to three times .
 In August 1961, the Soviet Union announced its intention to resume atmospheric testing . Over the next 3 months it conducted 31 nuclear tests . The Soviet Union conducted 31 tests in three months .
 It exploded the largest nuclear bomb in history—58 megatons—4,000 times more powerful than the bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The Hiroshima bomb exploded 58 megatonons, the most powerful nuclear bomb ever detonated in 1945 .
 President Kennedy pursued diplomatic efforts before allowing renewed testing by the U.S. President Kennedy was dismayed by the Soviet tests .
 President Kennedy reluctantly announced the resumption of atmospheric testing . Unsuccessful in his efforts to reach a diplomatic agreement, Kennedy reluctantly relented .
 In a series of private letters, Khrushchev and Kennedy reopened a dialogue on banning nuclear testing . In the letters, they wrote about the possibility of testing nuclear weapons in the 1960s . The letters were signed by the two world leaders .
 The Soviet government broadcast a translation of the entire speech, and allowed it to be reprinted in the controlled Soviet press . The speech was broadcast by the Soviet government .
 Kennedy selected Averell Harriman, an experienced diplomat known by Khrushchev, to resume negotiations in Moscow . Kennedy selected a respected diplomat known for his work in Russia .
 An agreement to limit the scope of the test ban paved the way for a treaty . The treaty was reached after a series of years of negotiations .
 By excluding underground tests from the pact, negotiators eliminated the need for on-site inspections that worried the Kremlin . The Kremlin worried about the need to inspect underground tests that worried them .
 On July 25, 1963, after only 12 days of negotiations, the two nations agreed to ban testing in the atmosphere, in space, and underwater . The two nations also agreed to a ban on testing underwater and in space .
 The Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963, by United States Secretary Dean Rusk, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, and British Foreign Secretary Lord Home . It was one day short of the 18th anniversary of the dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima .
 Over the next two months, President Kennedy convinced a fearful public and a divided Senate to support the Treaty . The Treaty was signed by President Kennedy and the Senate .
 Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly in September 1996 . Comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty was adopted in 1996 by the United Nations .
 Treaty prohibits all nuclear test explosions including those conducted underground . Signed by 71 nations, including those possessing nuclear weapons, signed by 71 .
 The Senate rejected the treaty by a vote of 51 to 48 . The treaty was signed by President Clinton but was rejected by the Senate .
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum 3.3.5.5 . The Kennedy Library will host a series of events at the Kennedy Museum in New York City .
 The United States, Soviet Union, Great Britain, and France were the only countries that had previously tested nuclear weapons .
 The United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union complied with the LNTB agreement and did not test nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, space, or underwater . Note that the U.S. and Great Britain did not continue underground tests until the early 1990s .
 Discuss how this agreement paved the way for future non-proliferation agreements . Also discuss how it paved the path for future nuclear arms proliferation . Discuss how the agreement paved way for the future .
 Have students look at the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Signed by President Clinton in 1996 . Have students write about or discuss as a group why the Senate did not ratify it .
 Treaty of the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the IAEA A Chronology From the International Atomic Energy Agency . This web page provides a chronology of key events in nuclear non-proliferation from 1957 to 2014 .
 The Making of the Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1958-1963 is an essay from the National Security Archive . This web page includes links to a large number of primary sources .
 Around the same time, both the Soviet Union and the United States were escalating their aggressive rhetoric towards each other regarding Germany and West Berlin .
 Negotiations took place over the next two years, even as testing continued . The two-year agreement was reached in 2010 and 2011 .
 One of the stumbling blocks of the treaty involved the issue of how to verify compliance with the test ban .
 Both the Soviets and the US wanted to maintain their status as superpowers . Also wanted to make sure they could still develop forceful nuclear weaponry . The Soviets and U.S. wanted to remain superpowers to maintain status .
 Mr Harold Brown [Director of Defense Research Engineering in the Department of Defense from 1961-1965] has said before a Senate committee that we could accept as few as six inspections .
 Mr Brown, whose judgment I value highly, has not set the official Government position . Well, that is the position we have taken more publicly, he said . Mr Brown's judgment is not set by the Government, he added .
 We have suggested to the Soviet Union that we would consider the make-up of the inspection team, the rules under which the inspection teams would operate, the area where there could be drilling, all of these questions . If we can get those settled, we could then come finally to the
 The Soviet Union has refused, however, to consider these other matters until we agree on their position of three . The United States has refused to take part in negotiations with the Soviet Union .
 We feel that we ought to try to wind up all the other questions which divide us, and then we could finally come and decide what would be, given the arrangements we have made for these other matters, what is a responsible number of tests . We feel it would be better to wind
 We are back and forth to the Soviet Union and we are still hoping that we can find a perhaps easing of their position. But we are back in touch with them again and again. We are hoping to find an easing of the position.
 I would say that we will know by the end of the summer whether it is finally out of the book . The book is due to be released in the summer and will be published in September .
 I said from the beginning that it seemed to me that the pace of events was such in the world that unless we would get an agreement now, I would think the chance of getting it would be comparatively slight, I said .
 Since December that has been no change in the Soviet position on the number of tests nor Prepared by the Department of Education and Public Programs, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . We are, therefore, going to continue to push very hard in May and June and July in every forum
 "What we are proposing, we settle the other matters and then come to the number of tests," he says . "As I indicated, what we are . proposing, what is proposing, is to settle the . other matters," he said .
 "We are not moving at this time on the number of tests," the government says .